<html><body><pre>
[Title 49 CFR ]
[Code of Federal Regulations (annual edition) - October 1, 2011 Edition]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]



[[Page i]]

          
<R02>
          Title 49

Transportation


________________________

Parts 400 to 571

                         Revised as of October 1, 2011

          Containing a codification of documents of general 
          applicability and future effect

          As of October 1, 2011
                    Published by the Office of the Federal Register 
                    National Archives and Records Administration as a 
                    Special Edition of the Federal Register

[[Page ii]]

          U.S. GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL EDITION NOTICE

          Legal Status and Use of Seals and Logos
          <GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>
          
          The seal of the National Archives and Records Administration 
              (NARA) authenticates the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) as 
              the official codification of Federal regulations established 
              under the Federal Register Act. Under the provisions of 44 
              U.S.C. 1507, the contents of the CFR, a special edition of the 
              Federal Register, shall be judicially noticed. The CFR is 
              prima facie evidence of the original documents published in 
              the Federal Register (44 U.S.C. 1510).

          It is prohibited to use NARA's official seal and the stylized Code 
              of Federal Regulations logo on any republication of this 
              material without the express, written permission of the 
              Archivist of the United States or the Archivist's designee. 
              Any person using NARA's official seals and logos in a manner 
              inconsistent with the provisions of 36 CFR part 1200 is 
              subject to the penalties specified in 18 U.S.C. 506, 701, and 
              1017.

          Use of ISBN Prefix

          This is the Official U.S. Government edition of this publication 
              and is herein identified to certify its authenticity. Use of 
              the 0-16 ISBN prefix is for U.S. Government Printing Office 
              Official Editions only. The Superintendent of Documents of the 
              U.S. Government Printing Office requests that any reprinted 
              edition clearly be labeled as a copy of the authentic work 
              with a new ISBN.

              <GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>
              
          U . S . G O V E R N M E N T P R I N T I N G O F F I C E

          ------------------------------------------------------------------

          U.S. Superintendent of Documents <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Washington, DC 
              20402-0001

          http://bookstore.gpo.gov

          Phone: toll-free (866) 512-1800; DC area (202) 512-1800

[[Page iii]]



<R02>
                            Table of Contents


<R03>
                                                                    Page
  Explanation.................................................       v

  Title 49:
    SUBTITLE B--Other Regulations Relating to Transportation 
      (Continued)
          Chapter IV--Coast Guard, Department of Homeland 
          Security                                                   5
          Chapter V--National Highway Traffic Safety 
          Administration, Department of Transportation              19
  Finding Aids:
      Table of CFR Titles and Chapters........................    1165
      Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR......    1185
      List of CFR Sections Affected...........................    1195

[[Page iv]]





                     ----------------------------

                     Cite this Code: CFR
                     To cite the regulations in 
                       this volume use title, 
                       part and section number. 
                       Thus, 49 CFR 450.1 refers 
                       to title 49, part 450, 
                       section 1.

                     ----------------------------

[[Page v]]



                               EXPLANATION

    The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and 
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided 
into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal 
regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the 
name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into 
parts covering specific regulatory areas.
    Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year 
and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:

Title 1 through Title 16.................................as of January 1
Title 17 through Title 27..................................as of April 1
Title 28 through Title 41...................................as of July 1
Title 42 through Title 50................................as of October 1

    The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each 
volume.

LEGAL STATUS

    The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially 
noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie 
evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).

HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

    The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual 
issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used 
together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
    To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its 
revision date (in this case, October 1, 2011), consult the ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected (LSA),'' which is issued monthly, and the ``Cumulative 
List of Parts Affected,'' which appears in the Reader Aids section of 
the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal 
Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.

EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES

    Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal 
Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source 
citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page 
number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication 
dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be 
exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In 
instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the 
Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In 
those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register 
states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be 
inserted following the text.

OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

    The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires 
Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information 
collection request.

[[Page vi]]

Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as 
amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are 
placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting 
requirements.

OBSOLETE PROVISIONS

    Provisions that become obsolete before the revision date stated on 
the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text 
of provisions in effect on a given date in the past by using the 
appropriate numerical list of sections affected. For the period before 
April 1, 2001, consult either the List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-
1963, 1964-1972, 1973-1985, or 1986-2000, published in eleven separate 
volumes. For the period beginning April 1, 2001, a ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected'' is published at the end of each CFR volume.

``[RESERVED]'' TERMINOLOGY

    The term ``[Reserved]'' is used as a place holder within the Code of 
Federal Regulations. An agency may add regulatory information at a 
``[Reserved]'' location at any time. Occasionally ``[Reserved]'' is used 
editorially to indicate that a portion of the CFR was left vacant and 
not accidentally dropped due to a printing or computer error.

INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE

    What is incorporation by reference? Incorporation by reference was 
established by statute and allows Federal agencies to meet the 
requirement to publish regulations in the Federal Register by referring 
to materials already published elsewhere. For an incorporation to be 
valid, the Director of the Federal Register must approve it. The legal 
effect of incorporation by reference is that the material is treated as 
if it were published in full in the Federal Register (5 U.S.C. 552(a)). 
This material, like any other properly issued regulation, has the force 
of law.
    What is a proper incorporation by reference? The Director of the 
Federal Register will approve an incorporation by reference only when 
the requirements of 1 CFR part 51 are met. Some of the elements on which 
approval is based are:
    (a) The incorporation will substantially reduce the volume of 
material published in the Federal Register.
    (b) The matter incorporated is in fact available to the extent 
necessary to afford fairness and uniformity in the administrative 
process.
    (c) The incorporating document is drafted and submitted for 
publication in accordance with 1 CFR part 51.
    What if the material incorporated by reference cannot be found? If 
you have any problem locating or obtaining a copy of material listed as 
an approved incorporation by reference, please contact the agency that 
issued the regulation containing that incorporation. If, after 
contacting the agency, you find the material is not available, please 
notify the Director of the Federal Register, National Archives and 
Records Administration, 8601 Adelphi Road, College Park, MD 20740-6001, 
or call 202-741-6010.

CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

    A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a 
separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index 
and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Authorities 
and Rules. A list of CFR titles, chapters, subchapters, and parts and an 
alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are also included in 
this volume.
    An index to the text of ``Title 3--The President'' is carried within 
that volume.

[[Page vii]]

    The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. 
This index is based on a consolidation of the ``Contents'' entries in 
the daily Federal Register.
    A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to 
the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.

REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL

    There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing 
in the Code of Federal Regulations.

INQUIRIES

    For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this 
volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at 
the top of odd-numbered pages.
    For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-741-6000 
or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, 8601 Adelphi Road, College Park, MD 
20740-6001 or e-mail fedreg.info@nara.gov.

SALES

    The Government Printing Office (GPO) processes all sales and 
distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call toll-free, 
866-512-1800, or DC area, 202-512-1800, M-F 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or 
fax your order to 202-512-2104, 24 hours a day. For payment by check, 
write to: US Government Printing Office - New Orders, P.O. Box 979050, 
St. Louis, MO 63197-9000.

ELECTRONIC SERVICES

    The full text of the Code of Federal Regulations, the LSA (List of 
CFR Sections Affected), The United States Government Manual, the Federal 
Register, Public Laws, Public Papers of the Presidents of the United 
States, Compilation of Presidential Documents and the Privacy Act 
Compilation are available in electronic format via www.ofr.gov. For more 
information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government 
Printing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free). E-
mail, gpo@custhelp.com.
    The Office of the Federal Register also offers a free service on the 
National Archives and Records Administration's (NARA) World Wide Web 
site for public law numbers, Federal Register finding aids, and related 
information. Connect to NARA's web site at www.archives.gov/federal-
register.

    Raymond A. Mosley,
    Director,
    Office of the Federal Register.
    October 1, 2011.







[[Page ix]]



                               THIS TITLE

    Title 49--Transportation is composed of nine volumes. The parts in 
these volumes are arranged in the following order: Parts 1-99, parts 
100-177, parts 178-199, parts 200-299, parts 300-399, parts 400-571, 
parts 572-999, parts 1000-1199, and part 1200 to end. The first volume 
(parts 1-99) contains current regulations issued under subtitle A--
Office of the Secretary of Transportation; the second volume (parts 100-
177) and the third volume (parts 178-199) contain the current 
regulations issued under chapter I--Pipeline and Hazardous Materials 
Safety Administration (DOT); the fourth volume (parts 200-299) contains 
the current regulations issued under chapter II--Federal Railroad 
Administration (DOT); the fifth volume (parts 300-399) contains the 
current regulations issued under chapter III--Federal Motor Carrier 
Safety Administration (DOT); the sixth volume (parts 400-571) contains 
the current regulations issued under chapter IV--Coast Guard (DHS), and 
some of chapter V--National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (DOT); 
the seventh volume (parts 572-999) contains the rest of the regulations 
issued under chapter IV, and the current regulations issued under 
chapter VI--Federal Transit Administration (DOT), chapter VII--National 
Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK), and chapter VIII--National 
Transportation Safety Board; the eighth volume (parts 1000-1199) 
contains the current regulations issued under chapter X--Surface 
Transportation Board and the ninth volume (part 1200 to end) contains 
the current regulations issued under chapter X--Surface Transportation 
Board, chapter XI--Research and Innovative Technology Administration, 
and chapter XII--Transportation Security Administration, Department of 
Transportation. The contents of these volumes represent all current 
regulations codified under this title of the CFR as of October 1, 2011.

    In the volume containing parts 100-177, see Sec.  172.101 for the 
Hazardous Materials Table. The Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards 
appear in part 571.

    Redesignation tables for chapter III--Federal Motor Carrier Safety 
Administration, Department of Transportation and chapter XII--
Transportation Security Administration, Department of Transportation 
appear in the Finding Aids section of the fifth and ninth volumes.

    For this volume, Robert J. Sheehan, III was Chief Editor. The Code 
of Federal Regulations publication program is under the direction of 
Michael L. White, assisted by Ann Worley.


[[Page 1]]


<R01>
                        TITLE 49--TRANSPORTATION


<R02>

                  (This book contains parts 400 to 599)

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Part

  SUBTITLE B--Other Regulations Relating to Transportation (Continued)

chapter iv--Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security....         450

chapter v--National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
  Department of Transportation..............................         501

[[Page 3]]

  Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to Transportation (Continued)

[[Page 5]]


<R02>
        CHAPTER IV--COAST GUARD, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

                         SUBCHAPTER A [RESERVED]
            SUBCHAPTER B--SAFETY APPROVAL OF CARGO CONTAINERS
Part                                                                Page
400-449         [Reserved]

450             General.....................................           7
451             Testing and approval of containers..........          10
452             Examination of containers...................          13
453             Control and enforcement.....................          15

[[Page 7]]


<R03>
                         SUBCHAPTER A [RESERVED]


<R03>
            SUBCHAPTER B_SAFETY APPROVAL OF CARGO CONTAINERS

                        PARTS 400-449 [RESERVED]


<R03>
PART 450_GENERAL--Table of Contents



                      Subpart A_General Provisions

Sec.
450.1 Purpose.
450.3 Definitions.
450.5 General requirements and applicability.
450.7 Marking.

       Subpart B_Procedures for Delegation to Approval Authorities

450.11 Application for delegation of authority.
450.12 Criteria for selection of Approval Authorities.
450.13 Granting of delegation.
450.14 Conditions of delegation.
450.15 Termination of delegation.
450.16 Withdrawal of delegation.

    Authority: 46 U.S.C. 80503; Department of Homeland Security 
Delegation No. 0170.1.

    Editorial Note: Nomenclature changes to part 450 appear at 74 FR 
49241, Sept. 25, 2009.


<R04>
                      Subpart A_General Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 450.1  Purpose.

    This subchapter establishes requirements and procedures for safety 
approval and periodic examination of cargo containers used in 
international transport, as defined in the International Safe Container 
Act.

[45 FR 37213, June 2, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 450.3  Definitions.

    (a) In this subchapter: (1) Approval Authority means a delegate of 
the Commandant authorized to approve containers within the terms of the 
convention, the International Safe Container Act and this subchapter.
    (2) Container means an article of transport equipment:
    (i) Of a permanent character and suitable for a repeated use.
    (ii) Specially design to facilitate the transport of goods, by one 
or more modes of transport, without intermediate reloading.
    (iii) Designed to be secured and readily handled, having corner 
fittings for these purposes.
    (iv) Of a size that the area enclosed by the four outer bottom 
corners is either:
    (A) At least 14 sq.m. (150 sq.ft.), or
    (B) At least 7 sq.m. (75 sq.ft.) if it has top corner fittings.
    (v) The term container includes neither vehicles nor packaging; 
however, containers when carried on chassis are included.
    (3) Convention means the International Convention for Safe 
Containers (CSC) done at Geneva, December 2, 1972 and ratified by the 
United States on January 3, 1978.
    (4) District Commander means the Coast Guard officer designated by 
the Commandant to command a Coast Guard District.
    (5) New Container means a container, the construction of which began 
on or after September 6, 1977.
    (6) Existing Container means a container that is not a new 
container.

[45 FR 37213, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58352, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 450.5  General requirements and applicability.

    (a) Every owner of a new or existing container used or offered for 
movement in international transport shall have the container approved in 
accordance with the procedures established by the Administration of any 
contracting party to the convention, except that existing containers 
need not be approved until September 6, 1982.
    (b) Every owner of an approved container used or offered for 
movement in international transport who:
    (1) Is domiciled in the United States and has the head office in the 
United States, or
    (2) Is domiciled in a country which is not a contracting party to 
the convention but has the principal office in the

[[Page 8]]

United States, shall have the container periodically examined in 
accordance with part 452 of this subchapter.
    (c) Every owner of an approved container used or offered for 
movement in international transport who:
    (1) Is domiciled in the United States but has the principal office 
in the jurisdiction of another contracting party to the convention, or
    (2) Is domiciled in the jurisdiction of another contracting party to 
the convention but has the principal office in the United States, but 
elects to have the container examined in accordance with the procedures 
prescribed by the United States, shall conform to part 452 of this 
subchapter.
    (d) Every owner of an approved container used or offered for 
movement in international transport who is neither domiciled in nor has 
the principal office in the jurisdiction of a contracting party to the 
convention, but elects to have the container examined in accordance with 
procedures prescribed by the United States, shall conform to part 452 of 
this subchapter.

[45 FR 37213, June 2, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 450.7  Marking.

    (a) On each container that construction begins on or after January 
1, 1984, all maximum gross weight markings on the container must be 
consistent with the maximum gross weight information on the safety 
approval plate.
    (b) On each container that construction begins before January 1, 
1984, all maximum gross weight markings on the container must be 
consistent with the gross weight information on the safety approval 
plate no later than January 1, 1989.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under OMB control 
number 1625-0024)

[49 FR 15562, Apr. 19, 1984, as amended at 71 FR 55747, Sept. 25, 2006]


<R04>
       Subpart B_Procedure for Delegation to Approval Authorities


<R05>
Sec. 450.11  Application for delegation of authority.

    (a) Any person or organization seeking delegation of authority to 
act as an Approval Authority may apply to the Commandant, (CG-522), U.S. 
Coast Guard, 2100 2nd St., SW., Stop 7126, Washington, DC 20593-7126. 
Each application must be signed and certified by the applicant or, if 
the applicant is an organization, by an authorized officer of the 
organization. A list of delegated approval authorities may be obtained 
from the Commandant (CG-522).
    (b) The application must include the following information:
    (1) Name and address, including place of incorporation, if a 
corporation.
    (2) A description of the organization, including the ownership, 
managerial structure, organizational components and directly affiliated 
agencies and their functions utilized for supporting technical services.
    (3) A listing of the basic technical services offered.
    (4) A general description of the geographic area served.
    (5) A general description of the clients being served or intended to 
be served.
    (6) A description of the types of work performed by the applicant in 
the past, noting the amount and extent of such work performed within the 
previous three years.
    (7) A description of the personnel to be utilized, indicating 
general background and qualifications, particularly for the surveyors to 
be involved in the actual witnessing of tests.
    (8) A description of its means of assuring continued competence of 
its personnel.
    (9) A detailed schedule of the fees proposed to be charged for the 
approval service.
    (10) Evidence of financial stability.
    (11) At least three business references who will furnish information 
regarding work performed by the applicant.
    (12) A statement that the Coast Guard may inspect the applicant's 
facilities and records of approvals under the convention and these 
regulations.
    (c) The application may contain any additional information the 
applicant deems to be pertinent.
    (d) The applicant must furnish any additional information to 
evaluate the applicant's qualifications, if requested by the Chief, 
Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (CG-522), U.S. Coast 
Guard.

[[Page 9]]

    (e) Applications from foreign nationals or organizations must 
contain an affidavit stating that the agency responsible for 
implementing the Convention in their country has delegated to the 
applicant an approval authority, and that it also delegates similar 
authority to United States citizens or organizations having delegations 
from the United States. The affidavit must also contain the name and 
address of the agency to which U.S. citizens or organizations must apply 
for delegation as an approval authority.

[45 FR 37213, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58352, Sept. 30, 2004; 74 FR 49241, Sept. 25, 2009]


<R05>
Sec. 450.12  Criteria for selection of Approval Authorities.

    (a) The Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (CG-
522), U.S. Coast Guard selects persons or organizations in accordance 
with the following criteria:
    (1) The person or organization is independent of manufacturers and 
owners in that:
    (i) It has sufficient breadth of interest or activity, so that the 
loss or award of a specific contract to approve containers would not be 
a substantial factor in the financial well-being of the organization.
    (ii) The employment status of the personnel of the organization is 
free from influence or control of manufacturers, owners, operators or 
lessors of containers.
    (2) The person or organization has demonstrated the ability to 
competently carry out the procedures required for approval.
    (3) The person or organization has an acceptable degree of financial 
security.

[45 FR 37213, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58352, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 450.13  Granting of delegation.

    (a) The Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (CG-
522), U.S. Coast Guard acts on applications for delegation within 60 
days of receipt.
    (b) If an applicant for delegation does not provide sufficient 
information with regard to all the criteria for delegation, the Chief, 
Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (CG-522), U.S. Coast 
Guard denies the application. A denial of an application on this basis 
is without prejudice to the submission of a new or amended application.
    (c) If an applicant satisfies all the criteria for delegation the 
Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (CG-522), U.S. 
Coast Guard sends the applicant a letter of delegation, and assigns to 
the Approval Authority an alphabetic Approval Authority identification 
code.
    (d) If an applicant fails to satisfy all the criteria for 
delegation, the Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards 
(CG-522), U.S. Coast Guard gives the applicant written notice of denial 
of his application. The notice contains all the reasons for the denial. 
The applicant may contest the denial by submitting additional oral or 
written evidence in support of its qualifications. Upon review of the 
evidence, the Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards 
(CG-522), U.S. Coast Guard notifies the applicant of the final decision.

[45 FR 37213, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58352, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 450.14  Conditions of delegation.

    (a) The following conditions are part of every delegation: (1) The 
Approval Authority shall use only testing equipment that it has 
determined by inspection to be suitable for the purpose.
    (2) All approval numbers issued by the Approval Authority must 
contain the identification code, assigned to the Approval Authority by 
the Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (CG-522), 
U.S. Coast Guard.
    (3) Each Approval Authority shall maintain the following records for 
a period of at least 15 years from the date of approval. (When the 
Approval Authority's delegation is withdrawn before such time, the 
records relating to the approvals issued within the prior 15 years must 
be turned over to the Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental 
Standards (CG-522), U.S. Coast Guard):
    (i) Each notice of approval issued.
    (ii) A copy of the application and final approved drawings (if 
applicable) to which each approval refers.

[[Page 10]]

    (iii) The manufacturer's serial numbers and the owner's 
identification numbers of all containers covered by each approval.
    (4) Each Approval Authority shall establish and make available to 
the public a schedule of fees for the approval services performed under 
these regulations. The fees must not be disproportionate to the costs 
(including transportation expense, if any) actually incurred.
    (5) The Approval Authority shall grant the Coast Guard the right to 
inspect records and shall cooperate in the conduct of such inspections.
    (6) The Approval Authority shall comply with any other term or 
condition stated in its letter of delegation.

[45 FR 37213, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58352, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 450.15  Termination of delegation.

    (a) An Approval Authority may voluntarily terminate its delegation 
by giving written notice of its intent to the Chief, Office of Operating 
and Environmental Standards (CG-522), U.S. Coast Guard. This notice must 
contain the date on which the termination is to be effective.

[45 FR 37213, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58352, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 450.16  Withdrawal of delegation.

    (a) The Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (CG-
522), U.S. Coast Guard withdraws a delegation if: (1) It is determined 
that the application for delegation contained a material 
misrepresentation.
    (2) An Approval Authority fails to comply with a condition of 
delegation.
    (3) An Approval Authority is incompetent.
    (b) When a delegation is withdrawn, the Chief, Office of Operating 
and Environmental Standards (CG-522), U.S. Coast Guard gives to the 
Approval Authority:
    (1) Written notice of the facts or conduct believed to warrant the 
withdrawal.
    (2) Opportunity to submit oral or written evidence.
    (3) Opportunity to demonstrate or achieve compliance with the 
applicable requirement.

[45 FR 37213, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58352, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R03>
PART 451_TESTING AND APPROVAL OF CONTAINERS--Table of Contents



                Subpart A_Approval of Existing Containers

Sec.
451.1 Application for approval.
451.3 Action by Approval Authority.
451.5 Resubmission or appeal.
451.7 Alternative approval of existing containers.

                  Subpart B_Approval of New Containers

451.11 Application for approval-general.
451.12 Application for approval by design type.
451.13 Action by approval authority-approval by design type.
451.14 Alternative approval of new containers by design type.
451.15 Application for individual approval.
451.16 Action by approval authority-individual approval.
451.18 Review of denials of approval.

                     Subpart C_Safety Approval Plate

451.21 Safety approval plate required.
451.23 Plate specifications.
451.25 Required information.

    Authority: 46 U.S.C. 80503; Department of Homeland Security 
Delegation No. 0170.1.

    Source: 45 FR 37214, June 2, 1980, unless otherwise noted.

    Editorial Note: Nomenclature changes to part 451 appear at 74 FR 
49241, Sept. 25, 2009.


<R04>
                Subpart A_Approval of Existing Containers


<R05>
Sec. 451.1  Application for approval.

    (a) Any owner of an existing container may apply for approval to the 
Commandant (CG-522), U.S. Coast Guard, 2100 2nd St., SW., Stop 7126, 
Washington, DC 20593-7126 or to any Approval Authority.
    (b) Each application must include the following for each container:
    (1) Date and place of manufacture.
    (2) Manufacturer's identification number, if available.

[[Page 11]]

    (3) Maximum operating gross weight capacity.
    (4) Allowable stacking weight for 1.8G (1.8xGross weight in 
kilograms or pounds).

    Note: This value is the total load the container is designed to 
support when subjected to a vertical acceleration of 1.8G.

    (5) A statement that the owner possesses documentary evidence that:
    (i) Container of this type has been safely used in marine or inland 
transport for a period of at least two years; or
    (ii) The container was manufactured to a design type which had been 
tested and found to comply with the technical conditions set out in 
Annex II to the convention with the exception of those technical 
conditions relating to the end-wall and side-wall strength tests; or
    (iii) The container was constructed to standards that were 
equivalent to the technical conditions set out in Annex II to the 
convention with the exception of those technical conditions relating to 
end-wall and side-wall strength tests.
    (6) A certification by the owner, or, if the owner is a corporation, 
partnership or unincorporated association, by a person authorized to 
make such statements for the organization, that the information provided 
in the application is true and correct.

[45 FR 37214, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58352, Sept. 30, 2004; 74 FR 49241, Sept. 25, 2009]


<R05>
Sec. 451.3  Action by Approval Authority.

    (a) The Approval Authority (or the Chief, Office of Operating and 
Environmental Standards (CG-522), U.S. Coast Guard, if the application 
was submitted to the Coast Guard) issues to the owner a notice of 
approval or notifies the owner in writing that approval is denied, 
setting forth the deficiencies causing denial. Notification of approval 
entitles the owner to affix a safety approval plate to each container 
after an examination of each container concerned has been carried out in 
accordance with part 452 of this subchapter. In the case of an 
application submitted to the Coast Guard, the Chief, Office of Operating 
and Environmental Standards (CG-522), U.S. Coast Guard acts on the 
application within 30 days of receipt of the application.

[45 FR 37214, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58352, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 451.5  Resubmission or appeal.

    (a) Upon receipt of a denial of approval for certain containers, an 
owner may correct the noted deficiencies and resubmit the application 
without prejudice.
    (b) An applicant aggrieved by a decision of an approval authority 
may obtain review of the decision by the Chief, Office of Operating and 
Environmental Standards (CG-522), U.S. Coast Guard. The decision of the 
Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (CG-522), U.S. 
Coast Guard is a final agency action.

[45 FR 37214, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58352, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 451.7  Alternative approval of existing containers.

    (a) Existing containers that do not qualify for approval under this 
subpart may be presented for approval under the provisions of subpart B 
of this part. For such containers, the requirements of subpart B of this 
part, relating to the end and sidewall strength tests, do not apply. 
Upon showing that the containers have performed satisfactorily in 
service, the applicant may omit the presentation of drawings and 
testing, other than the lifting and floor strength test, if permitted by 
the approval authority.

[45 FR 37214, June 2, 1980, as amended at 69 FR 58352, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R04>
                  Subpart B_Approval of New Containers


<R05>
Sec. 451.11  Application for approval-general.

    (a) An owner of a new container, or a manufacturer acting on behalf 
of an owner, may apply for approval to any approval authority.

[[Page 12]]


<R05>
Sec. 451.12  Application for approval by design type.

    (a) For approval of new containers by design type, each application 
must include the following:
    (1) Engineering drawings and plans showing platform, end framing, 
welds and hardware, connections of cross-members, top and bottom rails, 
roof bows, detailed subassemblies of major structural components and 
attachments, and any other plans and drawings required by the approval 
authority.
    (2) Design and material specifications including type and size of 
materials. Material specifications of the safety approval plate must 
also be given.
    (3) The manufacturer's identification number assigned to each 
container in the type series.
    (4) The identification code assigned to each container in the series 
by the owner, lessee, or bailee responsible for maintenance.
    (5) The written assurance from the manufacturer, that the 
manufacturer will:
    (i) Produce to the approval authority such containers as the 
approval authority may wish to examine;
    (ii) Advise the approval authority of any change in the design or 
specification and await its approval before affixing the Safety Approval 
Plate to the container;
    (iii) Affix the Safety Approval Plate to each container in the 
design type and to no others;
    (iv) Keep a record of containers manufactured to the approved design 
type containing at least the manufacturer's identification numbers, date 
of delivery, and names and addresses of customers to whom the containers 
are delivered; and
    (v) Supply to the approval authority the information contained in 
paragraphs (a)(3) and (4) of this section if not available at the time 
of original application.
    (6) A statement as to whether this design type has been examined by 
any approval authority previously and judged unacceptable. Affirmative 
statements must be documented with the name of the approving authority, 
the reason for nonacceptance, and the nature of modifications made to 
the design type.

[45 FR 37214, June 2, 1980, as amended at 69 FR 58353, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 451.13  Action by approval authority-approval by design type.

    (a) The approval authority arranges with the manufacturer, with 
notification to the owner, to witness the prototype tests required by 
the convention, and to examine any number of containers that the 
approval authority considers appropriate. Upon witnessing successful 
completion of prototype tests and examination of several containers the 
approval authority issues to the owner, a notice of approval which 
authorizes the attachment of safety approval plates to the containers. 
Absence of individual inspections will not relieve the manufacturer of 
any responsibility to maintain proper quality control. If a prototype 
container fails to pass the tests, the approval authority may require 
testing of as many further representative containers as necessary to 
ensure the adequacy of the design.


<R05>
Sec. 451.14  Alternative approval of new containers by design type.

    (a) New containers manufactured before June 16, 1978 without being 
approved under the preceding section may be approved by submission to an 
approval authority of an application corresponding to that required 
under Sec. 451.1(b) for existing containers. All new containers so 
approved must have safety approval plates affixed and receive their 
first periodic examination in accordance with the procedures prescribed 
in Sec. 452.3 by January 1, 1985.

[47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 451.15  Application for individual approval.

    (a) For approval of new containers by individual approval, each 
application must include the following:
    (1) The manufacturer's identification number.
    (2) The identification code of the owner, lessee, or bailee 
responsible for maintenance of the container.

[[Page 13]]


<R05>
Sec. 451.16  Action by approval authority-individual approval.

    (a) The approval authority arranges with the manufacturer or owner 
to witness testing in accordance with Annex II to the convention. Upon 
witnessing successful completion of the tests, the approval authority 
issues to the owner a notice of approval that authorizes the attachment 
of a safety approval plate.


<R05>
Sec. 451.18  Review of denials of approval.

    (a) An applicant aggrieved by a decision of an approval authority 
may obtain review of the decision by the Chief, Office of Operating and 
Environmental Standards (CG-522), U.S. Coast Guard. The decision of the 
Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (CG-522), U.S. 
Coast Guard is a final agency action.

[45 FR 37214, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58353, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R04>
                     Subpart C_Safety Approval Plate


<R05>
Sec. 451.21  Safety approval plate required.

    (a) The safety approval plate must be supplied by the owner or 
manufacturer.


<R05>
Sec. 451.23  Plate specifications.

    (a) The safety approval plate must be of the size and in the format 
specified in the appendix to Annex I to the convention.
    (b) The safety approval plate must be:
    (1) Designed to withstand and remain legible after a 15 minute 
exposure to a medium intensity fire producing a temperature of 1,000 
[deg]F (540 [deg]C), when mounted on the specified material of 
construction of the container.
    (2) Designed to resist the corrosive effects of its environment, 
both at sea and ashore, so as to remain legible for the working life of 
the container.
    (3) Designed to have a legible life expectancy equal to or greater 
than the life expectancy of the container to which the plate is affixed.


<R05>
Sec. 451.25  Required information.

    (a) The safety approval number appearing on line 1 of the safety 
approval plate must be of the form ``USA/(approval number, which 
includes the approval authority identification code)/(year in which 
approval was granted).''
    (b) The date upon which approval was granted must be the same for 
all containers of a design-type or type-series covered by one notice of 
approval.
    (c) The safety approval number must be the same for all containers 
of a design-type or type-series covered by one notice of approval.
    (d) The owner's International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
alpha numeric identification numbers may be used in place of the 
manufacturer's identification numbers on line 3 of the safety approval 
plate. If owner's identification numbers are used and the manufacturer's 
are available, the owner shall keep records correlating the owner's 
identification numbers used with the manufacturer's number. If a 
container marked with owner's identification numbers changes ownership, 
and the owner's identification number is changed as a result, the new 
owner must add the new owner's identification number, following the 
original owner's identification number on line 3 of the safety approval 
plate. In the event that the new owner's identification number cannot be 
legibly added to line 3 of the safety approval plate following the 
original owner's identification number, the new owner is authorized to 
put a new safety approval plate on the freight container provided that 
all the information contained on the original safety approval plate is 
retained in the owners files.


<R03>
PART 452_EXAMINATION OF CONTAINERS--Table of Contents



Sec.
452.1 Periodic examination required.
452.3 Elements of periodic examinations.
452.5 Examinations made in conjunction with other inspections.
452.7 Continuous examination program.
452.9 Elements of a continuous examination program.

    Authority: 46 U.S.C. 80503; Department of Homeland Security 
Delegation No. 0170.1.


<R05>
Sec. 452.1  Periodic examination required.

    (a) Except as provided for in Sec. 452.7, each owner of an approved 
container

[[Page 14]]

subject to this part shall examine the container or have it examined in 
accordance with the procedures prescribed in Sec. 452.3 at intervals of 
not more than 30 months, except that for containers approved as new 
containers, the interval from the date of manufacture to the date of the 
first examination must not exceed five years. For containers approved, 
examined and plated as existing containers before January 1, 1985 and 
containers approved and plated as new containers before January 1, 1985, 
the subsequent examination must be carried out in accordance with the 
following schedule:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Date of initial plating               Subsequent examination
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Existing containers before Sept. 30, 1981  Before Jan. 1986.
 and new containers before Dec. 31, 1978.
Existing containers between Oct. 1, 1981   Before May 1986.
 and Sept. 30, 1982 and new containers
 between Jan. 1, 1979 and Dec. 31, 1979.
Existing containers between Oct. 1, 1982   Before Sept. 1986.
 and Sept. 30, 1983 and new containers
 between Jan. 1, 1980 and Dec. 31, 1980.
Existing containers between Oct. 1, 1983   Before Jan. 1987.
 and Dec. 31, 1984 and new containers
 between Jan. 1, 1981 and Dec. 31, 1981.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Note: Containers plated under Sec. 451.14 are considered existing 
containers in the above schedule.

    (b) Upon completion of an examination required by this part, the 
owner shall mark on the safety approval plate, or on the container 
itself as close as practicable to the safety approval plate, the month 
and year before which the container must next be examined. This marking 
must be on all containers by January 1, 1987. The marking may be by a 
decal, sticker, stencil, or other means so long as it is capable of 
remaining legible for at least 24 months. Affixing such a marking to a 
container that has not been examined in accordance with Sec. 452.3 
constitutes a misrepresentation in a matter within the jurisdiction of 
an agency of the United States, and makes the owner punishable under 18 
U.S.C. 1001.
    (c) The owner of containers subject to this section shall have those 
containers examined in accordance with the program prescribed in this 
section regardless of whether the examinations are preformed within or 
outside the United States.

[45 FR 37216, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 49 
FR 15562, Apr. 19, 1984; 69 FR 58353, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 452.3  Elements of periodic examinations.

    (a) Periodic examinations required by Sec. 452.1 must conform to 
the following minimum requirements:
    (1) Each examination must include a detailed visual inspection for 
defects such as cracks, failures, corrosion, missing or deteriorated 
fasteners, and any other safety related deficiency or damage which could 
place any person in danger. Any such deficiencies disclosed by the 
examination must be corrected by the owner before the container is 
continued in service.
    (2) Each examination must take into account the particular 
characteristics of various kinds of containers and materials of 
construction.
    (3) Each examination must be performed by qualified personnel, 
trained and experienced in the detection of container structural damage.
    (4) The examinations must be scheduled so as to allow adequate time 
for thorough performance.
    (5) Each examination must apply owner established or industry 
accepted pass/fail criteria to determine whether a container has any 
deficiency that must be remedied before the container is returned to 
service.
    (b) Examinations must be documented, and the records retained by the 
owner, until the next examination is completed and recorded. The records 
must include, in addition to identification of the container, a record 
of the date of last examination and a means of identifying the examiner. 
The records must be maintained in an office under the control of the 
owner and be made available for inspection by the Coast Guard upon 
demand. If the original records are maintained outside the United 
States, its territories or possessions, supplementary records must be 
available in written or data processing form to be produced on demand of 
the Commandant or his representative.

[45 FR 37216, June 2, 1980; as amended at 69 FR 58353, Sept. 30, 2004]

[[Page 15]]


<R05>
Sec. 452.5  Examinations made in conjunction with other inspections.

    (a) Periodic examinations may be made in conjunction with or as part 
of routine change-of-custody inspections, or in any other manner 
convenient to the owner so long as the examinations conform to the 
requirements of Sec. 452.3.

[45 FR 37216, June 2, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 452.7  Continuous examination program.

    (a) In lieu of a periodic examination under Sec. 452.1, each owner 
of an approved container meeting Sec. 450.5 may examine the container 
or have it examined using an approved continuous examination program. An 
owner must submit the continuous examination program for approval to the 
Commandant (CG-522), United States Coast Guard, 2100 2nd St. SW., Stop 
7126, Washington, DC 20593-7126. When submitting a continuous 
examination program for approval the owner must show the continuous 
examination complies with Sec. 452.9.
    (b) The owner must mark the container with the letters ``ACEP/USA/
(year continuous examination program is approved)'' to indicate the 
container is being periodically examined under an approved continuous 
examination program. This marking must be as close as practicable to the 
safety approval plate. This marking must be on all containers covered by 
a continuous examination program by January 1, 1987.
    (c) The owner of containers subject to this section shall have those 
containers examined in accordance with the program prescribed in this 
section regardless of whether the examinations are performed within or 
outside the United States.

(The information collection requirements contained in paragraphs (a) and 
(b) have been approved by the Office of Management and Budget under OMB 
control number 1625-0024)

[49 FR 15562, Apr. 19, 1984, as amended at 69 FR 58353, Sept. 30, 2004; 
74 FR 49241, Sept. 25, 2009; 74 FR 49241, Sept.. 25, 2009]


<R05>
Sec. 452.9  Elements of a continuous examination program.

    (a) Examinations required by Sec. 452.7 must conform to the 
following minimum requirements:
    (1) A thorough examination that must include a detailed visual 
inspection for defects such as cracks, failures, corrosion, missing or 
deteriorated fasteners, and any other safety related deficiency or 
damage that could place any person in danger. Any such deficiencies 
disclosed by the examination must be corrected by the owner before the 
container is continued in service. A thorough examination must be done 
each time a container undergoes a major repair, refurbishment or on-
hire/off-hire interchange. In no case is the time period between 
thorough examinations to exceed 30 months.
    (2) Each thorough examination must be performed by qualified 
personnel, trained and experienced in the detection of container 
structural damage.
    (3) Each thorough examination must apply owner established or 
industry accepted pass/fail criteria to determine whether a container 
has any deficiency that must be remedied before the container is 
returned to service.
    (b) Thorough examinations must be documented, and the records 
retained by the owner, until the next examination is completed and 
recorded. The records must include, in addition to identification of the 
container, a record of the date of last examination and a means of 
identifying the examiner. The records must be maintained in an office 
under the control of the owner and be made available for inspection by 
the Coast Guard upon demand. If the original records are maintained 
outside the United States, its territories or possessions, supplementary 
records must be available in written or data processing form to be 
produced on demand of the Commandant or his representative.

(The information collection requirements contained in paragraph (b) have 
been approved by the Office of Management and Budget under OMB control 
number 1625-0024)

[49 FR 15562, Apr. 19, 1984, as amended at 69 FR 58353, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R03>
PART 453_CONTROL AND ENFORCEMENT--Table of Contents



Sec.
453.1 Unsafe and noncomplying containers subject to detention or 
          control.
453.3 Detention orders and other orders.

[[Page 16]]

453.5 Termination of detention orders and other orders.
453.7 Appeal provisions.

    Authority: 46 U.S.C. 80503; Department of Homeland Security 
Delegation No. 0170.1.

    Editorial Note: Nomenclature changes to part 453 appear at 74 FR 
49241, Sept. 25, 2009.


<R05>
Sec. 453.1  Unsafe and noncomplying containers subject to detention or 

control.

    (a) Any container used in or offered for movement in international 
transport which does not have a valid safety approval plate attached to 
it is subject to detention or other control by a District Commander or 
Captain of the Port. However, upon receipt of evidence that a container 
which does not have a valid safety approval plate attached to it meets 
the standards of the convention, the District Commander or Captain of 
the Port may authorize limited movement of such container under 
conditions he deems appropriate. This paragraph becomes effective on 
January 3, 1979 for new containers and on January 1, 1985 for existing 
containers.
    (b) If a District Commander or Captain of the Port finds that a 
container used in or offered for movement in international transport, 
even though it has a valid safety approval plate attached to it, is in a 
condition that creates an obvious risk to safety, he issues a detention 
order causing the container to be removed from service until it is 
restored to a safe condition. In addition to removing a container from 
transport, a detention order may require any special handling, including 
unloading prior to movement, necessary to ensure safety.
    (c) If a District Commander or Captain of the Port finds that a 
container used or offered for movement in international transport has 
not been timely examined, the District Commander or Captain of the Port 
affixes to the container, at a place on the container where it will be 
readily noticeable to anyone loading or unloading the container, a mark 
or tag indicating that the container must be examined before being 
reloaded and again used in international transport. The mark or tag 
affixed by the District Commander or Captain of the Port indicates the 
place and the date on which it was affixed, and is capable of remaining 
legible and in place for at least 12 months. Such mark or tag must not 
be removed until the container is examined in accordance with Sec. 
452.3 of this subchapter. If a District Commander or Captain of the Port 
finds that container marked or tagged as provided for in this paragraph 
was reloaded and used or offered for movement in international transport 
without having been examined, the District Commander or Captain of the 
Port issues a detention order causing the container to be removed from 
service until it is brought into compliance.

[45 FR 37217, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 453.3  Detention orders and other orders.

    (a) The terms of any detention order or other order issued under 
Sec. 453.1, to the maximum extent practicable, make provisions to avoid 
loss or damage to cargo.
    (b) Written notice of any detention order or other order issued 
under Sec. 453.1 is given immediately to the terminal operator, 
stevedore, or other person having actual control over the container 
involved. Prompt notification is also given to the owner of the 
container, or his agent. The notification identifies the container 
involved, its location, and describes the condition which gave rise to 
the order.

[45 FR 37217, June 2, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 453.5  Termination of detention orders and other orders.

    (a) When a container, which is the subject of a detention order or 
other order, is restored to a safe condition or otherwise brought into 
compliance, it must be examined in accordance with Sec. 452.3 and a new 
re-examination date marked on the container in accordance with Sec. 
452.1(b) of this subchapter.
    (b) The owner or the owner's agent shall notify the District 
Commander or Captain of the Port who issue the order, in writing, that 
the container has been brought into compliance. Upon giving such notice, 
the owner, or his agent, may return the container to service.

[45 FR 37217, June 2, 1980]

[[Page 17]]


<R05>
Sec. 453.7  Appeal provisions.

    (a) The owner, his agent, or the custodian of a container subject to 
a detention order or other order, may petition the Chief, Office of 
Operating and Environmental Standards (CG-522), U.S. Coast Guard to 
review that order.
    (b) The Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (CG-
522), U.S. Coast Guard requires independent surveys to determine the 
extent of deficiencies, if necessary. Upon completion of his review, 
including review of the results of any required independent surveys, the 
Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (CG-522), U.S. 
Coast Guard affirms, sets aside, or modifies the order.
    (c) The owner of a container is liable for any costs incident to a 
petition for review including any independent surveys, and for any other 
costs incident to or resulting from detention or other control of a 
container.
    (d) Unless otherwise determined by the Chief, Office of Operating 
and Environmental Standards (CG-522), U.S. Coast Guard, a detention 
order or other order remains in effect pending the outcome of any 
petition or appeal of that order.
    (e) The Chief, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards (CG-
522), U.S. Coast Guard acts on all appeals within ten days of receipt.

[45 FR 37217, June 2, 1980, as amended at 47 FR 50496, Nov. 8, 1982; 69 
FR 58353, Sept. 30, 2004]

[[Page 19]]


<R02>
CHAPTER V--NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF 

                             TRANSPORTATION


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
Part                                                                Page
501             Organization and delegation of powers and 
                    duties..................................          21
509             OMB control numbers for information 
                    collection requirements.................          26
510             Information gathering powers................          26
511             Adjudicative procedures.....................          32
512             Confidential business information...........          58
520             Procedures for considering environmental 
                    impacts.................................          67
523             Vehicle classification......................          83
525             Exemptions from average fuel economy 
                    standards...............................          89
526             Petitions and plans for relief under the 
                    Automobile Fuel Efficiency Act of 1980..          93
529             Manufacturers of multistage automobiles.....          95
531             Passenger automobile average fuel economy 
                    standards...............................          98
533             Light truck fuel economy standards..........         106
534             Rights and responsibilities of manufacturers 
                    in the context of changes in corporate 
                    relationships...........................         115
535             Medium- and Heavy-Duty Vehicle Fuel 
                    Efficiency Program (Eff. 11-14-11)......         119
536             Transfer and trading of fuel economy credits         154
537             Automotive fuel economy reports.............         160
538             Manufacturing incentives for alternative 
                    fuel vehicles...........................         166
541             Federal motor vehicle theft prevention 
                    standard................................         169
542             Procedures for selecting light duty truck 
                    lines to be covered by the theft 
                    prevention standard.....................         178
543             Exemption from vehicle theft prevention 
                    standard................................         180
544             Insurer reporting requirements..............         183
545             Federal motor vehicle theft prevention 
                    standard phase-in and small-volume line 
                    reporting requirements..................         188
551             Procedural rules............................         190

[[Page 20]]

552             Petitions for rulemaking, defect, and 
                    noncompliance orders....................         196
553             Rulemaking procedures.......................         200
554             Standards enforcement and defects 
                    investigation...........................         211
555             Temporary exemption from motor vehicle 
                    safety and bumper standards.............         213
556             Exemption for inconsequential defect or 
                    noncompliance...........................         220
557             Petitions for hearings on notification and 
                    remedy of defects.......................         222
563             Event data recorders........................         223
564             Replaceable light source information (Eff. 
                    until 12-01-12).........................         235
564             Replaceable light source and sealed beam 
                    headlamp information (Eff. 12-01-12)....         239
565             Vehicle identification number (VIN) 
                    requirements............................         244
566             Manufacturer identification.................         259
567             Certification...............................         260
568             Vehicles manufactured in two or more 
                    stages--All incomplete, intermediate and 
                    final-stage manufacturers of vehicles 
                    manufactured in two or more stages......         267
569             Regrooved tires.............................         269
570             Vehicle in use inspection standards.........         271
571             Federal motor vehicle safety standards......         281

[[Page 21]]


<R03>
PART 501_ORGANIZATION AND DELEGATION OF POWERS AND DUTIES--Table of Contents



Sec.
501.1 Purpose.
501.2 General.
501.3 Organization and general responsibilities.
501.4 Succession to Administrator.
501.5 Exercise of authority.
501.6 Secretary's reservations of authority.
501.7 Administrator's reservations of authority.
501.8 Delegations.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. secs. 105 and 322, delegation of authority at 
49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 53 FR 26258, July 12, 1988, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 501.1  Purpose.

    This part describes the organization of the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration (NHTSA) through Associate Administrator, Regional 
Administrator and Staff Office Director levels and provides for the 
performance of duties imposed on, and the exercise of powers vested in, 
the Administrator of the NHTSA (hereafter referred to as the 
``Administrator'').


<R05>
Sec. 501.2  General.

    The Administrator is delegated authority by the Secretary of 
Transportation (49 CFR 1.50) to:
    (a) Carry out the following chapters or sections of Title 49 of the 
United States Code:
    (1) Chapter 301--Motor Vehicle Safety.
    (2) Chapter 303--National Driver Register.
    (3) Chapter 305--National Automobile Title Information System.
    (4) Chapter 321--General.
    (5) Chapter 323--Consumer Information.
    (6) Chapter 325--Bumper Standards.
    (7) Chapter 327--Odometers.
    (8) Chapter 329--Automobile Fuel Economy.
    (9) Chapter 331--Theft Prevention.
    (10) Section 20134(a), with respect to the laws administered by the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administrator pertaining to highway, 
traffic and motor vehicle safety.
    (b) Carry out 23 U.S.C. chapter 4, HIGHWAY SAFETY, as amended, 
except for section 409 and activities relating to highway design, 
construction and maintenance, traffic control devices, identification 
and surveillance of accident locations, and highway-related aspects of 
pedestrian and bicycle safety.
    (c) Exercise the authority vested in the Secretary by section 210(2) 
of the Clean Air Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 7544(2)).
    (d) Carry out the Act of July 14, 1960, as amended (23 U.S.C. 313 
note).
    (e) Administer the following sections of Title 23, United States 
Code, with the concurrence of the Federal Highway Administrator:
    (1) Section 141, as it relates to certification of the enforcement 
of speed limits.
    (2) Section 153.
    (3) Section 154(a), (b), (d), and (e).
    (4) Section 158.
    (f) Carry out the consultation functions vested in the Secretary by 
Executive Order 11912 (3 CFR, 1976 Comp., p. 114), as amended.

[60 FR 43029, Aug. 18, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 501.3  Organization and general responsibilities.

    The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration consists of a 
headquarters organization located in Washington, DC, and a unified field 
organization consisting of ten geographic regions. The organization of, 
and general spheres of responsibility within, the NHTSA are as follows:
    (a) Office of the Administrator--(1) Administrator. (i) Represents 
the Department and is the principal advisor to the Secretary in all 
matters related to chapters 301, 303, 305, 321, 323, 325, 327, 329, and 
331 of Title 49 U.S.C.; 23 U.S.C. chapter 4, except section 409; as each 
relates to highway safety, sections 141, 153, 154(a), (b), (d) and (e), 
and 158 of Title 23 U.S.C.; and such other authorities as are delegated 
by the Secretary of Transportation (49 CFR 1.50);
    (ii) Establishes NHTSA program policies, objectives, and priorities 
and directs development of action plans to accomplish the NHTSA mission;
    (iii) Directs, controls, and evaluates the organization, program 
activities,

[[Page 22]]

performance of NHTSA staff, program and field offices;
    (iv) Approves broad legislative, budgetary, fiscal and program 
proposals and plans; and
    (v) Takes management actions of major significance, such as those 
relating to changes in basic organization pattern, appointment of key 
personnel, allocation of resources, and matters of special political or 
public interest or sensitivity.
    (2) Deputy Administrator. Assists the Administrator in discharging 
responsibilities. Directs and coordinates the Administration's 
management and operational programs, and related policies and procedures 
at headquarters and in the field. Provides policy direction and 
executive direction to the Associate Administrator for State and 
Community Services.
    (3) [Reserved]
    (4) Director, Executive Secretariat. Provides a central facilitative 
staff that administers an executive correspondence program and maintains 
policy files for the Administrator and Deputy Administrator, and 
services and support to committees as designated by the Administrator.
    (5) Director, Office of Civil Rights. As principal staff advisor to 
the Administrator and Deputy Administrator on all matters pertaining to 
civil rights, acts as Director of Equal Employment Opportunity, 
Contracts Compliance Officer and Title VI (Civil Rights Act of 1964) 
Coordinator; assures Administration-wide compliance with related laws, 
Executive Orders, regulations and policies; and provides assistance to 
the Office of the Secretary in investigating and adjudicating formal 
complaints of discrimination.
    (6) Director, Intergovernmental Affairs. As the principal advisor to 
the Administrator and Deputy Administrator on all intergovernmental 
matters, including communications with Congress, communicates agency 
policy and coordinates with the Chief Counsel on legislative issues 
affecting the agency.
    (b) Chief Counsel. As chief legal officer, provides legal services 
for the Administrator and the Administration; prepares litigation for 
the Administration; effects rulemaking actions; issues subpoenas; and 
serves as coordinator on legislative affairs.
    (c) Senior Associate Administrators--(1) Senior Associate 
Administrator for Policy and Operations. As the principal advisor to the 
Administrator and Deputy Administrator with regard to core 
administrative and support services, provides direction and internal 
management and mission support for such activities. Provides executive 
direction over the Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and 
Analysis, the Associate Administrator for Administration, the Associate 
Administrator for Planning, Evaluation and Budget, the Chief Information 
Officer and the Office of Communications and Consumer Information.
    (2) Senior Associate Administrator for Vehicle Safety. As the 
principal advisor to the Administrator and Deputy Administrator with 
regard to rulemaking, enforcement and applied research, provides 
direction and internal management and mission support for such 
activities. Provides executive direction over the Associate 
Administrator for Rulemaking, the Associate Administrator for 
Enforcement, and the Associate Administrator for Applied Research.
    (3) Senior Associate Administrator for Traffic Injury Control. As 
the principal advisor to the Administrator and Deputy Administrator with 
regard to programs to reduce traffic injury, provides direction and 
internal management and mission support for such activities. Provides 
executive direction over the Associate Administrator for Program 
Development and Delivery and the Associate Administrator for Injury 
Control Operations and Resources.

[53 FR 26258, July 12, 1988, as amended at 58 FR 12545, Mar. 5, 1993; 60 
FR 15504, Mar. 24, 1995; 60 FR 43029, Aug. 18, 1995; 67 FR 44083, 44085, 
July 1, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 501.4  Succession to Administrator.

    (a) The following officials, in the order indicated, shall act in 
accordance with the requirements of 5 U.S.C. 3346-3349 as Administrator 
of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, in the case of 
the absence or disability or in the case of a vacancy in the office of 
the Administrator, until a successor is appointed:

[[Page 23]]

    (1) Deputy Administrator;
    (2) Senior Associate Administrator for Vehicle Safety;
    (3) Chief Counsel;
    (4) Senior Associate Administrator for Traffic Injury Control; and
    (5) Senior Associate Administrator for Policy and Operations.
    (b) In order to qualify for the line of succession, officials must 
be encumbered in their position on a permanent basis.

[69 FR 63957, Nov. 3, 2004, as amended at 74 FR 46021, Sept. 8, 2009]


<R05>
Sec. 501.5  Exercise of authority.

    (a) All authorities lawfully vested in the Administrator and 
reserved to him/her in this Regulation or other NHTSA directives may be 
exercised by the Deputy Administrator and, in the absence of both 
Officials, by the Executive Director, unless specifically prohibited.
    (b) In exercising the powers and performing the duties delegated by 
this part, officers of the NHTSA and their delegates are governed by 
applicable laws, executive orders, regulations, and other directives, 
and by policies, objectives, plans, standards, procedures, and 
limitations as may be issued from time to time by or on behalf of the 
Secretary of Transportation, the Administrator, Deputy Administrator and 
Executive Director or, with respect to matters under their 
jurisdictions, by or on behalf of the Associate Administrators, Regional 
Administrators, and Directors of Staff Offices.
    (c) Each officer to whom authority is delegated by this part may 
redelegate and authorize successive redelegations of that authority 
subject to any conditions the officer prescribes. Redelegations of 
authority shall be in written form and shall be published in the Federal 
Register when they affect the public.
    (d) Each officer to whom authority is delegated will administer and 
perform the functions described in the officer's respective functional 
statements.

[53 FR 26258, July 12, 1988, as amended at 58 FR 12545, Mar. 5, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 501.6  Secretary's reservations of authority.

    The authorities reserved to the Secretary of Transportation are set 
forth in subpart 1.44 of part 1 and in part 95 of the regulations of the 
Office of the Secretary of Transportation in subtitle A of this title 
(49 CFR parts 1 and 95).


<R05>
Sec. 501.7  Administrator's reservations of authority.

    The delegations of authority in this part do not extend to the 
following authority which is reserved to the Administrator and, in those 
instances when the office of the Administrator is vacant due to death or 
resignation, or when the Administrator is absent as provided by Sec. 
501.5(a), to the Deputy Administrator or Executive Director:
    (a) The authority under chapter 301--Motor Vehicle Safety--of Title 
49 of the United States Code to:
    (1) Issue, amend, or revoke final federal motor vehicle safety 
standards and regulations;
    (2) Make final decisions concerning alleged safety-related defects 
and noncompliances with Federal motor vehicle safety standards;
    (3) Grant or renew temporary exemptions from federal motor vehicle 
safety standards; and
    (4) Grant or deny appeals from determinations upon petitions for 
inconsequential defect or noncompliance.
    (b) The authority under 23 U.S.C. chapter 4, as amended, to:
    (1) Apportion authorization amounts and distribute obligation 
limitations for State and community highway safety programs under 23 
U.S.C. 402;
    (2) Approve the initial awarding of alcohol incentive grants to the 
States authorized under 23 U.S.C. 408, and drunk driving prevention 
grants to the States authorized under 23 U.S.C. 410;
    (3) Issue, amend, or revoke uniform State and community highway 
safety guidelines, and, with the concurrence of the Federal Highway 
Administrator, designate priority highway safety programs, under 23 
U.S.C. 402;
    (4) Fix the rate of compensation for non-government members of 
agency sponsored committees which are entitled to compensation.
    (c) The authority under chapters 321, 323, 325, and 329 of Title 49 
of the United States Code to:
    (1) Issue, amend, or revoke final rules and regulations, except for 
final rules issued under section 32902(d); and

[[Page 24]]

    (2) Assess civil penalties and approve manufacturer fuel economy 
credit plans under chapter 329.
    (d) The authority under sections 141, 153, 154 and 158 of Title 23 
of the United States Code, with the concurrence of the Federal Highway 
Administrator, to disapprove any State certification or to impose any 
sanction or transfer on a State for violations of the National Maximum 
Speed Limit, Safety Belt and Motorcycle Helmet Use Requirements, or the 
National Minimum Drinking Age.

[60 FR 43030, Aug. 18, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 501.8  Delegations.

    (a) Deputy Administrator. The Deputy Administrator is delegated 
authority to act for the Administrator, except where specifically 
limited by law, order, regulation, or instructions of the Administrator. 
The Deputy Administrator is delegated authority to provide executive 
direction to the Associate Administrator for State and Community 
Services and the Director of International Harmonization, and assist the 
Administrator in providing executive direction to all organizational 
elements of NHTSA.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) Director, Office of Civil Rights. The Director, Office of Civil 
Rights is delegated authority to:
    (1) Act as the NHTSA Director of Equal Employment Opportunity.
    (2) Act as NHTSA Contracts Compliance Officer.
    (3) Act as NHTSA coordinator for matters under Title VI of the Civil 
Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.), Executive Order 12250 (3 
CFR, 1980 Comp., p. 298), and regulations of the Department of Justice.
    (d) Chief Counsel. The Chief Counsel is delegated authority to:
    (1) Exercise the powers and perform the duties of the Administrator 
with respect to setting of odometer regulations authorized under 49 
U.S.C. chapter 327, and with respect to providing technical assistance 
and granting extensions of time to the states under 49 U.S.C. 32705.
    (2) Establish the legal sufficiency of all investigations and 
enforcement actions conducted under the authority of the following 
chapters, including notes, of Title 49 of the United States Code: 
Chapter 301; chapter 323; chapter 325; chapter 327; chapter 329; and 
chapter 331; to make an initial penalty demand based on a violations of 
any of these chapters; and to compromise any civil penalty or monetary 
settlement in an amount of $100,000 or less resulting from a violation 
of any of these chapters.
    (3) Exercise the powers of the Administrator under 49 U.S.C. 30166 
(c), (g), (h), (i), and (k).
    (4) Issue subpoenas, after notice to the Administrator, for the 
attendance of witnesses and production of documents pursuant to chapters 
301, 323, 325, 327, 329, and 331 of Title 49 of the United States Code.
    (5) Issue authoritative interpretations of the statutes administered 
by NHTSA and the regulations issued by the agency.
    (e) Senior Associate Administrator for Policy and Operations. The 
Senior Associate Administrator for Policy and operations is delegated 
authority for executive direction of the Associate Administrator for 
Advanced Research and Analysis; the Associate Administrator for 
Administration; the Associate Administrator for Planning, Evaluation, 
and Budget; the Chief Information Officer; and the Director of 
Communications and Consumer Information. To carry out this direction, 
the Senior Associate Administrator for Policy and Operations is 
delegated authority, except for authority reserved to the Administrator, 
to direct the NHTSA planning and evaluation system in conjunction with 
Departmental requirement and planning goals; to coordinate the 
development of the Administrator's plans, policies, budget, and 
programs, and analyses of their expected impact, and their evaluation in 
terms of the degree of goal achievement; and to perform independent 
analyses of proposed Administration regulatory, grant, legislative, and 
program activities. Except for authority reserved to the Senior 
Associate Administrator for Vehicle Safety, the Senior Associate 
Administrator for Policy and Operations is delegated authority to 
develop and conduct research and development programs and projects 
necessary to support the purposes of Chapters 301, 323,

[[Page 25]]

325, 327, 329, and 331 of title 49, United States Code, and Chapter 4 of 
title 23, United States Code, as amended, in coordination with the 
Senior Associate Administrator for Vehicle Safety and the Chief Counsel. 
The Senior Associate Administrator for Policy and Operations is also 
delegated authority to exercise procurement authority with respect to 
NHTSA requirements; administer and conduct NHTSA's personnel management 
activities; administer NHTSA financial management programs, including 
systems of funds control and accounts of all financial transactions; and 
conduct administrative management services in support of NHTSA missions 
and programs.
    (f) Senior Associate Administrator for Vehicle Safety. The Senior 
Associate Administrator for Vehicle Safety is delegated authority for 
executive direction of the Associate Administrator for Rulemaking, the 
Associate Administrator for Enforcement and the Associate Administrator 
for Applied Research. The Senior Associate Administrator for Vehicle 
Safety exercises executive direction with respect to the setting of 
standards and regulations for motor vehicle safety, fuel economy, theft 
prevention, consumer information, and odometer fraud. To carry out this 
direction, the Senior Associate Administrator for Vehicle Safety is 
delegated authority, except for authority reserved to the Administrator 
or the Chief Counsel, to exercise the powers and perform the duties of 
the Administrator with respect to the setting of motor vehicle safety 
and theft prevention standards, average fuel economy standards, 
procedural regulations, and the development of consumer information and 
odometer fraud regulations authorized under Chapters 301, 323, 325, 327, 
329, and 331 of title 49, United States Code. Except for authority 
reserved to the Senior Associate Administrator for Policy and 
Operations, the Senior Associate Administrator for Vehicle Safety is 
delegated authority to develop and conduct research and development 
programs and projects necessary to support the purposes of Chapters 301, 
323, 325, 327, 329, and 331 of title 49, United States Code, and Chapter 
4 of title 23, United States Code, as amended, in coordination with the 
appropriate Associate Administrators, and the Chief Counsel. The Senior 
Associate Administrator for Vehicle Safety is also delegated authority 
to respond to a manufacturer's petition for exemption from 49 U.S.C. 
Chapter 301's notification and remedy requirements in connection with a 
defect or noncompliance concerning labeling errors; extend comment 
periods (both self-initiated and in response to a petition for extension 
of time) for noncontroversial rulemakings; make technical amendments or 
corrections to a final rule; extend the effective date of a 
noncontroversial final rule; administer the NHTSA enforcement program 
for all laws, standards, and regulations pertinent to vehicle safety, 
fuel economy, theft prevention, damageability, consumer information and 
odometer fraud, authorized under Chapters 301, 323, 325, 327, 329, and 
331 of title 49, United States Code; issue regulations relating to the 
importation of motor vehicles under sections 30141 through 30147 of 
title 49, United States Code; and grant and deny petitions for import 
eligibility determinations submitted to NHTSA by motor vehicle 
manufacturers and registered importers under 49 U.S.C. 30141.
    (g) Senior Associate Administrator for Traffic Injury Control. The 
Senior Associate Administrator for Traffic Injury Control is delegated 
authority for executive direction of the Associate Administrator for 
Program Development and Delivery and the Associate Administrator for 
Injury Control Operations and Resources. To carry out this direction, 
the Senior Associate Administrator for Traffic Injury Control is 
delegated authority, except for authority reserved to the Administrator, 
over programs with respect to: Chapter 4 of title 23, United States 
Code, as amended; the authority vested by section 210(2) of the Clean 
Air Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 7544(2)); the authority vested by 49 
U.S.C. 20134(a), with respect to the laws administered by the 
Administrator pertaining to highway, traffic, and motor vehicle safety; 
the Act of July 14, 1960, as amended (23 U.S.C. 313 note) and 49 U.S.C. 
Chapter 303; the authority vested by section 157(g) of title 23, United 
States Code; the authority vested by sections 153, 154, 157(except

[[Page 26]]

paragraph (g)), 161, 163, and 164 of title 23, United States Code, with 
the concurrence of the Federal Highway Administrator; and section 209 of 
the Surface Transportation Assistance Act of 1978 (23 U.S.C. 401 note) 
as delegated by the Secretary in Sec. 501.2(i). The Senior Associate 
Administrator for Traffic Injury Control is also delegated authority to 
exercise the powers and perform the duties of the Administrator with 
respect to State and community highway safety programs under 23 U.S.C. 
402, including approval and disapproval of State highway safety plans 
and final vouchers, in accordance with the procedural requirements of 
the Administration; to approve the awarding of alcohol incentive grants 
to the States under 23 U.S.C. 408 and drunk driving prevention grants 
under 23 U.S.C. 410, for years subsequent to the initial awarding of 
such grants by the Administrator; as appropriate for activities 
benefiting states and communities; and to implement 23 U.S.C. 403.
    (h) Director, Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance, Enforcement. The 
Director, Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance, Enforcement, is delegated 
authority to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the 
Administrator with respect to granting and denying petitions for import 
eligibility decisions submitted to NHTSA by motor vehicle manufacturers 
and registered importers under 49 U.S.C. 30141(a)(1).

[60 FR 43030, Aug. 18, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 26469, May 28, 1996; 67 
FR 44084, 44085, July 1, 2002; 74 FR 41067, Aug. 14, 2009]


<R03>
PART 509_OMB CONTROL NUMBERS FOR INFORMATION COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS--Table of 

Contents



Sec.
509.1 Purpose.
509.2 Display.

    Authority: 44 U.S.C. 3507.


<R05>
Sec. 509.1  Purpose.

    This part collects and displays the control numbers assigned to 
information collection requirements of NHTSA by the Office of Management 
and Budget (OMB). NHTSA intends that this part comply with the 
requirements of 44 U.S.C. 3507(f), which mandates that agencies display 
a current control number assigned by the Director of the OMB for each 
agency information collection requirement.

[48 FR 51310, Nov. 8, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 509.2  Display.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
  49 CFR part or section containing information collection   OMB control
                        requirement                              No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part 512...................................................    2127-0025
Part 537...................................................    2127-0019
Part 538...................................................    2127-0554
Part 541...................................................    2127-0510
Part 542...................................................    2127-0539
Part 543...................................................    2127-0542
Part 544...................................................    2127-0547
Section 551.45.............................................    2127-0040
Part 552 and Part 527......................................    2127-0046
Part 556...................................................    2127-0045
Part 557...................................................    2127-0039
Part 566...................................................    2127-0043
Consolidated owners' manual requirements for vehicles and      2127-0541
 equipment (Sec. Sec.  571.126, 571.205 571.208, 571.210,
 and 575.105)..............................................
Consolidatd labeling requirements for tires and rims (parts    2127-0503
 569 and 574, Sec. Sec.  571.109, 571.110, 571.117,
 571,119, and 571.120).....................................
Consolidated VIN and Theft Prevention Standard and Labeling    2127-0510
 Requirements (parts 541, 565, 567 and Sec.  571.115).....
Consolidated lighting requirements (part 564 and Sec.         2127-0563
 571.108)..................................................
Section 571.106............................................    2127-0052
Section 571.116............................................    2127-0521
Section 571.125............................................    2127-0506
Section 571.205............................................    2127-0038
Section 571.209............................................    2127-0512
Section 571.213............................................    2127-0511
Section 571.214............................................    2127-0558
Section 571.217............................................    2127-0505
Section 571.218............................................    2127-0518
Part 573...................................................    2127-0004
Part 574...................................................    2127-0050
Part 575 excluding UTQGS...................................    2127-0049
Section 575.104 (UTQGS)....................................    2127-0519
Part 576...................................................    2127-0042
Part 580...................................................    2127-0047
Part 585...................................................    2127-0535
Parts 591 and 592..........................................    2127-0002
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[57 FR 21215, May 19, 1992]


<R03>
PART 510_INFORMATION GATHERING POWERS--Table of Contents



Sec.
510.1 Scope and purpose.
510.2 Definitions.
510.3 Compulsory process, the service thereof, claims for confidential 
          treatment, and terms of compliance.
510.4 Subpoenas, generally.
510.5 Information gathering hearings.
510.6 Administrative depositions.
510.7 General or special orders.
510.8 Written requests for the production of documents and things.

[[Page 27]]

510.9 Motions to modify, limit, or quash process.
510.10 Supplementation of responses to process.
510.11 Fees.
510.12 Remedies for failure to comply with compulsory process.

    Authority: Secs. 112 and 119, National Traffic and Motor Vehicle 
Safety Act 1966, as amended (15 U.S.C. 1401 and 1407); secs. 104, 204, 
414, and 505, Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, as amended 
(15 U.S.C. 1914, 1944, 1990d, and 2005); delegation of authority (49 CFR 
1.51).

    Source: 45 FR 29042, May 1, 1980, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 510.1  Scope and purpose.

    This rule governs the use of the information gathering powers of the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration contained in section 112 
of the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966, as amended 
15 U.S.C. 1401, and sections 104, 204, 414, and 505 of the Motor Vehicle 
Information and Cost Savings Act, as amended 15 U.S.C. 1914, 1944, 
1990d, and 2005.


<R05>
Sec. 510.2  Definitions.

    (a) NHTSA means the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
    (b) Administrator means the Administrator of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration.
    (c) Chief Counsel means the Chief Counsel of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration.
    (d) Deputy Administrator means the Deputy Administrator of the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
    (e) Person includes agents, officers, and employees of sole 
proprietorships, partnerships, corporations, and other entities.

[45 FR 29042, May 1, 1980; 45 FR 32001, May 15, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 510.3  Compulsory process, the service thereof, claims for confidential 

treatment, and terms of compliance.

    (a) NHTSA may use any of the following means to conduct 
investigations, inspections, or inquiries to obtain information to carry 
out its functions under the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety 
Act of 1966, as amended, 15 U.S.C. 1381 et seq., and the Motor Vehicle 
Information and Cost Savings Act, as amended, 15 U.S.C. 1901 et seq.:
    (1) Subpoenas;
    (2) Information gathering hearings;
    (3) Administrative depositions;
    (4) General or special orders; and
    (5) Written requests for the production of documents and things.
    (b) A person, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or 
other entity served with compulsory process under this part shall be 
provided with the following information at the time of the service:
    (1) The name of the person, sole proprietorship, partnership, 
corporation, or other entity to which the process is addressed;
    (2) The statutory provision under which the compulsory process is 
issued;
    (3) The date, time, and place of return;
    (4) A brief statement of the subject matter of the investigation, 
inspection, or inquiry; and
    (5) In the case of a subpoena duces tecum or a written request for 
the production of documents and things, a reasonably specific 
description of the documents or things to be produced.
    (c) Service of the compulsory processes specified in paragraph (a) 
of this section is effected:
    (1) By personal service upon the person, agent-in-charge, or agent 
designated to receive process under 15 U.S.C. 1399(e) of the sole 
proprietorship, partnership, corporation or other entity being 
investigated, inspected, or inquired of; or
    (2) By mail (registered or certified) or delivery to the last known 
residence or business address of such person or agent.
    (d) The date of service of any compulsory process specified in 
paragraph (a) of this section is the date on which the process is mailed 
by the agency, or delivered in person, as the case may be. Whenever a 
period is prescribed for compliance with compulsory process, and the 
process is served upon the party by mail, 3 days are added to the 
period.
    (e)(1) Any person, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or 
other entity submitting information or producing documents or things in 
response to any compulsory process issued under

[[Page 28]]

this part may request confidential treatment for all or part of that 
information or for those documents or things.
    (2)(i) Except as provided in paragraph (e)(2)(ii) of this section, 
requests for confidentiality shall be in writing, and addressed to the 
Chief Counsel.
    (ii) Requests for confidentiality made during an information 
gathering hearing or an administrative deposition may be made orally to 
the presiding officer. Any oral request for confidentiality shall be 
supplemented by a written request, and this written request must be 
addressed to the Chief Counsel and received by NHTSA within five days of 
the date of the oral request.
    (iii) A written request for confidentiality under paragraph (e) of 
this section shall specify the information, documents, or things which 
are to be kept confidential, specify the grounds upon which the claim is 
based, provide such information as may be necessary to permit the NHTSA 
to determine whether the claim is valid, and specify the period of time 
for which confidential treatment is requested.
    (f) The Chief Counsel, or his or her delegate, is authorized to 
negotiate and approve the terms of satisfactory compliance with any 
compulsory process issued under this part.


<R05>
Sec. 510.4  Subpoenas, generally.

    NHTSA may issue to any person, sole proprietorship, partnership, 
corporation, or other entity a subpoena requiring the production of 
documents or things (subpoena duces tecum) and testimony of witnesses 
(subpoena ad testificandum), or both, relating to any matter under 
investigation or the subject of any inquiry. Subpoenas are issued by the 
Chief Counsel. When a person, sole proprietorship, partnership, 
corporation, or other entity is served with a subpoena ad testificandum 
under this part, the subpoena will describe with reasonable 
particularity the matters on which the testimony is required. In 
response to a subpoena ad testificandum, the sole proprietorship, 
partnership, corporation, or other entity so named shall designate one 
or more officers, directors, or managing agents, or other persons who 
consent to testify on its behalf, and set forth, for each person 
designated, the matters on which he or she will testify. The persons so 
designated shall testify as to matters known or reasonably available to 
the entity.

[53 FR 26261, July 12, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 510.5  Information gathering hearings.

    (a) NHTSA may issue a subpoena to compel any person, sole 
proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or other entity to provide 
information at an information gathering hearing. The subpoenas are used 
for the purpose of obtaining testimony from a witness under oath and 
obtaining relevant documents and things. The Administrator, or a NHTSA 
employee designated by the Administrator, presides at the hearing. 
Information gathering hearings are open to the public unless the 
presiding officer rules otherwise, and the hearings are stenographically 
reported.
    (b) In addition to the presiding officer, one or more other persons 
may comprise the panel. Each member of the panel may question any 
witness at the hearing. No person who is not a member of the panel may 
ask questions of a witness. However, any person may submit to the panel, 
in writing, proposed questions to be asked of a witness. A member of the 
panel may pose these questions to the witness if that member deems the 
questions useful and appropriate. Proposed questions may be submitted to 
the panel at any time before or during the course of the hearing.
    (c) The stenographic record of each witness's testimony will be 
available to the public, unless the testimony was not given publicly and 
the witness requests confidential treatment for some or all of his or 
her testimony. When an oral request for confidential treatment is made 
during the course of a witness's testimony, the presiding officer may 
order the hearing closed to the public at that point and continue the 
questioning of the witness, or may note the request for confidentiality 
and direct the witness not to answer the question at that time, but 
require the witness to answer the question in writing within some 
specified period, or

[[Page 29]]

take such other action as the presiding officer deems appropriate. If a 
request for confidential treatment is made, the release of the record is 
governed by the applicable laws or regulations relating to the handling 
of allegedly confidential information. To the extent that some or all of 
a witness's testimony is not publicly available, that witness may 
procure a copy of his or her testimony as recorded upon payment of 
lawfully prescribed costs.
    (d)(1) Any person who is required by subpoena or designated by an 
entity that is required by subpoena to provide information at an 
information gathering hearing conducted under this section may be 
accompanied, represented, and advised by counsel. Any member of the bar 
of a Federal court or the courts of any State or Territory of the United 
States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or the District of Columbia, 
and any representative, official, or employee of the sole 
proprietorship, partnership, corporation or other entity under subpoena 
may act as counsel.
    (2) A witness appearing in response to subpoena may confer in 
confidence with his or her counsel or representative concerning any 
questions asked of the witness. If such witness, counsel, or 
representative objects to a question, he or she shall state the 
objection and basis therefor on the record.
    (e) The presiding officer at an information gathering hearing takes 
all necessary action to regulate the course of the hearing, to avoid 
delay, and to assure that reasonable standards of orderly and ethical 
conduct are maintained. In any case in which counsel for or a 
representative of a witness has refused to comply with the presiding 
officer's directions, or to adhere to reasonable standards of orderly 
and ethical conduct in the course of a hearing, the presiding officer 
states on the record the reasons given, if any, for the refusal and, if 
the presiding officer is someone other than the Administrator, 
immediately reports the refusal to the Administrator. The Administrator 
thereupon takes such action as the circumstances warrant.
    (f) Where appropriate, the procedures established in this subsection 
may be utilized in informal hearings conducted by NHTSA pursuant to its 
authority under sections 152 and 156 of the Safety Act (15 U.S.C. 1412, 
1416) to receive data, views and arguments concerning alleged safety-
related defects. The rights accorded to witnesses in this subsection may 
also be accorded to witnesses who appear voluntarily at such hearings.


<R05>
Sec. 510.6  Administrative depositions.

    (a) NHTSA may issue a subpoena to compel any person, sole 
proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or other entity to provide 
information as a witness at an administrative deposition. These 
depositions are for the purpose of obtaining information from the 
witness under oath and receiving documents and things relevant to an 
agency investigation. These depositions shall be taken before an officer 
authorized to administer oaths by the laws of the United States or of 
the place where the deposition is taken. Unless otherwise ordered by the 
Administrator, administrative depositions are closed to the public.
    (b) Any person who is required by subpoena or designated by an 
entity that is required by subpoena to produce documents or things or to 
give testimony as a witness at an administrative deposition conducted 
under this section may be accompanied, represented, and advised by 
counsel. Any member of the bar or a Federal court or the courts of any 
State or Territory of the United States, the Commonwealth of Puerto 
Rico, or the District of Columbia and any representative, official, or 
employee of the person, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, 
or other entity under subpoena may act as counsel.
    (c) During an administrative deposition:
    (1) The presiding officer before whom the deposition is to be taken 
puts the witness on oath and personally, or by someone acting under his 
or her direction and in his or her presence, records the testimony of 
the witness. The testimony is stenographically reported.
    (2) After NHTSA has examined the witness at the deposition, that 
witness' counsel or representative may examine the witness. NHTSA may 
then reexamine the witness and the witness' counsel or representative 
may reexamine

[[Page 30]]

the witness and so forth, as appropriate.
    (3) A witness appearing in response to a subpoena may confer in 
confidence with his or her counsel or representative concerning any 
questions asked of the witness. If such witness, counsel, or 
representative objects to a question, he or she shall state the 
objection and the basis therefor on the record.
    (4) Objections to the qualifications of the officer taking the 
deposition, or to the manner of taking it, or to the evidence presented, 
and any other objection to the proceedings shall be noted by the officer 
on the record, and shall be treated as continuing. Evidence objected to 
shall be taken subject to the objections. Errors and irregularities 
occurring at a deposition in the manner of the taking of the deposition, 
in the form of questions or answers, or in the oath or affirmation, and 
errors of any kind which might be obviated, removed, or cured if 
promptly presented shall be deemed to be waived unless reasonable 
objection is made thereto at the taking of the deposition.
    (5) If the witness refuses to answer any question or answers 
evasively, or if the witness or his or her counsel engages in conduct 
likely to delay or obstruct the administrative deposition, such refusal, 
evasive answer or conduct shall be a failure to comply with the subpoena 
issued to the witness.
    (6) Upon completion of the examination of a witness, the witness may 
clarify on the record any of his or her answers.
    (d) The transcript of the testimony of a witness who testified in 
response to a subpoena at an administrative deposition is submitted to 
the witness for signature, unless the witness waives the right to sign 
the transcript. If a witness desires to make any changes in the form or 
substance contained in the transcript, the witness shall submit, 
together with the transcript, a separate document setting forth the 
changes and stating the reasons for such changes. If the deposition is 
not signed by the witness within 30 days of its submission to the 
witness, or such other period as the NHTSA may designate, the officer 
before whom the deposition was taken or a NHTSA employee signs the 
transcript and states on the record the fact of the waiver of the right 
to sign or the fact of the witness' unavailability or inability or 
refusal to sign together with the reasons, if any, given therefor.
    (e) The transcript of the testimony of a witness will be inspected 
by NHTSA to determine if there are any errors in the transcription of 
the questions posed to the witness and the testimony in response to 
those questions. If NHTSA discovers any errors, it notes that fact and 
forwards the notation of errors together with the transcript to the 
witness, requesting the witness to stipulate that the transcript is in 
error and that the corrections made by NHTSA are accurate. If the 
witness will not make this stipulation, NHTSA may make a motion to the 
presiding officer to include its notation of error and its corrections 
in the record along with the version of the testimony signed by the 
witness.
    (f)(1) Upon payment of lawfully prescribed costs, any person who is 
required by subpoena or designated by a sole proprietorship, 
partnership, corporation, or other entity that is required by subpoena 
to appear as a witness at an administrative deposition may procure a 
copy of the deposition as recorded, except that in a nonpublic 
investigatory proceeding, the witness may, for good cause, be limited to 
an inspection of the record of the deposition.
    (2) A copy of the record of the deposition may be furnished to the 
witness without charge or at a reduced charge if the Associate 
Administrator for Administration determines that waiver of the fee is in 
the public interest because furnishing the copy can be considered as 
primarily benefitting the general public. Any witness who seeks a waiver 
of the copying charge may apply in writing to the Associate 
Administrator for Administration, and shall state the reasons justifying 
waiver of the fee in the application.
    (g) The testimony obtained in an adminstrative deposition may be 
used or considered by the NHTSA in any of its activities, and may be 
used or offered into evidence in any administrative proceeding in 
accordance with the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 554, or in any judicial 
proceeding.

[[Page 31]]


<R05>
Sec. 510.7  General or special orders.

    The NHTSA may require by the issuance of general or special orders 
any person, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or other 
entity to file with the NHTSA, in such form as NHTSA may prescribe, 
periodic or special reports or answers in writing to specific questions. 
The responses to general or special orders will provide NHTSA with such 
information as it may require, including, but not limited to, 
information relating to the organization of that person, sole 
proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or other entity, its business, 
conduct, practices, management, and relation to any other person or 
entity. General or special orders which are required to be answered 
under oath are issued by the Chief Counsel. Any general or special order 
issued under this section contains the information specified in Sec. 
510.3(b). Reports and answers filed in response to general or special 
orders must be made under oath, or otherwise, as NHTSA may prescribe.


<R05>
Sec. 510.8  Written requests for the production of documents and things.

    The NHTSA may, by the issuance of a written request for the 
production of documents and things, require any person, sole 
proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or other entity to produce 
documents or things. A written request for the production of documents 
and things may be issued alone, or as a part of a general or special 
order issued under Sec. 510.7. Written requests for the production of 
documents and things are issued by the Chief Counsel. Any written 
request for the production of documents and things issued under this 
section shall contain the information specified in Sec. 510.3(b).


<R05>
Sec. 510.9  Motions to modify, limit, or quash process.

    (a)(1) Any person, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or 
other entity served with a subpoena issued under Sec. 510.4 may file 
with the Deputy Administrator a motion to modify, limit, or quash that 
subpoena. If there is no Deputy Administrator, or the Deputy 
Administrator is not available, such motions shall be filed with and 
decided by the Associate Administrator for Administration. A motion to 
modify, limit, or quash must be filed not later than 15 days after the 
service of the process or five days before the return date specified in 
the process, whichever is earlier, except that, if the process is served 
within five days of its return date, such motion may be filed at any 
time before the return date. Any motion must set forth the grounds and 
theories of why and how the party believes the process should be 
modified, limited, or quashed and must contain all facts and arguments 
which support those grounds and theories.
    (2) The Deputy Administrator may, upon receiving a motion filed 
pursuant to paragraph (a)(1) of this section:
    (i) Deny the motion;
    (ii) Modify the return date of the subpoena;
    (iii) Modify, limit or quash the subpoena;
    (iv) Condition granting the motion upon certain requirements; or
    (v) Take any other action he or she believes to be appropriate in 
the circumstances.
    (3) The Office of the Deputy Administrator serves the decision on 
the motion on the moving party or the counsel or representative of the 
moving party. This service may be made by personal service, by 
registered or certified mail, or by reading a copy of the decision to 
the moving party or the counsel or representative of the moving party.
    (4) A denial of any motion properly filed under this section shall 
be in writing, and shall contain a brief statement of the facts involved 
and the conclusions drawn from those facts by the Deputy Administrator.
    (b) The Deputy Administrator's decision on the motion to modify, 
limit, or quash, filed under paragraph (a) of this section is not 
subject to reconsideration by NHTSA.


<R05>
Sec. 510.10  Supplementation of responses to process.

    (a) A person, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or 
other entity which has provided NHTSA with information under this part, 
which information was complete and accurate at the time the information 
was given to NHTSA, is not required to supplement

[[Page 32]]

that information in the light of after acquired information, except:
    (1) The person or entity to whom the process is addressed shall 
supplement the response with respect to any question directly addressed 
to the identity and location of persons having knowledge of information 
obtainable under this part.
    (2) The person or entity to whom the process is addressed shall 
seasonably amend a prior response if that person or entity obtains 
information upon the basis of which the person or entity knows that the 
response was incorrect when made or the person or entity knows that the 
response, though correct when made, is no longer true and the 
circumstances are such that a failure to amend the response is in 
substance a knowing concealment.
    (b) The requirement to supplement information set forth in paragraph 
(a) of this section terminates when:
    (1) The compulsory process stated that it was issued in connection 
with a contemplated rulemaking action, and a final rule is issued on 
that subject or a notice is issued announcing that the rulemaking action 
has been suspended or terminated.
    (2) The compulsory process stated that it was issued in connection 
with an enforcement investigation, and the investigation is closed.
    (3) The compulsory process does not state that it is issued in 
connection with a specific rulemaking action or enforcement 
investigation, and 18 months have passed since the date of the original 
response.
    (c) This section in no way limits NHTSA's authority to obtain 
supplemental information by specific demands through the means specified 
in Sec. 510.3.


<R05>
Sec. 510.11  Fees.

    Any person compelled to appear in person in response to a subpoena 
issued under this part at an information gathering hearing or an 
administrative deposition is paid the same attendance and mileage fees 
as are paid witnesses in the courts of the United States, in accordance 
with title 28, U.S.C., section 1821.


<R05>
Sec. 510.12  Remedies for failure to comply with compulsory process.

    Any failure to comply with compulsory process authorized by law and 
issued under this part is a violation of this part. In the event of such 
failure to comply, NHTSA may take appropriate action pursuant to the 
authority conferred by the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act 
or the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, as appropriate, 
including institution of judicial proceedings to enforce the order and 
to collect civil penalties.


<R03>
PART 511_ADJUDICATIVE PROCEDURES--Table of Contents



     Subpart A_Scope of Rules; Nature of Adjudicative Proceedings, 
                               Definitions

Sec.
511.1 Scope of the rules.
511.2 Nature of adjudicative proceedings.
511.3 Definitions.

       Subpart B_Pleadings; Form; Execution; Service of Documents

511.11 Commencement of proceedings.
511.12 Answer.
511.13 Amendments and supplemental pleadings.
511.14 Form and filing of documents.
511.15 Time.
511.16 Service.
511.17 Public participation.
511.18 Joinder of proceedings.

Subpart C_Prehearing Procedures; Motions; Interlocutory Appeals; Summary 
                          Judgment; Settlement

511.21 Prehearing conferences.
511.22 Prehearing briefs.
511.23 Motions.
511.24 Interlocutory appeals.
511.25 Summary decision and order.
511.26 Settlement.

                 Subpart D_Discovery; Compulsory Process

511.31 General provisions governing discovery.
511.32 Written interrogatories to parties.
511.33 Production of documents and things.
511.34 Requests for admission.
511.35 Testimony upon oral examination.
511.36 Motions to compel discovery.
511.37 Sanctions for failure to comply with order.
511.38 Subpoenas.

[[Page 33]]

511.39 Orders requiring witnesses to testify or provide other 
          information and granting immunity.

                           Subpart E_Hearings

511.41 General rules.
511.42 Powers and duties of Presiding Officer.
511.43 Evidence.
511.44 Expert witnesses.
511.45 In camera materials.
511.46 Proposed findings, conclusions, and order.
511.47 Record.
511.48 Official docket.
511.49 Fees.

                           Subpart F_Decision

511.51 Initial decision.
511.52 Adoption of initial decision.
511.53 Appeal from initial decision.
511.54 Review of initial decision in absence of appeal.
511.55 Final decision on appeal or review.
511.56 Reconsideration.
511.57 Effective date of order.

  Subpart G_Settlement Procedure in Cases of Violation of Average Fuel 
                            Economy Standards

511.61 Purpose.
511.62 Definitions.
511.63 Criteria for settlement.
511.64 Petitions for settlement; timing, contents.
511.65 Public comment.
511.66 Confidential business information.
511.67 Settlement order.

               Subpart H_Appearances; Standards of Conduct

511.71 Who may make appearances.
511.72 Authority for representation.
511.73 Written appearances.
511.74 Attorneys.
511.75 Persons not attorneys.
511.76 Qualifications and standards of conduct.
511.77 Restrictions as to former members and employees.
511.78 Prohibited communications.

Appendix I to Part 511--Final Prehearing Order

    Authority: 15 U.S.C. 2002; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
     Subpart A_Scope of Rules; Nature of Adjudicative Proceedings, 

                               Definitions


<R05>
Sec. 511.1  Scope of the rules.

    This part establishes rules of practice and procedure for 
adjudicative proceedings conducted pursuant to section 508(a)(2) of the 
Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act (15 U.S.C. Pub. L. 94-
163, 89 Stat. 911, section 2008(a)(2)), which are required by statute to 
be determined on the record after opportunity for a public hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 511.2  Nature of adjudicative proceedings.

    Adjudicative proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with title 
5, U.S.C., sections 551 through 559 and this part. It is the policy of 
the agency that adjudicative proceedings shall be conducted 
expeditiously and with due regard to the rights and interests of all 
persons affected, and to the public interest. Therefore, the presiding 
officer and all parties shall make every effort at each stage of a 
proceeding to avoid unnecessary delay.


<R05>
Sec. 511.3  Definitions.

    (a) As used in this part:
    (1) The term application means an ex parte request by a party for an 
order that may be granted or denied without opportunity for response by 
any other party.
    (2) The term NHTSA means the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration.
    (3) The term Administrator means the Administrator of the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
    (4) The term Complaint Counsel means prosecuting counsel for the 
NHTSA.
    (5) The term motion means a request by a party for a ruling or order 
that may be granted or denied only after opportunity for response by 
each affected party.
    (6) The term party means the NHTSA, and any person named as a 
respondent in a proceeding governed by this part.
    (7) The term person means any individual, partnership, corporation, 
association, public or private organization, or Federal, State or 
municipal governmental entity.

[[Page 34]]

    (8) The term petition means a written request, made by a person or a 
party and addressed to the Presiding Officer or the Administrator, that 
the addressee take some action.
    (9) The term Presiding Officer means the person who conducts an 
adjudicative hearing under this part, who shall be an administrative law 
judge qualified under title 5, U.S.C., section 3105 and assigned by the 
Chief Administrative Law Judge, Office of Hearings, United States 
Department of Transportation.
    (10) The term Respondent means any person against whom a complaint 
has been issued.
    (11) The term Office of Hearings means the Officer of Hearings, 
Department of Transportation.
    (12) The term staff means the staff of the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration.
    (13) The term Chief Administrative Law Judge means the Chief 
Administrative Law Judge of the Office of Hearings, Department of 
Transportation.
    (14) The term Docket Section means the Docket Section, Office of the 
Secretary of Transportation.

[45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 15782, May 3, 1988]


<R04>
       Subpart B_Pleadings; Form; Execution; Service of Documents


<R05>
Sec. 511.11  Commencement of proceedings.

    (a) Notice of institution of an enforcement proceeding. An 
adjudicative proceeding under this part is commenced by the issuance of 
a complaint by the NHTSA.
    (b) Form and content of complaint. The complaint shall be signed by 
the Complaint Counsel and shall contain the following:
    (1) Recital of the legal authority for instituting the proceeding, 
with specific designation of the statutory provisions involved in each 
allegation.
    (2) Identification of each respondent.
    (3) A clear and concise statement of the charges, sufficient to 
inform each respondent with reasonable definiteness of the factual basis 
of the allegations of violation. A list and summary of documentary 
evidence supporting the charges shall be attached.
    (4) A statement of the civil penalty which the Complaint Counsel 
believes is in the public interest, or which is required by law. In the 
case of civil penalties assessed for violations of section 507(3) of the 
Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act (15 U.S.C. 2007(3)), the 
amount of such penalty shall be calculated from the time of the alleged 
violation. In the case of civil penalties assessed for violations of 
section 507 (1) or (2) of that Act, any monetary credits available to 
offset those civil penalties shall be specified.
    (5) The right of the respondent to a hearing on the alleged 
violations.
    (c) Notice to the public. Once a complaint is issued, notice of it 
shall be immediately submitted to the Federal Register for publication. 
The notice in the Federal Register shall briefly describe the nature of 
the proceeding and state that petitions to participate in the proceeding 
must be filed no later than the first prehearing conference.


<R05>
Sec. 511.12  Answer.

    (a) Time for filing. A respondent shall have twenty (20) days after 
service of a complaint within which to file an answer.
    (b) Content of answer. An answer shall conform to the following:
    (1) Request for hearing. Respondent shall state whether it requests 
a full, adjudicatory hearing or whether it desires to proceed on the 
basis of written submissions. If a hearing is requested, respondent 
shall specify those issues on which a hearing is desired.
    (2) Contested allegations. An answer in which the allegations of a 
complaint are contested shall contain:
    (i) Specific admission or denial of each allegation in the 
complaint. If the respondent is without knowledge or information 
sufficient to form a belief as to the truth of an allegation, respondent 
shall so state. Such a statement shall have the effect of a denial. 
Denials shall fairly meet the substance of the allegations denied. 
Allegations not thus answered shall be deemed to have been admitted.
    (ii) A concise statement of the factual and/or legal defenses to 
each allegation of the complaint.
    (3) Admitted allegations. If the respondent admits or fails to deny 
any

[[Page 35]]

factual allegation, he or she shall be deemed to have waived a hearing 
as to such allegation.
    (c) Default. Failure of the respondent to file an answer within the 
time provided (or within an extended time, if provided), shall be deemed 
to constitute a waiver of the right to appear and contest the 
allegations set forth in the complaint and to authorize the Presiding 
Officer to make such findings of fact as are reasonable under the 
circumstances.


<R05>
Sec. 511.13  Amendments and supplemental pleadings.

    Whenever determination of a controversy on the merits will be 
facilitated thereby, the Presiding Officer upon motion, may allow 
appropriate amendments and supplemental pleadings which do not unduly 
broaden the issues in the proceeding or cause undue delay.


<R05>
Sec. 511.14  Form and filing of documents.

    (a) Filing. Except as otherwise provided, all documents submitted to 
the Administrator or a Presiding Officer shall be filed with the Docket 
Section, Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation, Room 
4107, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. Documents may be 
filed in person or by mail and shall be deemed filed on the day of 
filing or mailing.
    (b) Caption. Every document shall contain a caption setting forth 
the name of the action in connection with which it is filed, the docket 
number, and the title of the document.
    (c) Copies. An original and nine (9) copies of all documents shall 
be filed. Documents may be reproduced by printing or any other process, 
provided that all copies filed are clear and legible.
    (d) Signature. (1) The original of each document filed shall be 
signed by a representative of record for the party; or in the case of 
parties not represented, by the party; or by a partner, officer, or 
regular employee of any corporation, partnership, or association, who 
files an appearance on behalf of the party.
    (2) The act of signing a document constitutes a representation by 
the signer that the signer has read it; that to the best of the signer's 
knowledge, information and belief, the statements made in it are true; 
and that it is not filed for purposes of delay.

[45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 15782, May 3, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 511.15  Time.

    (a) Computation. In computing any period of time prescribed or 
allowed by the rules in this part, the day of the act, event, or default 
from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be 
included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included, 
unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday, in which event 
the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, a 
Sunday, or a legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or 
allowed is less than 7 days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal 
holidays shall be excluded in the computation. As used in this part, 
``legal holiday'' includes New Year's Day, Washington's Birthday, 
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veteran's Day, 
Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and any other day appointed as a 
holiday by the President or the Congress of the United States.
    (b) Additional time after service by mail. Whenever a party is 
required or permitted to do an act within a prescribed period after 
service of a document and the document is served by mail, three (3) days 
shall be added to the prescribed period.
    (c) Extensions. For good cause shown, the Presiding Officer may 
extend any time limit prescribed or allowed under this part or by order 
of the Administrator or the Presiding Officer, except those governing 
the filing of interlocutory appeals and appeals from Initial Decisions 
and those expressly requiring the Administrator's action. Except as 
otherwise provided by law, the Administrator, for good cause shown, may 
extend any time limit prescribed under this part, or by order of the 
Administrator or the Presiding Officer. A party or participant may 
petition the Presiding Officer or the Administrator, as appropriate, for 
an extension under this paragraph. Such a petition shall be filed prior 
to the occurrence of the

[[Page 36]]

time limit which is the subject of the petition.


<R05>
Sec. 511.16  Service.

    (a) Mandatory service. Every document filed with the Office of 
Hearings shall be served upon all parties and participants to a 
proceeding, i.e., Complaint Counsel, respondent(s), and participants, 
and upon the Presiding Officer.
    (b) Service of complaint, ruling, order, decision, or subpoena. 
Service of a complaint, ruling, order, decision, or subpoena may be 
effected as follows:
    (1) By registered or certified mail. A copy of the document shall be 
addressed to the person, partnership, corporation or unincorporated 
association to be served at his or its residence or principal office or 
place of business; registered or certified; and mailed; or
    (2) By delivery to an individual. A copy of the document may be 
delivered to the person to be served; or to a member of the partnership 
to be served; or to the president, secretary, or other executive 
officer, or a director of the corporation or unincorporated association 
to be served; or to an agent authorized by appointment or by law to 
receive service; or
    (3) By delivery to an address. A copy of the document may be left at 
the principal office or place of business of the person, partnership, 
corporation, unincorporated association, or authorized agent with an 
officer, a managing or general agent; or it may be left with a person of 
suitable age and discretion residing therein, at the residence of the 
person or of a member of the partnership or of an executive officer, 
director, or agent of the corporation or unincorporated association to 
be served.
    (c) Service of documents with prescribed response periods. When 
service of a document starts the running of a prescribed period of time 
for the submission of a responsive document or the occurrence of an 
event, the document shall be served as provided in paragraph (b) of this 
section.
    (d) Service of other documents. All documents other than those 
specified in paragraph (c) of this section may be served as provided in 
paragraph (b) of this section, or by ordinary first-class mail, properly 
addressed, postage prepaid.
    (e) Service on a representative. When a party has appeared by an 
attorney or other representative, service upon that attorney or other 
representative shall constitute service on the party.
    (f) Certificate of service. The original of every document filed 
with the agency and required to be served upon all parties to a 
proceeding shall be accompanied by a certificate of service signed by 
the party making service, stating that such service has been made upon 
each party to the proceeding. Certificates of service may be in 
substantially the following form:

    I hereby certify that I have this day served the foregoing document 
upon all parties of record in this proceeding by mailing, postage 
prepaid (or by delivering in person) a copy to each such party.
    Dated at -------------------- this ---- day of --------------------, 
19----.

(Signature)_____________________________________________________________
For_____________________________________________________________________

    (g) Date of service. The date of service of a document shall be the 
date on which the document is deposited in the United States mail or is 
delivered in person.

[45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 15783, May 3, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 511.17  Public participation.

    Participant Status. Any person interested in a proceeding commenced 
pursuant to Sec. 511.11 who desires to participate in the proceeding, 
shall file with the Docket Section a notice of intention to participate 
in the proceeding and shall serve a copy of such notice on each party to 
the proceeding. A notice of intention to participate shall be filed not 
later than the commencement of the hearing. Untimely filings will not be 
accepted absent a determination by the Presiding Officer that the person 
making the request has made a substantial showing of good cause for 
failure to file on time. Any person who files a notice to participate in 
the proceeding as a nonparty shall be known as a ``participant'' and 
shall have the rights specified in Sec. 511.41(d).

[53 FR 15783, May 3, 1988]

[[Page 37]]


<R05>
Sec. 511.18  Joinder of proceedings.

    Two or more matters which have been scheduled for adjudicative 
proceedings, and which involve one or more common questions of law or 
fact, may be consolidated for the purpose of hearing, appeal or the 
Administrator's review. A motion for consolidation for the purpose of 
hearing may be filed with the Presiding Officer by any party to such 
proceedings not later than thirty (30) days prior to the hearing. A 
motion for consolidation for the purpose of appeal may be filed by any 
party to such proceedings within 10 days after issuance of the Initial 
Decision. A motion to consolidate shall be served upon all parties to 
all proceedings whose joinder is contemplated. The proceedings may be 
consolidated where to do so would tend to avoid unnecessary costs or 
delay. Such consolidation may also be ordered upon the initiative of the 
Presiding Officer or the Administrator, as appropriate. The Presiding 
Officer may order separate hearings on any issue where to do so would 
promote economy or convenience or would avoid prejudice to a party.


<R04>
Subpart C_Prehearing Procedures; Motions; Interlocutory Appeals; Summary 

                          Judgment; Settlement


<R05>
Sec. 511.21  Prehearing conferences.

    (a) When held. (1) A prehearing conference shall be held in person 
or by conference telephone call, except in unusual circumstances, 
approximately fifty (50) days after publication in the Federal Register 
of the complaint, upon ten (10) days notice to all parties and 
participants, to consider any or all the following:
    (i) Motions for consolidation of proceedings;
    (ii) Identification, simplification and clarification of the issues;
    (iii) Necessity or desirability of amending the pleadings;
    (iv) Stipulations and admissions of fact and of the content and 
authenticity of documents;
    (v) Oppositions to notices of oral examination;
    (vi) Motions for protective orders to limit or modify discovery;
    (vii) Issuance of subpoenas to compel the appearance of witnesses 
and the production of documents;
    (viii) Limitation of the number of witnesses, particularly the 
avoidance of duplicate expert witnesses;
    (ix) Matters of which official notice will be taken and matters 
which may be resolved by reliance upon findings of other Federal 
agencies; and
    (x) Other matters which may expedite the conduct of the hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 511.22  Prehearing briefs.

    Not later ten (10) days prior to the hearing, the parties shall, 
except when ordered otherwise by the Presiding Officer in unusual 
circumstances, simultaneously serve and file prehearing briefs, which 
shall set forth (a) a statement of the facts expected to be proved, and 
of the anticipated order of proof; (b) a statement of the issues and the 
legal argument in support of the party's contentions with respect to 
each issue; and (c) a table of authorities with a designation by 
asterisk of the principal authorities relied upon.


<R05>
Sec. 511.23  Motions.

    (a) Presentations and dispositions. During the time a proceeding is 
before a Presiding Officer, all motions, whether oral or written, except 
those filed under Sec. 511.42(e), shall be addressed to the Presiding 
Officer, who shall rule upon them promptly after affording an 
opportunity for response.
    (b) Written motions. All written motions shall state the particular 
order, ruling, or action desired and the grounds therefor. If a motion 
is supported by memoranda, affidavits or other documents, they shall be 
served and filed with the motion. All motions shall contain a proposed 
order setting forth the relief sought. All written motions shall be 
filed with the Executive Secretary and served on all parties, and all 
motions addressed to the Administrator shall be in writing.
    (c) Responses. Within ten (10) days after service of any written 
motion or petition or within such longer or shorter time as may be 
designated by these Rules or by the Presiding Officer or the 
Administrator, the opposing party or parties shall file a written 
response to

[[Page 38]]

such motion. Where a motion would affect only a single party, or an 
identifiable group of parties, the Presiding Officer or Administrator 
may limit the response to the motion to the affected party or parties. 
Failure to respond to a written motion may, in the discretion of the 
Presiding Officer be deemed as consent to the granting of the relief 
sought in the motion. The moving party shall have no right to reply, 
except as permitted by the Presiding Officer or the Administrator.
    (d) Rulings on motions for dismissal. When a motion to dismiss a 
complaint or motion for other relief is granted with the result that the 
proceeding before the Presiding Officer is terminated, the Presiding 
Officer shall issue an Initial Decision and Order thereon in accordance 
with the provisions of Sec. 511.51. If such a motion is granted as to 
all issues alleged in the complaint in regard to some, but not all, of 
the respondents, or is granted as to any part of the allegations in 
regard to any or all of the respondents, the Presiding Officer shall 
enter an order on the record and consider the remaining issues in the 
Initial Decision. The Presiding Officer may elect to defer ruling on a 
motion to dismiss until the close of the case.


<R05>
Sec. 511.24  Interlocutory appeals.

    (a) General. Rulings of the Presiding Officer may not be appealed to 
the Administrator prior to the Initial Decision, except as provided 
herein.
    (b) Exceptions--(1) Interlocutory appeals to Administrator. The 
Administrator may, in his or her discretion, entertain interlocutory 
appeals where a ruling of the Presiding Officer:
    (i) Requires the production or disclosure of records claimed to be 
confidential;
    (ii) Requires the testimony of a supervisory official of the agency 
other than one especially cognizant of the facts of the matter in 
adjudication;
    (iii) Excludes an attorney from participation in a proceeding 
pursuant to Sec. 511.42(b).
    (2) Procedures for interlocutory appeals. Within ten (10) days of 
issuance of a ruling, any party may petition the Administrator to 
entertain an interlocutory appeal on a ruling in the categories 
enumerated above. The petition shall not exceed fifteen (15) pages. Any 
other party may file a response to the petition within ten (10) days of 
its service. The response shall not exceed fifteen (15) pages. The 
Administrator shall thereupon act upon the petition, or the 
Administrator shall request such further briefing or oral presentation 
as he may deem necessary.
    (3) Interlocutory appeals from all other rulings--(i) Grounds. 
Interlocutory appeals from all other rulings by the Presiding Officer 
may proceed only upon motion to the Presiding Officer and a 
determination by the Presiding Officer in writing, with justification in 
support thereof, that the ruling involves a controlling question of law 
or policy as to which there is substantial ground for differences of 
opinion and that an immediate appeal from the ruling may materially 
advance the ultimate termination of the litigation, or that subsequent 
review will be an inadequate remedy.
    (ii) Form. If the Presiding Officer determines, in accordance with 
paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section that an interlocutory appeal may 
proceed, a petition for interlocutory appeal may be filed with and acted 
upon by the Administrator in accordance with paragraph (b)(2) of this 
section.
    (c) Proceedings not stayed. A petition for interlocutory appeal 
under this part shall not stay the proceedings before the Presiding 
Officer unless the Presiding Officer shall so order, except that a 
ruling of the Presiding Officer requiring the production of records 
claimed to be confidential shall be automatically stayed for a period of 
(10) days following the issuance of such ruling to allow an affected 
party the opportunity to file a petition for an interlocutory appeal 
pursuant to Sec. 511.24(b)(2). The filing of such a petition shall 
automatically extend the stay of such a ruling pending the 
Administrator's action on such petition.


<R05>
Sec. 511.25  Summary decision and order.

    (a) Motion. Any party may move, with a supporting memorandum, for a 
Summary Decision and Order in its favor upon all or any of the issues in 
controversy. Complaint Counsel may so move at any time after thirty (30)

[[Page 39]]

days following issuance of a complaint, and any other party may so move 
at any time after issuance of a complaint. Any such motion by any party 
shall be filed at least twenty (20) days before the date fixed for the 
adjudicatory hearing.
    (b) Response to motion. Any other party may, within ten (10) days 
after service of the motion, file a response thereto with a supporting 
memorandum.
    (c) Grounds. A Summary Decision and Order shall be granted if the 
pleadings and any testimony upon oral examination, answers to 
interrogatories, admissions, and/or affidavits show that there is no 
genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is 
entitled to a Summary Decision and Order as a matter of law.
    (d) Legal effect. A Summary Decision and Order upon all the issues 
being adjudicated shall constitute the Initial Decision of the Presiding 
Officer, and may be appealed to the Administrator in accordance with 
Sec. 511.53. A Summary Decision, interlocutory in character, may be 
rendered on fewer than all issues and may not be appealed prior to 
issuance of the Initial Decision, except in accordance with Sec. 
511.24.
    (e) Case not fully adjudicated on motion. A Summary Decision and 
Order that does not dispose of the whole case shall include a statement 
of those material facts as to which there is no substantial controversy, 
and of those material facts that are actually and in good faith 
controverted. The Summary Order shall direct such further proceedings as 
are just.


<R05>
Sec. 511.26  Settlement.

    (a) Applicability. This section applies only to cases of alleged 
violations of section 507(3) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost 
Savings Act, Pub. L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 911 (15 U.S.C. section 2007(3)). 
Settlement in other cases may be made only in accordance with subpart G 
of this part.
    (b) Availability. Any party shall have the opportunity to submit an 
offer of settlement to the Presiding Officer.
    (c) Form. Offers of settlement shall be in the form of a consent 
agreement and order, shall be signed by the party submitting the offer 
or his representative, and may be signed by any other party. Each offer 
of settlement shall be accompanied by a motion to transmit to the 
Administrator the proposed agreement and order, outlining the 
substantive provisions of the agreement, and the reasons why it should 
be accepted.
    (d) Contents. The proposed consent agreement and order which 
constitute the offer of settlement shall contain the following:
    (1) An admission of all jurisdictional facts;
    (2) An express waiver of further procedural steps, and of all rights 
to seek judicial review or otherwise to contest the validity of the 
order;
    (3) A description of the alleged noncompliance, or violation;
    (4) Provisions to the effect that the allegations of the complaint 
are resolved by the proposed consent agreement and order;
    (5) A listing of the acts or practices from which the respondent 
shall refrain;
    (6) A detailed statement of the corrective action(s) which the 
respondent shall excute and the civil penalty, if any, that respondent 
shall pay.
    (e) Transmittal. The Presiding Officer shall transmit to the 
Administrator for decision all offers of settlement and accompanying 
memoranda that meet the requirements enumerated in paragraph (d) of this 
section. The Presiding Officer may, but need not, recommend acceptance 
or rejection of such offers. Any party or participant may object to a 
proposed consent agreement by filing a motion and supporting memorandum 
with the Administrator.
    (f) Stay of proceedings. When an offer of settlement has been agreed 
to by the parties and has been transmitted to the Administrator, the 
proceedings shall be stayed until the Administrator has ruled on the 
offer. When an offer of settlement has been made and transmitted to the 
Administrator but has not been agreed to by all parties, the proceedings 
shall not be stayed pending the Administrator's decision on the offer.
    (g) Administrator's ruling. The Administrator will rule upon all 
transmitted

[[Page 40]]

offers of settlement. If the Administrator accepts the offer, the 
Administrator shall issue an appropriate order. The order shall become 
effective upon issuance. In determining whether to accept an offer of 
settlement, the Administrator will consider the gravity of the alleged 
violation, and any good faith efforts by the respondent to comply with 
applicable requirements.
    (h) Rejection. If the Administrator rejects an offer of settlement, 
the Administrator shall give written notice of that decision and the 
reasons therefor to the parties and the Presiding Officer. Promptly 
thereafter, the Presiding Officer shall issue an order notifying the 
parties of the resumption of the proceedings, including any 
modifications to the schedule resulting from the stay of the 
proceedings.
    (i) Effect of rejected offer. Rejected offers of settlement shall 
not be admissible in evidence over the objection of any signatory, nor 
shall the fact of the proposal of the offer be admissible in evidence.

[45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 15783, May 3, 1988]


<R04>
                 Subpart D_Discovery; Compulsory Process


<R05>
Sec. 511.31  General provisions governing discovery.

    (a) Applicability. The discovery rules established in this subpart 
are applicable to the discovery of information among the parties to a 
proceeding. Parties seeking information from persons not parties may do 
so by subpoena in accordance with Sec. 511.38.
    (b) Discovery methods. Parties may obtain discovery by one or more 
of the following methods: (1) Written interrogatories; (2) requests for 
production of documents or things; (3) requests for admissions; or (4) 
testimony upon oral examination. Unless the Presiding Officer otherwise 
orders under paragraph (d) of this section, the frequency of use of 
these methods is not limited.
    (c) Scope of discovery. The scope of discovery is as follows:
    (1) In general. Parties may obtain discovery regarding any matter 
not privileged, which is relevant to the subject matter involved in the 
proceedings, whether it relates to the claim or defense of the party 
seeking discovery or to the claim or defense of any other party. It is 
not ground for objection that the information sought will be 
inadmissible at the hearing if the information sought appears reasonably 
calculated to lead to the discovery of admissible evidence.
    (2) Exception. Parties may not obtain discovery of documents which 
accompanied the staff's recommendation as to whether a complaint should 
issue or of documents or portions thereof which would be exempt from 
discovery under Rule 26(b)(3) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
    (3) Hearing preparation: Experts. A party may obtain discovery of 
facts known and opinions held by experts, regardless of whether they are 
acquired or developed in anticipation of or for litigation. Such 
discovery may be had by any of the methods provided in paragraph (b) of 
this section.
    (d) Protective orders. Upon motion by a party or person and for good 
cause shown, the Presiding Officer may make any order which justice 
requires to protect such party or person from annoyance, embarrassment, 
competitive disadvantage, oppression or undue burden or expense, 
including one or more of the following: (1) That the discovery shall not 
be had; (2) that the discovery may be had only on specified terms and 
conditions, including a designation of the time and/or place; (3) that 
the discovery shall be had only by a method of discovery other than that 
selected by the party seeking discovery; (4) that certain matters shall 
not be inquired into, or that the scope of discovery shall be limited to 
certain matters; (5) that discovery shall be conducted with no one 
present except persons designated by the Presiding Officer; (6) that a 
trade secret or other confidential research, development, or commercial 
information shall not be disclosed or shall be disclosed only in a 
designated way or only to designated parties; and (7) that responses to 
discovery shall be placed in camera in accordance with Sec. 511.45.

If a motion for a protective order is denied in whole or in part, the 
Presiding Officer may, on such terms or conditions as are just, order 
that any party provide or permit discovery.

[[Page 41]]

    (e) Sequence and timing of discovery. Discovery may commence at any 
time after filing of the answer. Unless otherwise provided in these 
Rules or by order of the Presiding Officer, methods of discovery may be 
used in any sequence and the fact that a party is conducting discovery 
shall not operate to delay any other party's discovery.
    (f) Supplementation of responses. A party who has responded to a 
request for discovery shall supplement the response with information 
thereafter acquired.
    (g) Completion of discovery. All discovery shall be completed as 
soon as practical but in no case longer than one hundred fifty (150) 
days after issuance of a complaint unless otherwise ordered by the 
Presiding Officer in exceptional circumstances and for good cause shown. 
All discovery shall be served by a date which affords the party from 
whom discovery is sought the full response period provided by these 
Rules.
    (h) Service and filing of discovery. All discovery requests and 
written responses, and all notices of the taking of testimony, shall be 
filed with the Docket Section and served on all parties and the 
Presiding Officer.
    (i) Control of discovery. The use of these discovery procedures is 
subject to the control of the Presiding Officer, who may issue any just 
and appropriate order for the purpose of ensuring their timely 
completion.

[45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 15783, May 3, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 511.32  Written interrogatories to parties.

    (a) Availability; procedures for use. Any party may serve upon any 
other party written interrogatories to be answered by the party served 
or, if the party served is a public or private corporation or a 
partnership or association or governmental agency, by any officer or 
agent, who shall furnish such information as is available to the party. 
Interrogatories may, without leave of the Presiding Officer, be served 
upon any party after filing of the answer.
    (b) Procedures for response. Each interrogatory shall be answered 
separately and fully in writing under oath, unless it is objected to, in 
which event the reasons for objection shall be stated in lieu of an 
answer. The answers are to be signed by a responsible representative of 
the respondent and the objections signed by the representative making 
them. The party upon whom the interrogatories have been served shall 
serve a copy of the answers, and objections if any, within 30 days after 
service of the interrogatories. The Presiding Officer may allow a 
shorter or longer time for response. The party submitting the 
interrogatories may move for an order under Sec. 511.36 with respect to 
any objection to or other failure to answer an interrogatory.
    (c) Scope of interrogatories. Interrogatories may relate to any 
matters which can be inquired into under Sec. 511.31(c)(1), and the 
answers may be used to the extent permitted under this part. An 
interrogatory otherwise proper is not objectionable merely because an 
answer to the interrogatory would involve an opinion or contention that 
relates to fact or to the application of law to fact, but the Presiding 
Officer may order that such an interrogatory need not be answered until 
a later time.
    (d) Option to produce business records. Where the answer to an 
interrogatory may be derived or ascertained from the business records of 
the party upon whom the interrogatory has been served, or from an 
examination, audit or inspection of such business records, or from a 
compilation, abstract or summary based thereon, and the burden of 
deriving the answer is substantially the same for the party serving the 
interrogatory as for the party served, it is a sufficient answer to the 
interrogatory to specify the records from which the answer may be 
derived or ascertained and to afford to the party serving the 
interrogatory reasonable opportunity to examine, audit or inspect such 
records and to make copies, complications, abstracts, or summaries.


<R05>
Sec. 511.33  Production of documents and things.

    (a) Scope. Any party may serve upon any other party a request (1) to 
produce and permit the party making

[[Page 42]]

the request, or someone acting on behalf of that party, to inspect and 
copy any designated documents (including writings, drawings, graphs, 
charts, photographs, phono-records, and any other data-compilation from 
which information can be obtained, translated, if necessary, by the 
party in possession into reasonably usable form), or (2) to inspect and 
copy, test or sample tangible things which constitute or contain matters 
within the scope of Sec. 511.31(c)(1) and which are in the possession, 
custody or control of the party upon whom the request is served.
    (b) Procedure for request. The request may be served at any time 
after the filing of the answer without leave of the Presiding Officer. 
The request shall set forth the items to be inspected either by 
individual item or by category, and shall describe each item or category 
with reasonable particularity. The request shall specify a reasonable 
time, place and manner for making the inspection and performing the 
related acts.
    (c) Procedure for response. The party upon whom the request is 
served shall serve a written response within twenty (20) days after 
service of the request. The Presiding Officer may allow a shorter or 
longer time for response. The response shall state, with respect to each 
item or category requested, that inspection and related activities will 
be permitted as requested, unless the request is objected to, in which 
event the reasons for objection shall be stated. If objection is made to 
only part of an item or category, that part shall be so specified. The 
party submitting the request may move for an order under Sec. 511.36 
with respect to any objection to or other failure to respond to the 
request or any part thereof, or to any failure to permit inspection as 
requested.


<R05>
Sec. 511.34  Requests for admission.

    (a) Procedure for request. A party may serve upon any other party a 
written request for the admission, for the purposes of the pending 
proceeding only, of the truth of any matters within the scope of Sec. 
511.31(c)(1) set forth in the request that relate to statements or 
opinions of fact or of the application of law to fact, including the 
genuineness of documents described in the request. Copies of documents 
shall be served with the request unless they have been, or are otherwise 
furnished or made available for inspection and copying. The request may, 
without leave of the Presiding Officer, be served upon any party after 
filing of the answer. Each matter as to which an admission is requested 
shall be separately set forth.
    (b) Procedure for response. The matter as to which an admission is 
requested is deemed admitted unless within thirty (30) days after 
service of the request, or within such shorter or longer time as the 
Presiding Officer may allow, the party to whom the request is directed 
serves upon the party requesting the admission a written answer or 
objection addressed to the matter, signed by the party or the party's 
representatives. If objection is made, the reasons therefore shall be 
stated.

The answer shall specifically admit or deny the matter or set forth in 
detail the reasons why the answering party cannot truthfully admit or 
deny the matter. A denial shall fairly meet the substance of the 
requested admission. When good faith requires that a party qualify an 
answer or deny only a part of the matter as to which an admission is 
requested, the party shall specify the portion that is true and qualify 
or deny the remainder. An answering party may not give lack of 
information or knowledge as a reason for failure to admit or deny, 
unless the party states that he or she has made reasonable inquiry and 
that the information known or readily available to him or her is 
insufficient to enable him or her to admit or deny. A party who 
considers that a matter as to which an admission has been requested 
presents a genuine issue for hearing may not, on that ground alone, 
object to the request but may deny the matter or set forth reasons why 
the party cannot admit or deny it. The party who has requested an 
admission may move to determine the sufficiency of the answer or 
objection thereto in accordance with Sec. 511.36. If the Presiding 
Officer determines that an answer does not comply with the requirements 
of this section, he or she may order that the matter be deemed admitted 
or that an amended answer be served.

[[Page 43]]

    (c) Effect of admission. Any matter admitted under this section is 
conclusively established unless the Presiding Officer on motion permits 
withdrawal or amendment of such admission. The Presiding Officer may 
permit withdrawal or amendment when the presentation of the merits of 
the action will be served thereby and the party that obtained the 
admission fails to satisfy the Presiding Officer that withdrawal or 
amendment will prejudice that party in maintaining an action or defense 
on the merits.


<R05>
Sec. 511.35  Testimony upon oral examination.

    (a) When testimony may be taken. At any time after the answer is 
filed under Sec. 511.12, upon leave of the Presiding Officer and under 
such terms and conditions as the Presiding Officer may prescribe, any 
party may take the testimony of any other party, including the agents, 
employees, consultants or prospective witnesses of that party at a place 
convenient to the witness. The attendance of witnesses and the 
production of documents and things at the examination may be compelled 
by subpoena as provided in Sec. 511.38.
    (b) Notice of oral examination--(1) Examination of a party. A party 
desiring to examine another party to the proceeding shall, after 
obtaining leave from the Presiding Officer, serve written notice of the 
examination on all other parties and the Presiding Officer at least ten 
(10) days before the date of the examination. The notice shall state (i) 
the time and place for making the examination; (ii) the name and address 
of each person to be examined, if known, or if the name is not known, a 
general description sufficient to identify him; and (iii) the subject 
matter of the expected testimony. If a subpoena duces tecum is to be 
served on the person to be examined, the designation of the materials to 
be produced, as set forth in the subpoena, shall be attached to or 
included in the notice of examination.
    (2) Examination of a nonparty. A party desiring to examine a person 
who is not a party to the proceeding shall make application for a 
subpoena, in accordance with Sec. 511.38, to compel the attendance, 
testimony and/or production of documents by such person who is not a 
party. The party desiring such examination shall serve written notice of 
the examination on all other parties to the proceeding, after issuance 
of the subpoena by the Presiding Officer or a designated alternate.
    (3) Opposition to notice. A person served with a notice of 
examination may, within 3 days of the date of service, oppose, in 
writing, the examination. The Presiding Officer shall rule on the notice 
and any opposition and may order the taking of all noticed examinations, 
upon a showing of good cause therefor. The Presiding Officer may, for 
good cause shown, enlarge or shorten the time for the taking of an 
examination.
    (c) Persons before whom examinations may be taken. Examinations may 
be taken before any person authorized to administer oaths by the laws of 
the United States or of the place where the examination is held. No 
examination shall be taken before a person who is a relative or employee 
or attorney or representative of any party, or who is a relative or 
employee of such attorney or representative, or who is financially 
interested in the action.
    (d) Procedure--(1) Examination. Each witness shall be duly sworn, 
and all testimony shall be duly recorded. All parties or their 
representatives may be present and participate in the examination. 
Examination and cross-examination of witnesses may proceed as permitted 
at the hearing. Questions objected to shall be answered subject to the 
objections. Objections shall be in short form, and shall state the 
grounds relied upon. The questions propounded and the answers thereto, 
together with all objections made, shall be recorded by the official 
reporter before whom the examination is made. The original or a verified 
copy of all documents and things produced for inspection during the 
examination of the witness shall, upon a request of any party present, 
be marked for identification and annexed to the record of the 
examination.
    (2) Motion to terminate or limit examination. At any time during the 
examination, upon motion of any party or of the witness, and upon 
showing that the examination is being conducted in bad

[[Page 44]]

faith or in such manner as unreasonably to annoy, embarrass or oppress 
the witness or party, the Presiding Officer may, upon motion, order the 
party conducting the examination to terminate the examination, or may 
limit the scope and manner of the examination as provided in Sec. 
511.31(d).
    (3) Participation by parties not present. In lieu of attending an 
examination, any party may serve written questions in a sealed envelope 
on the party conducting the examination. That party shall transmit the 
envelope to the official reporter, who shall unseal it and propound the 
questions contained therein to the witness.
    (e) Transcription and filing of testimony--(1) Transcription. Upon 
request by any party, the testimony recorded at an examination shall be 
transcribed. When the testimony is fully transcribed, the transcript 
shall be submitted to the witness for examination and signing, and shall 
be read to or by the witness, unless such examination and signature are 
waived by the witness. Any change in form or substance which the witness 
desires to make shall be entered upon the transcript of the official 
reporter with a statement of the reasons given by the witness for making 
them. The transcript shall then be signed by the witness, unless the 
parties by stipulation waive the signing, or the witness is ill or 
cannot be found or refuses to sign. If the transcript is not signed by 
the witness within thirty (30) days of its submission to him, the 
official reporter shall sign it and state on the record the fact of the 
waiver of signature or of the illness or absence of the witness or the 
fact of the refusal to sign, together with a statement of the reasons 
therefor. The testimony may then be used as fully as though signed, in 
accordance with paragraph (i) of this section.
    (2) Certification and filing. The official reporter shall certify on 
the transcript that the witness was duly sworn and that the transcript 
is a true record of the testimony given and corrections made by the 
witness. The official reporter shall then seal the transcript in an 
envelope endorsed with the title and docket number of the action and 
marked ``Testimony of [name of witness]'' and shall promptly file the 
transcript with the Docket Section. The Presiding Officer shall notify 
all parties of the filing of the transcript and the Docket Section shall 
furnish a copy of the transcript to any party or to the witness upon 
payment of reasonable charges therefor.
    (f) Costs of examination. The party who notices the examination 
shall pay for the examination. The party who requests transcription of 
the examination shall pay for the transcription.
    (g) Failure to attend or to serve subpoena; expenses. If a party who 
notices an examination fails to attend and proceed therewith and another 
party attends in person or by a representative pursuant to the notice, 
the Presiding Officer may order the party who gave the notice to pay the 
attending party the reasonable expenses incurred. If a party who notices 
an examination fails to serve a subpoena upon the witness and as a 
result the witness does not attend, and if another party attends in 
person or by a representative because that party expects the examination 
to be made, the Presiding Officer may order the party who gave notice to 
pay the attending party the reasonable expenses incurred.
    (h) Examination to preserve testimony--(1) When available. By leave 
of the Presiding Officer, a party may examine a witness for the purpose 
of perpetuating the testimony of that witness. A party who wishes to 
conduct such an examination shall obtain prior leave of the Presiding 
Officer by filing a motion. The motion shall include a showing of 
substantial reason to believe that the testimony could not be presented 
at the hearing. If the Presiding Officer is satisfied that the 
perpetuation of the testimony may prevent a failure of justice or is 
otherwise reasonably necessary, he or she shall order that the 
deposition be taken.
    (2) Procedure. Notice of an examination to preserve testimony shall 
be served at least fifteen (15) days prior to the examination. The 
examination shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of 
paragraph (d) of this section. Any examination taken to preserve 
testimony shall be fully transcribed and filed in accordance with 
paragraph (e) of this section.

[[Page 45]]

    (i) Use of testimony obtained under this section. At the hearing or 
upon a motion or an interlocutory proceeding, any part or all of a 
deposition, so far as admissible under the rules of evidence applied as 
though the witness were then present and testifying, may be used against 
any party who was present or represented at the taking of the deposition 
or who had reasonable notice thereof, in accordance with any of the 
following provisions:
    (1) Any deposition may be used by any party for the purpose of 
contradicting or impeaching the testimony of the deponent as a witness.
    (2) The deposition of a party or of a person who at the time of the 
taking of his testimony was an officer, director or managing agent of a 
party may be used against that party for any purpose.
    (3) The deposition of a witness, whether or not a party, may be used 
by any party for any purpose if the Presiding Officer finds:
    (i) That the witness is dead; or
    (ii) That the witness is at a greater distance than 100 miles from 
the place of the hearing, or is out of the United States, unless it 
appears that the absence of the witness was procured by the party 
offering the deposition; or
    (iii) That the witness is unable to attend or testify because of 
age, illness, infirmity, or imprisonment; or
    (iv) That the party offering the deposition has been unable to 
procure the attendance of the witness by subpoena; or
    (v) Upon application and notice, that such exceptional circumstances 
exist as to make it desirable, in the interest of justice and with due 
regard to the importance of presenting the testimony of witnesses orally 
in open court, to allow the deposition to be used.
    (4) If only part of a deposition is offered in evidence by a party, 
an adverse party may require him to introduce any other part which ought 
in fairness to be considered with the part introduced, and any party may 
introduce any other parts.

[45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 15783, May 3, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 511.36  Motions to compel discovery.

    If a party fails to respond to discovery, in whole or in part, the 
party seeking discovery may move within twenty (20) days for an order 
compelling an answer, or compelling inspection or production of 
documents, or otherwise compelling discovery. For purposes of this 
subsection, an evasive or incomplete response is to be treated as a 
failure to respond. If the motion is granted, the Presiding Officer 
shall issue an order compelling discovery. If the motion is denied in 
whole or in part, the Presiding Officer may make such protective order 
as he or she would have been empowered to make on a motion pursuant to 
Sec. 511.31(d). When making oral examinations, the discovering party 
shall continue the examination to the extent possible with respect to 
other areas of inquiry before moving to compel discovery.


<R05>
Sec. 511.37  Sanctions for failure to comply with order.

    If a party fails to obey an order to provide or permit discovery, 
the Presiding Officer may take such action as is just, including but not 
limited to the following:
    (a) Infer that the admission, testimony, document or other evidence 
would have been adverse to the party;
    (b) Order that for the purposes of the proceeding, the matters 
regarding which the order was made or any other designated facts shall 
be taken to be established in accordance with the claim of the party 
obtaining the order;
    (c) Order that the party withholding discovery not introduce into 
evidence or otherwise rely, in support of any claim or defense, upon the 
documents or other evidence withheld;
    (d) Order that the party withholding discovery not introduce into 
evidence or otherwise use at the hearing, information obtained in 
discovery;
    (e) Order that the party withholding discovery not be heard to 
object to introduction and use of secondary evidence to show what the 
withheld admission, testimony, documents, or other evidence would have 
shown;
    (f) Order that a pleading, or part of a pleading, or a motion or 
other submission by the party, concerning which the order was issued, be 
stricken, or

[[Page 46]]

that decision on the pleadings be rendered against the party, or both; 
and
    (g) Exclude the party or representative from proceedings, in 
accordance with Sec. 511.42(b).

Any such action may be taken by order at any point in the proceedings.


<R05>
Sec. 511.38  Subpoenas.

    (a) Availability. A subpoena shall be addressed to any party or any 
person not a party for the purpose of compelling attendance, testimony 
and production of documents at a hearing or oral examination.
    (b) Form. A subpoena shall identify the action with which it is 
connected; shall specify the person to whom it is addressed and the 
date, time and place for compliance with its provisions; and shall be 
issued by order of the Presiding Officer and signed by the Chief 
Counsel, or by the Presiding Officer. A subpoena duces tecum shall 
specify the books, papers, documents, or other materials or data-
compilations to be produced.
    (c) How obtained--(1) Content of application. An application for the 
issuance of a subpoena stating reasons shall be submitted in triplicate 
to the Presiding Officer.
    (2) Procedure of application. The original and two copies of the 
subpoena, marked ``original,'' ``duplicate'' and ``triplicate,'' shall 
accompany the application. The Presiding Officer shall rule upon an 
application for a subpoena ex parte, by issuing the subpoena or by 
issuing an order denying the application.
    (d) Issuance of a subpoena. The Presiding Officer shall issue a 
subpoena by signing and dating, or ordering the Chief Counsel to sign 
and date, each copy in the lower right-hand corner of the document. The 
``duplicate'' and ``triplicate'' copies of the subpoena shall be 
transmitted to the applicant for service in accordance with these Rules; 
the ``original'' copy shall be retained by or forwarded to the Chief 
Counsel for retention in the docket of the proceeding.
    (e) Service of a subpoena. A subpoena may be served in person or by 
certified mail, return receipt requested, as provided in Sec. 
511.16(b). Service shall be made by delivery of the signed ``duplicate'' 
copy to the person named therein.
    (f) Return of service. A person serving a subpoena shall promptly 
execute a return of service, stating the date, time, and manner of 
service. If service is effected by mail, the signed return receipt shall 
accompany the return of service. In case of failure to make service, a 
statement of the reasons for the failure shall be made. The 
``triplicate'' of the subpoena, bearing or accompanied by the return of 
service, shall be returned forthwith to the Chief Counsel after service 
has been completed.
    (g) Motion to quash or limit subpoena. Within five (5) days of 
receipt of a subpoena, the person against whom it is directed may file 
with the Presiding Officer a motion to quash, modify, or limit the 
subpoena, setting forth the reasons why the subpoena should be withdrawn 
or why it should be modified or limited in scope. Any such motion shall 
be answered within five (5) days of service, and shall be ruled on 
immediately thereafter. The order shall specify the date, if any, for 
compliance with the specifications of the subpoena and the reasons for 
the decision.
    (h) Consequences of failure to comply. In the event of failure to 
comply with a subpoena, the Presiding Officer may take any of the 
actions enumerated in Sec. 511.37 or may order any other appropriate 
relief to compensate for the withheld testimony, documents, or other 
materials. If in the opinon of the Presiding Officer such relief is 
insufficient, the Presiding Officer shall certify to the Administrator a 
request for judicial enforcement of the subpoena.

[45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 26261, July 12, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 511.39  Orders requiring witnesses to testify or provide other 

information and granting immunity.

    (a) A party who desires the issuance of an order requiring a witness 
to testify or provide other information upon being granted immunity from 
prosecution under title 18, U.S.C., section 6002, may make a motion to 
that effect. The motion shall be made and ruled on in accordance with 
Sec. 511.22, and shall include a showing:

[[Page 47]]

    (1) That the testimony or other information sought from a witness or 
prospective witness may be necessary to the public interest; and
    (2) That such individual has refused or is likely to refuse to 
testify or provide such information on the basis of that individual's 
privilege against self-incrimination.
    (b) If the Presiding Officer determines that the witness' testimony 
appears necessary and that the privilege against self-incrimination may 
be invoked, he or she may certify to the Administrator a request that he 
or she obtain the approval of the Attorney General of the United States 
for the issuance of an order granting immunity.
    (c) Upon application to and approval of the Attorney General of the 
United States, and after the witness has invoked the privilege against 
self-incrimination, the Presiding Officer shall issue the order granting 
immunity unless he or she determines that the privilege was improperly 
invoked.
    (d) Failure of a witness to testify after a grant of immunity or 
after a denial of the issuance of an order granting immunity shall 
result in the imposition of appropriate sanctions as provided in Sec. 
511.37.


<R04>
                           Subpart E_Hearings


<R05>
Sec. 511.41  General rules.

    (a) Public hearings. All hearings pursuant to this part shall be 
public unless otherwise ordered by the Presiding Officer. Notice of the 
time and location of the hearing shall be served on each party and 
participant, and published in the Federal Register.
    (b) Expedition. Hearings shall proceed with all reasonable speed, 
insofar as practicable and with due regard to the convenience of the 
parties and shall continue without suspension until concluded, except in 
unusual circumstances.
    (c) Rights of parties. Every party shall have the right of timely 
notice and all other rights essential to a fair hearing, including, but 
not limited to, the rights to present evidence, to conduct such cross-
examination as may be necessary in the judgment of the Presiding Officer 
for a full and complete disclosure of the facts, and to be heard by 
objection, motion, brief, and argument.
    (d) Rights of participants. Every participant shall have the right 
to make a written or oral statement of position, file proposed findings 
of fact, conclusions of law and a posthearing brief, in accordance with 
Sec. 511.17(b).
    (e) Rights of witnesses. Any person compelled to testify in a 
proceeding in response to a subpoena may be accompanied, represented, 
and advised by counsel or other representative, and may obtain a 
transcript of his or her testimony at no cost.


<R05>
Sec. 511.42  Powers and duties of Presiding Officer.

    (a) General. A Presiding Officer shall have the duty to conduct 
full, fair, and impartial hearings, to take appropriate action to avoid 
unnecessary delay in the disposition of proceedings, and to maintain 
order. He or she shall have all powers necessary to that end, including 
the following powers:
    (1) To administer oaths and affirmations;
    (2) To compel discovery and to impose appropriate sanctions for 
failure to make discovery;
    (3) To issue subpoenas;
    (4) To rule upon offers of proof and receive relevant and probative 
evidence;
    (5) To regulate the course of the hearings and the conduct of the 
parties and their representatives therein;
    (6) To hold conferences for simplification of the issues, settlement 
of the proceedings, or any other proper purposes;
    (7) To consider and rule, orally or in writing, upon all procedural 
and other motions appropriate in an adjudicative proceeding;
    (8) To issue initial decisions, rulings, and orders, as appropriate;
    (9) To certify questions to the Administrator for determination; and
    (10) To take any action authorized in this part or in conformance 
with the provisions of title 5, U.S.C., sections 551 through 559.
    (b) Exclusion of parties by Presiding Officer. A Presiding Officer 
shall have the authority, for good cause stated on the record, to 
exclude from participation in a proceeding any party, participant,

[[Page 48]]

and/or representative who shall violate requirements of Sec. 511.76. 
Any party, participant and/or representative so excluded may appeal to 
the Administrator in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 511.23. If 
the representative of a party or participant is excluded, the hearing 
shall be suspended for a reasonable time so that the party or 
participant may obtain another representative.
    (c) Substitution of Presiding Officer. In the event of the 
substitution of a new Presiding Officer for the one originally 
designated, any motion predicated upon such substitution shall be made 
within five (5) days of the substitution.
    (d) Interference. In the performance of adjudicative functions, a 
Presiding Officer shall not be responsible to or subject to the 
supervision or direction of the Administrator or of any officer, 
employee, or agent engaged in the performance of investigative or 
prosecuting functions for NHTSA. All directions by the Administrator to 
a Presiding Officer concerning any adjudicative proceeding shall appear 
on and be made a part of the record.
    (e) Disqualification of Presiding Officer. (1) When a Presiding 
Officer deems himself or herself disqualified to preside in a particular 
proceeding, he or she shall withdraw by notice on the record and shall 
notify the Chief Administrative Law Judge of the withdrawal.
    (2) Whenever, for any reason, any party shall deem the Presiding 
Officer to be disqualified to preside, or to continue to preside, in a 
particular proceeding, that party may file with the Chief Administrative 
Law Judge a motion to disqualify and remove, supported by affidavit(s) 
setting forth the alleged grounds for disqualification. A copy of the 
motion and supporting affidavit(s) shall be served by the Chief 
Administrative Law Judge on the Presiding Officer whose removal is 
sought. The Presiding Officer shall have ten (10) days from service to 
reply in writing. Such motion shall not stay the proceeding unless 
otherwise ordered by the Presiding Officer or the Administrator. If the 
Presiding Officer does not disqualify himself or herself, the 
Administrator will determine the validity of the grounds alleged, either 
directly or on the report of another Presiding Officer appointed to 
conduct a hearing for that purpose, and shall in the event of 
disqualification take appropriate action, by assigning another Presiding 
Officer or requesting assignment of another Administrative Law Judge 
through the Office of Hearings.

[45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 15783, May 3, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 511.43  Evidence.

    (a) Applicability of Federal Rules of Evidence. The Federal Rules of 
Evidence shall apply to proceedings held under this part only as a 
general guide. The Presiding Officer may admit any relevent and 
probative evidence.
    (b) Burden of proof. (1) Complaint counsel shall have the burden of 
sustaining the allegations of any complaint.
    (2) Any party who is the proponent of a legal and/or factual 
proposition shall have the burden of sustaining the proposition.
    (c) Presumptions. A presumption imposes on the party against whom it 
is directed the burden of going forward with evidence to rebut or meet 
the presumption, but does not shift to such party the burden of proof in 
the sense of the risk of nonpersuasion, which remains throughout the 
hearing upon the party on whom it was originally cast.
    (d) Admissibility. All relevant and reliable evidence is admissible, 
but may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed 
by unfair prejudice or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, 
immateriality, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.
    (e) Official notice--(1) Definition. Official notice means use by 
the Presiding Officer of extra-record facts and legal conclusions drawn 
from those facts. An officially noticed fact or legal conclusion must be 
one not subject to reasonable dispute in that it is either (i) generally 
known within the jurisdiction of the Presiding Officer or (ii) known by 
the Presiding Officer in areas of his or her expertise; or (iii) capable 
of accurate and ready determination by resort to sources whose accuracy 
cannot reasonably be questioned.
    (2) Method of taking official notice. The Presiding Officer may at 
any time take

[[Page 49]]

official notice upon motion of any party or upon its own initiative. The 
record shall reflect the facts and conclusions which have been 
officially noticed.
    (3) Opportunity to challenge. Any party may upon application in 
writing rebut officially noticed facts and conclusions by supplementing 
the record. The Presiding Officer shall determine the permissible extent 
of this challenge; that is, whether to limit the party to presentation 
of written materials, whether to allow presentation of testimony, 
whether to allow cross-examination, or whether to allow oral argument. 
The Presiding Officer shall grant or deny the application on the record.
    (f) Objections and exceptions. Objections to evidence shall be 
timely interposed, shall appear on the record, and shall contain the 
grounds upon which they are based. Rulings on all objections, and the 
bases therefore, shall appear on the record. Formal exception to an 
adverse ruling is not required to preserve the question for appeal.
    (g) Offer of proof. When an objection to proffered testimony or 
documentary evidence is sustained, the sponsoring party may make a 
specific offer, either in writing or orally, of what the party expects 
to prove by the testimony or the document. When an offer of proof is 
made, any other party may make a specific offer, either in writing or 
orally, of what the party expects to present to rebut or contradict the 
offer of proof. Written offers of proof or of rebuttal, adequately 
marked for identification, shall accompany the record and be available 
for consideration by any reviewing authority.


<R05>
Sec. 511.44  Expert witnesses.

    (a) Definition. An expert witness is one who, by reason of 
education, training, experience, or profession, has peculiar knowlege 
concerning the matter of science or skill to which his or her testimony 
relates and from which he or she may draw inferences based upon 
hypothetically stated facts or from facts involving scientific or 
technical knowledge.
    (b) Method of presenting testimony of expert witness. Except as may 
be otherwise ordered by the Presiding Officer, a detailed written 
statement of the elements of the direct testimony of an expert witness 
shall be filed on the record and exchanged between the parties no later 
than 10 days preceding the commencement of the hearing. The statement 
must contain a full explanation of the methodology underlying any 
analysis, and a full disclosure of the basis of any opinion. The direct 
testimony of an expert witness shall not include points not contained in 
the written statement. A party may waive direct examination of an expert 
witness by indicating that the written statement be considered the 
testimony of the witness. In such a case, the written testimony shall be 
incorporated into the record and shall constitute the testimony of the 
witness.
    (c) Cross-examination and redirect examination of expert witness. 
Cross-examination, redirect examination, and re-cross-examination of an 
expert witness will proceed in due course based upon the written 
testimony and any amplifying oral testimony.
    (d) Failure to file and/or to exchange written statement. Failure to 
file and/or to exchange the written statement of an expert witness as 
provided in this section shall deprive the sponsoring party of the use 
of the expert witness and of the conclusions which that witness would 
have presented.


<R05>
Sec. 511.45  In camera materials.

    (a) Definition. In camera materials are documents, testimony, or 
other data which by order of the Presiding Officer or the Administrator, 
as appropriate under this part, are kept confidential and excluded from 
the public record. Only materials exempt under the Freedom of 
Information Act may be kept confidential and excluded from the public 
record. Pursuant to 49 CFR part 512, the Chief Counsel of the NHTSA is 
responsible for determining whether an alleged confidential business 
record is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act. The right of the 
Presiding Officer, the Administrator and reviewing courts to order 
disclosure of in camera materials is specifically reserved.
    (b) In camera treatment of documents and testimony. The Presiding 
Officer or the Administrator, as appropriate under this part, shall have 
authority,

[[Page 50]]

when good cause is found on the record, to order documents or testimony 
offered in evidence, whether admitted or rejected, to be received and 
preserved in camera. The order shall specify the length of time for in 
camera treatment and shall include:
    (1) A description of the documents and/or testimony;
    (2) The reasons for granting in camera treatment for the specified 
length of time.
    (c) Access and disclosure to parties. (1) The Administrator and 
Presiding Officer, and their immediate advisory staffs shall have 
complete access to all in camera materials. All other parties shall also 
have complete access to all in camera materials, except that these 
parties may seek access only in accordance with paragraph (c)(2) of this 
section when:
    (i) The in camera materials consist of information obtained by the 
government from persons not parties to the proceeding; or
    (ii) The in camera materials consist of information provided by one 
of the parties to the proceeding which is confidential as to the other 
parties to the proceeding.
    (2) Any party desiring access to and/or disclosure of the in camera 
materials specified in paragraph (c)(1) (i) and (ii) of this section for 
the preparation and presentation of that party's case shall make a 
motion which sets forth the justification therefor. The Presiding 
Officer or the Administrator, as appropriate under this part, may grant 
such motion on the record for substantial good cause shown and shall 
enter a protective order prohibiting unnecessary disclosure and 
requiring other necessary safeguards. The Presiding Officer or the 
Administrator, as appropriate, may examine the in camera materials and 
excise portions thereof before disclosing the materials to the moving 
party.
    (d) Segregation of in camera materials. In camera materials shall be 
segregated from the public record and protected from public view.
    (e) Public release of in camera materials. In camera materials 
constitute a part of the confidential records of the NHTSA and shall not 
be released to the public until the expiration of in camera treatment.
    (f) Reference to in camera materials. In the submission of proposed 
findings, conclusions, briefs, or other documents, all parties shall 
refrain from disclosing specific details of in camera materials. Such 
refraining shall not preclude general references to such materials. To 
the extent that parties consider it necessary to include specific 
details of in camera materials, the references shall be incorporated 
into separate proposed findings, briefs, or other documents marked 
``CONFIDENTIAL, CONTAINS IN CAMERA MATERIAL,'' which shall be placed in 
camera and become part of the in camera record. These documents shall be 
served only on parties accorded access to the in camera materials in 
accordance with paragraph (c)(2) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 511.46  Proposed findings, conclusions, and order.

    Within a reasonable time after the closing of the record and receipt 
of the transcript, all parties and participants may, simultaneously, 
file post-hearing briefs, including proposed findings of fact, 
conclusions of law and a proposed order, together with reasons 
therefore. The Presiding Officer shall establish a date certain for the 
filing of the briefs, which shall not exceed 45 days after the close of 
the record except in unusual circumstances. The briefs shall be in 
writing, shall be served upon all parties, and shall contain adequate 
references to the record and authorities relied on. Replies shall be 
filed within fifteen (15) days of the date for the filing of briefs 
unless otherwise established by the Presiding Officer. The parties and 
participants may waive either or both submissions.


<R05>
Sec. 511.47  Record.

    (a) Reporting and transcription. Hearings shall be recorded and 
transcribed under the supervision of the Presiding Officer by a reporter 
appointed by the Administrator. The original transcript shall be a part 
of the record and the official transcript. Copies of transcripts are 
available from the reporter at a cost not to exceed the maximum rates 
fixed by contract between the NHTSA and the reporter.

[[Page 51]]

    (b) Corrections. Corrections of the official transcript may be made 
only when they involve errors affecting substance and then only in the 
manner herein provided. The Presiding Officer may order corrections, 
either on his or her own motion or on motion of any party. The Presiding 
Officer shall determine the corrections to be made and so order. 
Corrections shall be interlineated or otherwise inserted in the official 
transcript so as not to obliterate the original text.


<R05>
Sec. 511.48  Official docket.

    (a) The official docket in adjudicatory proceedings will be 
maintained in the Docket Section, Office of the Secretary, Room 4107, 
400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20590, and will be available for 
inspection during normal working hours (9:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m.) Monday 
through Friday.
    (b) Fees for production or disclosure of records contained in the 
official docket shall be levied as prescribed in the Department of 
Transportation's regulations on Public Availability of Information (49 
CFR part 7).

[53 FR 15783, May 3, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 511.49  Fees.

    (a) Witnesses. Any person compelled to appear in person in response 
to a subpoena or notice of oral examination shall be paid at least the 
same attendance and mileage fees as are paid witnesses in the courts of 
the United States, in accordance with title 28, U.S.C., section 1821.
    (b) Responsibility. The fees and mileage referred to in this section 
shall be paid by the party at whose instance witnesses appear.


<R04>
                           Subpart F_Decision


<R05>
Sec. 511.51  Initial decision.

    (a) When filed. The Presiding Officer shall endeavor to file an 
Initial Decision with the Administrator within sixty (60) days of the 
close of the record, the filing of post-hearing briefs, or the filing of 
replies thereto, whichever is latest.
    (b) Content. The Initial Decision shall be based upon a 
consideration of the entire record and it shall be supported by 
reliable, probative, and substantial evidence. It shall include:
    (1) Findings and conclusions, as well as the reasons or bases 
therefor, upon the material questions of fact, material issues of law, 
or discretion presented on the record, and should, where practicable, be 
accompanied by specific page citations to the record and to legal and 
other materials relied upon.
    (2) An appropriate order.
    (c) By whom made. The Initial Decision shall be made and filed by 
the Presiding Officer who presided over the hearing, unless otherwise 
ordered by the Administrator.
    (d) Reopening of proceeding by presiding officer; termination of 
jurisdiction. (1) At any time prior to or concomitant with the filing of 
the Initial Decision, the Presiding Officer may reopen the proceedings 
for the reception of further evidence.
    (2) Except for the correction of clerical errors, the jurisdiction 
of the Presiding Officer is terminated upon the filing of the Initial 
Decision, unless and until the proceeding is remanded to the Presiding 
Officer by the Administrator.


<R05>
Sec. 511.52  Adoption of initial decision.

    The Initial Decision and Order shall become the Final Decision and 
Order of the Administrator forty (40) days after issuance unless an 
appeal is noted and perfected or unless review is ordered by the 
Administrator. Upon the expiration of the fortieth day, the Executive 
Secretary shall prepare, sign and enter an order adopting the Initial 
Decision and Order.


<R05>
Sec. 511.53  Appeal from initial decision.

    (a) Who may file notice of intention. Any party may appeal an 
Initial Decision to the Administrator provided that within ten (10) days 
after issuance of the Initial Decision such party files and serves a 
notice of intention to appeal.
    (b) Appeal brief. The appeal shall be in the form of a brief, filed 
within forty (40) days after service of the Initial Decision, duly 
served upon all parties and participants. The appeal brief shall 
contain, in the order indicated, the following:

[[Page 52]]

    (1) A subject index of the matters in the brief, with page 
references, and a table of cases (alphabetically arranged), textbooks, 
statutes, and other material cited, with page references thereto;
    (2) A concise statement of the case;
    (3) A specification of the position urged;
    (4) The argument, presenting clearly the points of fact and law 
relied upon in support of the position on each question, with specific 
page references to the record and the legal or other material relied 
upon; and
    (5) A proposed form of order for the Administrator's consideration 
in lieu of the order contained in the Initial Decision.
    (c) Answering brief. Within thirty (30) days after service of the 
appeal brief upon all parties and participants, any party may file an 
answering brief which shall also contain a subject index, with page 
references, and a table of cases (alphabetically arranged), textbooks, 
statutes, and other material cited, with page references thereto. Such 
brief shall present clearly the points of fact and law relied upon in 
support of the position taken on each question, with specific page 
references to the record and legal or other material relied upon.
    (d) Participant's brief. Within thirty (30) days after service of 
the appeal brief upon all parties and participants, any participant may 
file an appeal brief which should contain a subject index, with page 
references, and a table of authorities being relied upon. Such brief 
shall present clearly the position taken by the participant on each 
question raised by the appellant(s).
    (e) Cross appeal. If a timely notice of appeal is filed by a party, 
any other party may file a notice of cross-appeal within ten (10) days 
of the date on which the first notice of appeal was filed. Cross-appeals 
shall be included in the answering brief and shall conform to the 
requirements for form, content and filing specified in paragraph (c) of 
this section. If an appeal is noticed but not perfected, no cross-appeal 
shall be permitted and the notice of cross-appeal shall be deemed void.
    (f) Reply brief. A reply brief shall be limited to rebuttal of 
matters in answering briefs, including matters raised in cross-appeals. 
A reply brief shall be filed and within fourteen (14) days after service 
of an answering brief, or on the day preceding the oral argument, 
whichever comes first.
    (g) Oral argument. The purpose of an oral argument is to emphasize 
and clarify the issues. Any party may request oral argument. The 
Administrator may order oral argument upon request or upon his or her 
own initiative. All oral arguments shall be reported and transcribed.


<R05>
Sec. 511.54  Review of initial decision in absence of appeal.

    The Administrator may, by order, review a case not otherwise 
appealed by a party. Thereupon the parties shall and participants may 
file briefs in accordance with Sec. 511.53(b), (c), (d), (e), and (f) 
except that the Administrator may, in his or her discretion, establish a 
different briefing schedule in his or her order. Any such order shall 
issue within forty (40) days of issuance of the Initial Decision. The 
order shall set forth the issues which the Administrator will review.


<R05>
Sec. 511.55  Final decision on appeal or review.

    (a) Upon appeal from or review of an Initial Decision, the 
Administrator shall consider such parts of the record as are cited or as 
may be necessary to resolve the issues presented and, in addition, 
shall, to the extent necessary or desirable, exercise all the powers 
which he or she could have exercised if he or she had made the Initial 
Decision.
    (b) In rendering his or her decision, the Administrator shall adopt, 
modify, or set aside the findings, conclusions, and order contained in 
the Initial Decision, and shall include in his or her Final Decision a 
statement of the reasons or bases for his or her action. The 
Administrator shall issue an order reflecting his or her Final Decision.


<R05>
Sec. 511.56  Reconsideration.

    Within twenty (20) days after issuance of a Final Decision and 
Order, any party may file with the Administrator a petition for 
reconsideration of such decision or order, setting forth the relief 
desired and the grounds in

[[Page 53]]

support thereof. Any party desiring to oppose such a petition shall file 
an answer thereto within ten (10) days after service of the petition. 
The filing of a petition for reconsideration shall not stay the 
effective date of the Decision and Order or toll the running of any 
statutory time period affecting the decision or order unless 
specifically so ordered by the Administrator.


<R05>
Sec. 511.57  Effective date of order.

    (a) Consent orders. An order which has been issued following 
acceptance of an offer of settlement in accordance with Sec. 511.26 
becomes effective upon issuance.
    (b) Litigated orders. All other orders become effective upon the 
expiration of the statutory period for court review specified in section 
508(c)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, title 
15, U.S.C. section 2008(c)(1), Pub. L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 911, or, if a 
petition for review has been filed, upon court affirmance of the 
Administrator's order.


<R04>
  Subpart G_Settlement Procedure in Cases of Violation of Average Fuel 

                            Economy Standards


<R05>
Sec. 511.61  Purpose.

    This subpart establishes the procedures and requirements necessary 
to obtain a settlement of a case of violation of section 507 (1) or (2) 
of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, as amended, Pub. 
L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 911 (15 U.S.C. section 2007(1)(2)). No settlement of 
such cases may be had except as in accordance with this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 511.62  Definitions.

    Average fuel economy standard means an average fuel economy standard 
established by or pursuant to the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost 
Savings Act.
    Insolvency means the inability to meet expenses when due.
    Settlement means a compromise, modification, or remission of a civil 
penalty assessed under this part for a violation of an average fuel 
economy standard.


<R05>
Sec. 511.63  Criteria for settlement.

    Settlement of a case of violation of an average fuel economy 
standard is discretionary with the Administrator. The Administrator will 
consider settlement only to the extent:
    (a) Necessary to prevent the insolvency or bankruptcy of the person 
seeking settlement, or
    (b) That the violation of the average fuel economy standard 
resulted, as shown by the person seeking settlement, from an act of God, 
a strike, or fire, or
    (c) That modification of a civil penalty assessed under this part is 
necessary to prevent lessening of competition, as determined and as 
certified by the Federal Trade Commission under section 508(b)(4) of the 
Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, Pub. L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 
911 (15 U.S.C. section 2008(b)(4)).


<R05>
Sec. 511.64  Petitions for settlement; timing, contents.

    (a) A petition seeking settlement under this subpart must be filed 
within 30 days after the issuance of a final order assessing a civil 
penalty for a violation of an average fuel economy standard.
    (b)(1) A petition for settlement should be sufficient to allow the 
Administrator to determine that at least one of the criteria set out in 
Sec. 511.63 is satisfied, and that the public interest would be served 
by settlement.
    (2) A petition asserting that settlement is necessary to prevent 
bankruptcy or insolvency must include:
    (i) Copies of all pertinent financial records, auditor's reports, 
and documents that show that the imposition of a civil penalty would 
cause insolvency, or would cause a company to do an act of bankruptcy, 
and
    (ii) A payment schedule that would allow the petitioner to pay a 
civil penalty without resulting in insolvency or an act of bankruptcy.
    (3) A petition asserting that the violation of the average fuel 
economy standard was caused by an act of God, fire, or strike must 
describe corrective and ameliorative steps taken to mitigate the effects 
of the act of God, fire, or strike.

[[Page 54]]

    (4) A petition based on a certification by the Federal Trade 
Commission that modification of the civil penalty assessed is necessary 
to prevent a substantial lessening of competition must include a 
certified copy of:
    (i) The application to the Federal Trade Commission for a 
certification under section 508(b)(4) of the Motor Vehicle Information 
and Cost Savings Act, Pub. L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 911 (15 U.S.C. 
2008(b)(4)), and materials supporting the application.
    (ii) The administrative record of any Federal Trade Commission 
proceeding held in regard to the application, and
    (iii) The certification by the Federal Trade Commission.
    (c) It is the policy of the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration that unconditional settlements of violations of average 
fuel economy standards are not in the public interest, and absent 
special and extraordinary circumstances, will not be allowed. All 
petitions for settlement shall contain a section proposing conditions 
for settlement. Conditions for settlement can be specific acts designed 
to lead to the reduction of automotive fuel consumption, which the 
petitioner is not otherwise required to perform pursuant to any statute, 
regulation, or administrative or judicial order, such as sponsoring 
public education programs, advertising, accelerating commercial 
application of technology, accelerating technology development programs, 
or making public the results of privately performed studies, surveys, or 
research activities.


<R05>
Sec. 511.65  Public comment.

    Notice and opportunity for comment are provided to the public in 
regard to settlements under this part. Subject to Sec. 511.66, notice 
of receipt of a petition for settlement is published in the Federal 
Register, and a copy of such petitions and any supporting information is 
placed in a public docket. Any settlement agreed to by the Administrator 
shall be placed in the public docket for 30 days so that interested 
persons may comment thereon. No settlement is binding until the 
completion of that thirty day period.


<R05>
Sec. 511.66  Confidential business information.

    The Administrator shall have authority to segregate from the public 
docket and to protect from public view information in support of a 
petition for settlement which has been determined to be confidential 
business information. The provisions of 15 U.S.C. 2005(d) pertaining to 
discretionary release by the Administrator of and to limited disclosure 
of information determined to be confidential business information shall 
apply to this section.


<R05>
Sec. 511.67  Settlement order.

    If, in accordance with this subpart, the Administrator allows a 
settlement of a case of violation of an average fuel economy standard, 
an order of settlement shall be issued, setting out the terms of the 
settlement, and containing a brief discussion of the factors underlying 
the exercise of the Administrator's discretion in allowing the 
settlement, including a discussion of comments received under Sec. 
511.65. If the Administrator rejects a petition for settlement, the 
Administrator shall give written notice of the rejection and the reasons 
for the rejection to the parties and the Presiding Officer.

[53 FR 15783, May 3, 1988]


<R04>
               Subpart H_Appearances; Standards of Conduct


<R05>
Sec. 511.71  Who may make appearances.

    A party or participant may appear in person, or by a duly authorized 
officer, partner, regular employee, or other agent of this party or 
participant, or by or with counsel or other duly qualified 
representative, in any proceeding under this part.


<R05>
Sec. 511.72  Authority for representation.

    Any individual acting in a representative capacity in any 
adjudicative proceeding may be required by the Presiding Officer or the 
Administrator to show his or her authority to act in such capacity. A 
regular employee of a party who appears on behalf of the party shall be 
required by the Presiding Officer or the Administrator to show his or 
her authority to so appear.

[[Page 55]]


<R05>
Sec. 511.73  Written appearances.

    (a) Any person who appears in a proceeding shall file a written 
notice of appearance with the Executive Secretary or deliver a written 
notice of appearance to the reporter at the hearing, stating for whom 
the appearance is made and the name, address, and telephone number 
(including area code) of the person making the appearance and the date 
of the commencement of the appearance. The written appearance shall be 
made a part of the record.
    (b) Any person who has previously appeared in a proceeding may 
withdraw his or her appearance by filing a written notice of withdrawal 
of appearance with the Docket Section. The notice of withdrawal shall 
state the name, address, and telephone number (including area code) of 
the person withdrawing the appearance, for whom the appearance was made, 
and the effective date of the withdrawal of the appearance, and such 
notice of withdrawal shall be filed within five (5) days of the 
effective date of the withdrawal of the appearance.

[45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 15783, May 3, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 511.74  Attorneys.

    An attorney at law who is admitted to practice before the Federal 
courts or before the highest court of any State, the District of 
Columbia, or any territory or Commonwealth of the United States, may 
practice before the NHTSA. An attorney's own representation that he or 
she is in good standing before any of such courts shall be sufficient 
proof thereof, unless otherwise ordered by the Presiding Officer or the 
Administrator.


<R05>
Sec. 511.75  Persons not attorneys.

    (a) Any person who is not an attorney at law may be admitted to 
appear in an adjudicative proceeding if that person files proof to the 
satisfaction of the Presiding Officer that he or she possesses the 
necessary legal, technical or other qualifications to render valuable 
service in the proceeding and is otherwise competent to advise and 
assist in the presentation of matters in the proceedings. An application 
by a person not an attorney at law to appear in a proceeding shall be 
submitted in writing to the Docket Section, not later than thirty (30) 
days prior to the hearing in the proceedings. The application shall set 
forth the applicant's qualifications to appear in the proceedings.
    (b) No person who is not an attorney at law and whose application 
has not been approved shall be permitted to appear in the 
Administration's proceedings. However, this provision shall not apply to 
any person who appears before the NHTSA on his or her own behalf or on 
behalf of any corporation, partnership, or association of which the 
person is a partner, officer, or regular employee.

[45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 15784, May 3, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 511.76  Qualifications and standards of conduct.

    (a) The NHTSA expects all persons appearing in proceedings before it 
to act with integrity, with respect, and in an ethical manner. Business 
transacted before and with the NHTSA shall be in good faith.
    (b) To maintain orderly proceedings, the Presiding Officer or the 
Administrator, as appropriate under this part, may exclude parties, 
participants, and their representatives for refusal to comply with 
directions, continued use of dilatory tactics, refusal to adhere to 
reasonable standards of orderly and ethical conduct, failure to act in 
good faith, or violation of the prohibition against certain ex parte 
communications. The Presiding Officer may, in addition to the above 
sanctions, deny access to additional in camera materials when a party or 
participant publicly releases such materials without authorization.
    (c) An excluded party, participant, or representative thereof may 
petition the Administrator to entertain an interlocutory appeal in 
accordance with Sec. 511.24. If, after such appeal, the representative 
of a party or participant, is excluded, the hearing shall, at the 
request of the party or participant, be suspended for a reasonable time 
so that the party or participant may obtain another representative.

[[Page 56]]


<R05>
Sec. 511.77  Restrictions as to former members and employees.

    The postemployee restrictions applicable to former Administrators 
and NHTSA employees, as set forth in 18 U.S.C. 207, shall govern the 
activities of former Administrators and NHTSA employees in matters 
connected with their former duties and responsibilities.


<R05>
Sec. 511.78  Prohibited communications.

    (a) Applicability. This section is applicable during the period 
commencing with the date of issuance of a complaint and ending upon 
final NHTSA action in the matter.
    (b) Definitions. (1) ``Decision-maker'' means those NHTSA personnel 
who render decisions in adjudicative proceedings under this part, or who 
advise officials who render such decisions, including:
    (i) The Administrator,
    (ii) The Administrative Law Judges;
    (2) ``Ex parte communication'' means:
    (i) Any written communication other than a request for a status 
report on the proceeding made to a decisionmaker by any person other 
than a decisionmaker which is not served on all parties,
    (ii) Any oral communication other than a request for a status report 
on the proceeding made to a decisionmaker by any person other than a 
decisionmaker without advance notice to the parties to the proceeding 
and opportunity for them to be present.
    (c) Prohibited ex parte communications. Any oral or written ex parte 
communication relative to the merits of a proceeding under this part is 
a prohibited ex parte communication, except as provided in paragraph (d) 
of this section.
    (d) Permissible ex parte communications. The following 
communications shall not be prohibited under this section:
    (1) Ex parte communications authorized by statute or by this part.
    (2) Any staff communication concerning judicial review or judicial 
enforcement in any matter pending before or decided by the 
Administrator.
    (e) Procedures for handling prohibited ex parte communication.--(1) 
Prohibited written ex parte communication. To the extent possible, a 
prohibited written ex parte communication received by any NHTSA employee 
shall be forwarded to the Docket Section rather than to a decisionmaker. 
A prohibited written ex parte communication which reaches a 
decisionmaker shall be forwarded by the decisionmaker to the Docket 
Section. If the circumstances in which a prohibited ex parte written 
communication was made are not apparent from the communication itself, a 
statement describing those circumstances shall be forwarded with the 
communication.
    (2) Prohibited oral ex parte communication. (i) If a prohibited oral 
ex parte communication is made to a decisionmaker, he or she shall 
advise the person making the communication that the communication is 
prohibited and shall terminate the discussion.
    (ii) In the event of a prohibited oral ex parte communication, the 
decisionmaker shall forward to the Docket Section a dated statement 
containing such of the following information as is known to him/her:
    (A) The title and docket number of the proceeding;
    (B) The name and address of the person making the communication and 
his/her relationship (if any) to the parties to the proceeding;
    (C) The date and time of the communication, its duration, and the 
circumstances (telephone call, personal interview, etc.) under which it 
was made;
    (D) A brief statement of the substance of the matters discussed;
    (E) Whether the person making the communication persisted in doing 
so after being advised that the communication was prohibited.
    (3) All communications and statements forwarded to the Docket 
Section under this section shall be placed in the public file which 
shall be associated with, but not made a part of, the record of the 
proceedings to which the communication or statement pertains.
    (4) Service on parties. The Administrator shall serve a copy of each 
communication and statement forwarded under this section on all parties 
to the proceedings. However, if the parties are numerous, or if other 
circumstances satisfy the Administrator that service of the 
communication or statement

[[Page 57]]

would be unduly burdensome, he or she may, in lieu of service, notify 
all parties in writing that the communication or statement has been made 
and filed and that it is available for inspection and copying.
    (5) Service on maker. The Administrator shall forward to the person 
who made the prohibited ex parte communication a copy of each 
communication or statement filed under this section.
    (f) Effect of ex parte communications. No prohibited ex parte 
communication shall be considered as part of the record for decision 
unless introduced into evidence by a party to the proceedings.
    (g) Sanctions. A party or participant who makes a prohibited ex 
parte communication, or who encourages or solicits another to make any 
such communication, may be subject to any appropriate sanction or 
sanctions, including, but not limited to, exclusion from the proceedings 
and adverse rulings on the issues which are the subject of the 
prohibited communication.

[45 FR 81578, Dec. 11, 1980, as amended at 53 FR 15784, May 3, 1988]


<R05>
           Sec. Appendix I to Part 511--Final Prehearing Order

                              Case Caption

                         Final Prehearing Order

    A prehearing conference was held in this matter pursuant to Rule 21 
of the Administration's Rules of Practice for Adjudicative Proceedings, 
on the -------------------- day of --------------------, 19----, at ---- 
o'clock -- M.

    Counsel appeared as follows:

For the Administration staff:

For the Respondent(s):
Others:

    1. NATURE OF ACTION AND JURISDICTION.

               This is an action for --------------------

________________________________________________________________________

and the jurisdiction of the Administration is involved under Section --
-- of Title ---- U.S.C. The jurisdiction of the Administration is (not) 
disputed. The questions of jurisdiction was decided as follows:

    2. STIPULATIONS AND STATEMENTS.

    The following stipulations and statements were submitted, attached 
to, and made a part of this order:
    (a) A comprehensive written stipulation or statement of all 
uncontested facts;
    (b) A concise summary of the ultimate facts as claimed by each 
party. (Complaint Counsel must set forth the claimed facts, 
specifically; for example, if violation is claimed, Complaint Counsel 
must assert specifically the acts of violation complained of; each 
respondent must reply with equal clarity and detail.)
    (c) Written stipulations or statements setting forth the 
qualifications of the expert witnesses to be called by each party;
    (d) A written list or lists of the witnesses whom each party will 
call, a written list or lists of the additional witnesses whom each 
party may call, and a statement of the subject on which each witness 
will testify;
    (e) An agreed statement of the contested issues of fact and of law, 
and/or separate statements by each party or any contested issues of fact 
and law not agreed to;
    (f) A list of all depositions to be read into evidence and 
statements of any objections thereto;
    (g) A list and brief description of any charts, graphs, models, 
schematic diagrams, and similar objects that will be used in opening 
statements or closing arguments, but will not be offered in evidence. If 
any other such objects are to be used by any party, they will be 
submitted to opposing counsel at least three days prior to hearing. If 
there is then any objection to their use, the dispute will be submitted 
to the Presiding Officer at least one day prior to hearing;
    (h) Written waivers of claims or defenses which have been abandoned 
by the parties.

The foregoing were modified at the pretrial conference as follows:

  [To be completed at the conference itself. If none, recite ``none'']

    3. COMPLAINT COUNSEL'S EVIDENCE.
    3.1 The following exhibits were offered by Complaint Counsel, 
received in evidence, and marked as follows:

      [Identification number and brief description of each exhibit]

The authenticity of these exhibits has been stipulated.
    3.2 The following exhibits were offered by the Complaint Counsel and 
marked for identification. There was reserved to the respondent(s) and 
party intervenors, if any, the right to object to their receipt in 
evidence on the grounds stated:

  [Identification number and brief description of each exhibit. State 
 briefly ground of objection, e.g., competency, relevancy, materiality]

    4. RESPONDENT'S EVIDENCE.


[[Page 58]]


    4.1 The following exhibits were offered by the respondent(s), 
received in evidence, and marked as herein indicated:

      [Identification number and brief description of each exhibit]

The authenticity of these exhibits has been stipulated.

    4.2 The following exhibits were offered by the respondent(s) and 
marked for identification. There was reserved to Complaint Counsel and 
party intervenors, if any, the right to object to their receipt in 
evidence on the grounds stated:
[Identification number and brief description of each exhibit. State 
briefly ground of objection, e.g., competency, relevancy, materiality]

    5. ADDITIONAL ACTIONS.

The following additional action was taken:

[Amendments to pleadings, agreements of the parties, disposition of 
motions, separation of issues of liability and remedy, etc., if 
necessary]

    6. LIMITATIONS AND RESERVATIONS.

    6.1 Each of the parties has the right to further supplement the list 
of witnesses not later than ten (10) days prior to trial by furnishing 
opposing counsel with the name and address of the witness and general 
subject matter of his or her testimony and filing a supplement to this 
pretrial order. Thereafter additional witnesses may be added only after 
application to the Presiding Officer, for good cause shown.
    6.2 Rebuttal witnesses not listed in the exhibits to this order may 
be called only if the necessity of their testimony could not reasonably 
be foreseen ten (10) days prior to trial. If it appears to counsel at 
any time before trial that such rebuttal witnesses will be called, 
notice will immediately be given to opposing counsel and the Presiding 
Officer.
    6.3 The probable length of hearing is -------- days. The hearings 
will be commenced on the ---- day of ----------, 19----, at ---- o'clock 
-- M. at (location) ----------.
    6.4 Prehearing briefs will be filed not later than 5:00 p.m. on ----
----. (Insert date not later than ten (10) days prior to hearing.) All 
anticipated legal questions, including those relating to the 
admissibility of evidence, must be covered by prehearing briefs.
    This prehearing order has been formulated after a conference at 
which counsel for the respective parties appeared. Reasonable 
opportunity has been afforded counsel for corrections or additions prior 
to signing. It will control the course of the hearing, and it may not be 
amended except by consent of the parties and the Presiding Officer, or 
by order of the Presiding Officer to prevent manifest injustice.

________________________________________________________________________

(Presiding Officer's Name)
(Presiding Officer's Title)

APPROVED AS TO FORM AND SUBSTANCE

Date: ----------.

________________________________________________________________________

Complaint Counsel.

________________________________________________________________________

Attorney for Respondent(s).

    Note: Where intervenors appear pursuant to Sec. 511.17 the 
prehearing order may be suitably modified; the initial page may be 
modified to reflect the intervention.


<R03>
PART 512_CONFIDENTIAL BUSINESS INFORMATION--Table of Contents



                      Subpart A_General Provisions

Sec.
512.1 Purpose and scope.
512.2 Applicability.
512.3 Definitions.

                    Subpart B_Submission Requirements

512.4 When requesting confidentiality, what should I submit?
512.5 How many copies should I submit?
512.6 How should I prepare documents when submitting a claim for 
          confidentiality?
512.7 Where should I send the information for which I am requesting 
          confidentiality?
512.8 What supporting information should I submit with my request?

                    Subpart C_Additional Requirements

512.9 What are the requirements if the information comes from a third 
          party?
512.10 Duty to amend.
512.11 What if I need an extension of time?
512.12 What if I am submitting multiple items of information?
512.13 What are the consequences for noncompliance with this part?

                     Subpart D_Agency Determination

512.14 Who makes the confidentiality determination?
512.15 How will confidentiality determinations be made?
512.16 Class determinations.
512.17 How long should it take to determine whether information is 
          entitled to confidential treatment?
512.18 How will I be notified of the confidentiality determination?
512.19 What can I do if I disagree with the determination?

[[Page 59]]

  Subpart E_Agency Treatment of Information Claimed To Be Confidential

512.20 How does the agency treat information submitted pursuant to this 
          part before a confidentiality determination is made?
512.21 How is information submitted pursuant to this part treated once a 
          confidentiality determination is made?
512.22 Under what circumstances may NHTSA modify a grant of 
          confidentiality?
512.23 Under what circumstances may NHTSA publicly release confidential 
          information?

Appendix A to Part 512--Certificate in Support of Request for 
          Confidentiality
Appendix B to Part 512--General Class Determinations
Appendix C to Part 512--Early Warning Reporting Class Determinations
Appendix D to Part 512--Vehicle Identification Number Information
Appendix E to Part 512--Consumer Assistance to Recycle and Save (CARS) 
          Class Determinations
Appendix F to Part 512--OMB Clearance

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322; 5 U.S.C. 552; 49 U.S.C. 30166; 49 U.S.C. 
30167; 49 U.S.C. 32307; 49 U.S.C. 32505; 49 U.S.C. 32708; 49 U.S.C. 
32910; 49 U.S.C. 33116; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 68 FR 44228, July 28, 2003, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                      Subpart A_General Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 512.1  Purpose and scope.

    The purpose of this part is to establish the procedures and 
standards by which NHTSA will consider claims that information submitted 
to the agency is entitled to confidential treatment under 5 U.S.C. 
552(b), most often because it constitutes confidential business 
information as described in 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(4), and to address the 
treatment of information determined to be entitled to confidential 
treatment.


<R05>
Sec. 512.2  Applicability.

    (a) This part applies to all information submitted to NHTSA, except 
as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, for which a determination 
is sought that the material is entitled to confidential treatment under 
5 U.S.C. 552(b), most often because it constitutes confidential business 
information as described in 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(4), and should be withheld 
from public disclosure.
    (b) Information received as part of the procurement process is 
subject to the Federal Acquisition Regulation, 48 CFR Chapter 1, as well 
as this part. In any case of conflict between the Federal Acquisition 
Regulation and this part, the provisions of the Federal Acquisition 
Regulation prevail.


<R05>
Sec. 512.3  Definitions.

    Whenever used in this part:
    (a) Administrator means the Administrator of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration.
    (b) Chief Counsel means the Chief Counsel of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration.
    (c) Confidential business information means trade secrets or 
commercial or financial information that is privileged or confidential, 
as described in 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(4).
    (1) A trade secret is a secret, commercially valuable plan, formula, 
process, or device that is used for the making, preparing, compounding, 
or processing of trade commodities and that can be said to be the end 
product of either innovation or substantial effort.
    (2) Commercial or financial information is considered confidential 
if it has not been publicly disclosed and:
    (i) If the information was required to be submitted and its release 
is likely to impair the Government's ability to obtain necessary 
information in the future, or is likely to cause substantial harm to the 
competitive position of the person from whom the information was 
obtained; or
    (ii) if the information was voluntarily submitted and is the kind of 
information that is customarily not released to the public by the person 
from whom it was obtained.
    (d) NHTSA means the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
    (e) ``Substantial competitive harm'' includes ``significant 
competitive damage'' under Chapter 329 of Title 49 of the United States 
Code, Automobile Fuel Economy, 49 U.S.C. 32910(c).

[[Page 60]]


<R04>
                    Subpart B_Submission Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 512.4  When requesting confidentiality, what should I submit?

    Any person submitting information to NHTSA, other than information 
in a class identified in appendix C of this Part, and requesting that 
the information be withheld from public disclosure pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 
552(b) shall submit the following:
    (a) The materials for which confidentiality is being requested, in 
conformance with Sec. Sec. 512.5, 512.6, and 512.7 of this part;
    (b) The Certificate, in the form set out in appendix A to this part;
    (c) Supporting information, in conformance with Sec. 512.8; and
    (d) Any request for an extension of time, made in accordance with 
Sec. 512.11.


<R05>
Sec. 512.5  How many copies should I submit?

    (a) Except as provided for in subsection (c), a person must send the 
following in hard copy or electronic format to the Chief Counsel when 
making a claim for confidential treatment covering submitted material:
    (1) A complete copy of the submission, and
    (2) A copy of the submission containing only the portions for which 
no claim of confidential treatment is made and from which those portions 
for which confidential treatment is claimed has been redacted, and
    (3) Either a second complete copy of the submission or, 
alternatively, those portions of the submission containing the material 
for which confidential treatment is claimed and any additional 
information the submitter deems important to the Chief Counsel's 
consideration of the claim.
    (4) If submitted in electronic format, a copy of any special 
software required to review materials for which confidential treatment 
is requested and user instructions must also be provided.
    (b) A person filing comments to a rulemaking action must 
additionally submit to the rulemaking docket a copy of the submission 
containing only the portions for which no claim of confidential 
treatment is made and from which those portions for which confidential 
treatment is claimed has been redacted.
    (c) Any person submitting blueprints or engineering drawings need 
only provide an original version with their submission.


<R05>
Sec. 512.6  How should I prepare documents when submitting a claim for 

confidentiality?

    (a) Information claimed to be confidential must be clearly 
identified to enable the agency to distinguish between those portions of 
the submission claimed to constitute confidential business information 
and those portions for which no such claim is made.
    (b) The word ``CONFIDENTIAL'' must appear on the top of each page 
containing information claimed to be confidential.
    (1) If an entire page is claimed to be confidential, the submitter 
must indicate clearly that the entire page is claimed to be 
confidential.
    (2) If the information for which confidentiality is being requested 
is contained within a page, the submitter shall enclose each item of 
information that is claimed to be confidential within brackets: ``[ ].''
    (c) Submissions in electronic format--(1) Persons submitting 
information under this Part may submit the information in an electronic 
format. Except for early warning reporting data submitted to the agency 
under 49 CFR part 579, the information submitted in an electronic format 
shall be submitted in a physical medium such as a CD-ROM. The exterior 
of the medium (e.g., the disk itself) shall be permanently labeled with 
the submitter's name, the subject of the information and the words 
``CONFIDENTIAL BUSINESS INFORMATION''.
    (2) Confidential portions of electronic files submitted in other 
than their original format must be marked ``Confidential Business 
Information'' or ``Entire Page Confidential Business Information'' at 
the top of each page. If only a portion of a page is claimed to be 
confidential, that portion shall be designated by brackets. Files 
submitted in their original format that cannot be marked as described 
above

[[Page 61]]

must, to the extent practicable, identify confidential information by 
alternative markings using existing attributes within the file or means 
that are accessible through use of the file's associated program. When 
alternative markings are used, such as font changes or symbols, the 
submitter must use one method consistently for electronic files of the 
same type within the same submission. The method used for such markings 
must be described in the request for confidentiality. Files and 
materials that cannot be marked internally, such as video clips or 
executable files or files provided in a format specifically requested by 
the agency, shall be renamed prior to submission so the words 
``Confidential Bus Info'' appears in the file name or, if that is not 
practicable, the characters ``Conf Bus Info'' or ``Conf'' appear. In all 
cases, a submitter shall provide an electronic copy of its request for 
confidential treatment on any medium containing confidential 
information, except where impracticable.
    (3) Confidential portions of electronic files submitted in other 
than their original format must be marked with consecutive page numbers 
or sequential identifiers so that any page can be identified and located 
using the file name and page number. Confidential portions of electronic 
files submitted in their original format must, if practicable, be marked 
with consecutive page numbers or sequential identifiers so that any page 
can be identified and located using the file name and page number. 
Confidential portions of electronic files submitted in their original 
format that cannot be marked as described above must, to the extent 
practicable, identify the portions of the file that are claimed to be 
confidential through the use of existing indices or placeholders 
embedded within the file. If such indices or placeholders exist, the 
submitter's request for confidential treatment shall clearly identify 
them and the means for locating them within the file. If files submitted 
in their original format cannot be marked with page or sequence number 
designations and do not contain existing indices or placeholders for 
locating confidential information, then the portions of the files that 
are claimed to be confidential shall be described by other means in the 
request for confidential treatment. In all cases, submitters shall 
provide an electronic copy of their request for confidential treatment 
on any media containing confidential data except where impracticable.
    (4) Electronic media may be submitted only in commonly available and 
used formats.

[68 FR 44228, July 28, 2003, as amended at 72 FR 59469, Oct. 19, 2007]


<R05>
Sec. 512.7  Where should I send the information for which I am requesting 

confidentiality?

    A claim for confidential treatment must be submitted in accordance 
with the provisions of this regulation to the Chief Counsel of the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 1200 New Jersey Avenue, 
SE., West Building W41-227, Washington, DC 20590.

[72 FR 59470, Oct. 19, 2007]


<R05>
Sec. 512.8  What supporting information should I submit with my request?

    When requesting confidentiality, the submitter shall:
    (a) Describe the information for which confidentiality is being 
requested;
    (b) Identify the confidentiality standard(s) under which the 
confidentiality request should be evaluated, in accordance with Sec. 
512.15;
    (c) Justify the basis for the claim of confidentiality under the 
confidentiality standard(s) identified pursuant to paragraph (b) of this 
section by describing:
    (1) Why the information qualifies as a trade secret, if the basis 
for confidentiality is that the information is a trade secret;
    (2) What the harmful effects of disclosure would be and why the 
effects should be viewed as substantial, if the claim for 
confidentiality is based upon substantial competitive harm;
    (3) What significant NHTSA interests will be impaired by disclosure 
of the information and why disclosure is likely to impair such 
interests, if the claim for confidentiality is based upon impairment to 
government interests;
    (4) What measures have been taken by the submitter to ensure that 
the information is not customarily disclosed

[[Page 62]]

or otherwise made available to the public, if the basis for 
confidentiality is that the information is voluntarily submitted; and
    (5) The information is otherwise entitled to protection, pursuant to 
5 U.S.C. 552(b).
    (d) Indicate if any items of information fall within any of the 
class determinations included in appendix B to this Part;
    (e) Indicate the time period during which confidential treatment is 
sought; and
    (f) State the name, address, and telephone number of the person to 
whom NHTSA's response and any inquiries should be directed.


<R04>
                    Subpart C_Additional Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 512.9  What are the requirements if the information comes from a third 

party?

    Where confidentiality is claimed for information obtained by the 
submitter from a third party, such as a supplier, the submitter is 
responsible for obtaining from the third party the information that is 
necessary to comply with Sec. 512.4 of this part, including a 
certificate in the form set out in appendix A to this Part.


<R05>
Sec. 512.10  Duty to amend.

    The submitter shall promptly amend any supporting information 
provided under Sec. 512.4 if the submitter obtains information upon the 
basis of which the submitter knows that the supporting information was 
incorrect when provided, or that the supporting information, though 
correct when provided to the agency, is no longer correct and the 
circumstances are such that a failure to amend the supporting 
information is in substance a knowing concealment.


<R05>
Sec. 512.11  What if I need an extension of time?

    If a person is unable to submit the necessary information required 
under Sec. 512.4 at the time the claimed confidential information is 
submitted to NHTSA, then that person may request an extension of time. 
Any request for an extension shall explain the reason for the extension 
of time and the length of time requested.


<R05>
Sec. 512.12  What if I am submitting multiple items of information?

    Any certificate provided under Sec. 512.4(b) of this part, and any 
supporting information provided under Sec. 512.4(c) of this part, may 
be used to support a claim for confidential treatment of more than one 
item of information. However, general or nonspecific assertions or 
analysis may be insufficient to form an adequate basis for the agency to 
find that the information is entitled to confidential treatment, and may 
result in the denial of the claim.


<R05>
Sec. 512.13  What are the consequences for noncompliance with this part?

    (a) If the submitter fails to comply with Sec. 512.4 of this part 
at the time the information is submitted to NHTSA or does not request an 
extension of time under Sec. 512.11, the claim for confidentiality may 
be waived, unless the agency is notified or otherwise becomes aware of 
the claim before the information is disclosed to the public. If the 
information is placed in a public docket or file, such placement is 
disclosure to the public within the meaning of this part and may 
preclude any claim for confidential treatment. The Chief Counsel may 
notify a submitter of information or, if applicable, a third party from 
whom the information was obtained, of inadequacies regarding a claim for 
confidential treatment and may allow the submitter or third party 
additional time to supplement the submission, but has no obligation to 
provide either notice or additional time.
    (b) If the submitter does not provide the certificate required under 
Sec. 512.4(b) of this part or any supporting information required under 
Sec. 512.4(c) of this part, or if the information is insufficient to 
establish that the information should be afforded confidential treatment 
under the confidentiality standards set out in Sec. 512.15 of this 
part, a request that such information be treated confidentially may be 
denied. The Chief Counsel may notify a submitter of information of 
inadequacies in the supporting information and may allow

[[Page 63]]

the submitter additional time to supplement the showing, but has no 
obligation to provide either notice or additional time.


<R04>
                     Subpart D_Agency Determination


<R05>
Sec. 512.14  Who makes the confidentiality determination?

    The Chief Counsel will determine whether an item of information will 
be afforded confidential treatment under this part.


<R05>
Sec. 512.15  How will confidentiality determinations be made?

    Information may be afforded confidential treatment if the Chief 
Counsel determines that:
    (a) The information is a trade secret;
    (b) Public disclosure of the information would be likely to cause 
substantial harm to the competitive position of the submitter;
    (c) Public disclosure of the information would be likely to impair 
NHTSA's ability to obtain necessary information in the future;
    (d) The information was provided to NHTSA voluntarily and was not 
customarily released to the public by the person from whom it was 
obtained; or
    (e) The information is otherwise entitled to protection, pursuant to 
5 U.S.C. 552(b).


<R05>
Sec. 512.16  Class determinations.

    (a) The Chief Counsel may issue class determinations of categories 
of information to be entitled to confidential treatment if the Chief 
Counsel determines that one or more characteristics common to each item 
of information in that class, will, in most cases, result in identical 
treatment, and further that it is appropriate to treat all such items as 
a class for one or more purposes under this part. Once a class 
determination is made, the Chief Counsel will publish the new class 
determination in the Federal Register.
    (b) The Chief Counsel may amend, modify, or terminate any class 
determination established under this section. These changes will be 
published in the Federal Register.
    (c) Class determinations made by the Chief Counsel are listed in 
Appendices B and C to this Part.
    (d) A class determination may state that all of the information in 
the class:
    (1) Is or is not governed by a particular section of this part or by 
a particular set of substantive criteria of this part;
    (2) Satisfies one or more of the applicable substantive criteria; or
    (3) Satisfies one or more of the substantive criteria, but only for 
a certain period of time.


<R05>
Sec. 512.17  How long should it take to determine whether information is 

entitled to confidential treatment?

    (a) When information claimed to be confidential is requested under 
the Freedom of Information Act, the determination will be made within 
twenty (20) working days after NHTSA receives such a request or within 
thirty (30) working days in unusual circumstances as provided under 5 
U.S.C. 552(a)(6)(A). However, these time periods may be extended by the 
Chief Counsel for good cause shown or on request from any person. An 
extension will be made in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a)(6)(A), and 
will be accompanied by a written statement setting out the reasons for 
the extension.
    (b) When information claimed to be confidential is not requested 
under the Freedom of Information Act, the determination of 
confidentiality will be made within a reasonable period of time, at the 
discretion of the Chief Counsel.


<R05>
Sec. 512.18  How will I be notified of the confidentiality determination?

    (a) If a request for confidential treatment is granted, the 
submitter of the information will be notified in writing of the 
determination and of any appropriate limitations.
    (b) If a request for confidential treatment is denied in whole or in 
part, the submitter of the information will be notified in writing of 
the determination, and the reasons for the denial, by certified mail, 
return receipt requested. The information may be made available to the 
public twenty (20) working days after the submitter of the information 
has received notice of the denial, unless a request for reconsideration 
is filed. The information may be released publicly on an earlier

[[Page 64]]

date, if the Chief Counsel determines in writing that the public 
interest requires that the information be made available to the public 
on such date.


<R05>
Sec. 512.19  What can I do if I disagree with the determination?

    (a) A submitter of information whose request for confidential 
treatment is denied in whole or in part, may petition for 
reconsideration of that decision. Petitions for reconsideration shall be 
addressed to and received by the Chief Counsel prior to the date on 
which the information would otherwise be made available to the public. 
The determination by the Chief Counsel upon such petition for 
reconsideration shall be administratively final.
    (b) If a person is unable to submit a petition for reconsideration 
within twenty (20) working days of receiving notice that a claim for 
confidential treatment was denied, that person may submit a request for 
an extension of time. The Chief Counsel must receive any request for an 
extension of time before the date on which the information would be made 
available to the public, and the request must be accompanied by an 
explanation describing the reason for the request and the length of time 
requested. The Chief Counsel will determine whether to grant or deny the 
extension and the length of the extension.
    (c) If a petition for reconsideration is granted, the petitioner 
will be notified in writing of the determination and of any appropriate 
limitations.
    (d) If a petition for reconsideration is denied in whole or in part, 
or if a request for an extension is denied, the petitioner will be 
notified in writing of the denial, and the reasons for the denial, and 
will be informed that the information will be made available to the 
public not less than twenty (20) working days after the petitioner has 
received notice of the denial. The information may be released publicly 
on an earlier date, if the Administrator determines in writing that the 
public interest requires that the information be made available to the 
public on such date.


<R04>
  Subpart E_Agency Treatment of Information Claimed To Be Confidential


<R05>
Sec. 512.20  How does the agency treat information submitted pursuant to this 

part before a confidentiality determination is made?

    (a) Information received by NHTSA, for which a properly filed 
confidentiality request is submitted, will be kept confidential until 
the Chief Counsel makes a determination regarding its confidentiality. 
Such information will not be disclosed publicly, except in accordance 
with this part.
    (b) Redacted copies of documents submitted to NHTSA under this part 
will be disclosed to the public.


<R05>
Sec. 512.21  How is information submitted pursuant to this part treated once a 

confidentiality determination is made?

    (a) Once the Chief Counsel makes a determination regarding the 
confidentiality of the submitted information, all materials determined 
not to be entitled to confidential protection will be disclosed to the 
public in accordance with the determination, unless a timely petition 
for reconsideration is received by the agency.
    (b) Upon receipt of a timely petition for reconsideration under 
Sec. 512.19 of this part, the submitted information will remain 
confidential, pending a determination regarding the petition.
    (c) Should the Chief Counsel, after considering a petition for 
reconsideration, decide that information is not entitled to confidential 
treatment, the agency may make the information available after twenty 
(20) working days after the submitter has received notice of that 
decision from the Chief Counsel unless the agency receives direction 
from a court not to release the information.

[68 FR 44228, July 28, 2003, as amended at 69 FR 21425, Apr. 21, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 512.22  Under what circumstances may NHTSA modify a grant of 

confidentiality?

    (a) The Chief Counsel may modify a grant of confidentiality based 
upon:
    (1) Newly discovered or changed facts;

[[Page 65]]

    (2) A change in the applicable law;
    (3) A change in class determination, pursuant to Sec. 512.16;
    (4) The passage of time; or
    (5) A finding that the prior determination is erroneous.
    (b) If the Chief Counsel believes that an earlier determination of 
confidentiality should be modified based on one or more of the factors 
listed in paragraph (a) of this section, the submitter of the 
information will be notified in writing that the Chief Counsel has 
modified its earlier determination and of the reasons for the 
modification, and will be informed that the information will be made 
available to the public in not less than twenty (20) working days from 
the date of receipt of the notice of modification. The information may 
be released publicly on an earlier date, if the Administrator determines 
in writing that the public interest requires that the information be 
made available to the public on such date. The submitter may seek 
reconsideration of the modification, pursuant to Sec. 512.19.


<R05>
Sec. 512.23  Under what circumstances may NHTSA publicly release confidential 

information?

    (a) Information that has been claimed or determined to be 
confidential under this part may be disclosed to the public by the 
Administrator notwithstanding such claim or determination, if disclosure 
would be in the public interest as follows:
    (1) Information obtained under chapter 325, 327, 329 or 331 of title 
49 of the United States Code (formerly under the Motor Vehicle 
Information and Cost Savings Act) may be disclosed when that information 
is relevant to a proceeding under the chapter under which the 
information was obtained.
    (2) Information obtained under chapter 301 of title 49 of the United 
States Code (49 U.S.C. Sec. 30101 et seq.), relating to the 
establishment, amendment, or modification of Federal motor vehicle 
safety standards, may be disclosed when relevant to a proceeding under 
the chapter.
    (3) Except as specified in the next sentence, information obtained 
under Chapter 301 of title 49 of the United States Code (49 U.S.C. 30101 
et seq.), related to a possible defect or noncompliance, shall be 
disclosed when the Administrator decides the information will assist in 
carrying out sections 30117(b) and 30118 through 30121 of title 49 or is 
required to be disclosed under 30118(a) of title 49, except as provided 
in paragraph (a)(4) of this section.
    (4) No information will be disclosed under paragraph (a) of this 
section unless the submitter of the information is given written notice 
of the Administrator's intention to disclose information under this 
section. Written notice will be given at least twenty (20) working days 
before the day of release, unless the Administrator finds that shorter 
notice is in the public interest. The notice under this paragraph will 
include a statement of the Administrator's reasons for deciding to 
disclose the information, and will afford the submitter of the 
information an opportunity to comment on the contemplated release of the 
information. The Administrator may also give notice of the contemplated 
release of information to other persons and may allow these persons the 
opportunity to comment. In making the determination to release 
information pursuant to this section, the Administrator will consider 
ways to release the information that will cause the least possible 
adverse effects to the submitter.
    (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this part, information 
that has been determined or claimed to be confidential may be released:
    (1) To a committee of Congress;
    (2) Pursuant to an order of a court of competent jurisdiction;
    (3) To the Office of the Secretary, U.S. Department of 
Transportation and other Executive branch offices or other Federal 
agencies in accordance with applicable laws;
    (4) With the consent of the submitter of the information; and
    (5) To contractors, if necessary for the performance of a contract 
with the agency or any Federal agency, with specific prohibitions on 
further release of the information.

[[Page 66]]


<R05>
   Sec. Appendix A to Part 512--Certificate in Support of Request for 

                             Confidentiality

          Certificate in Support of Request for Confidentiality

    I ----------, pursuant to the provisions of 49 CFR part 512, state 
as follows:
    (1) I am (official's name, title) and I am authorized by (company) 
to execute this certificate on its behalf;
    (2) I certify that the information contained in (pertinent 
document(s)) is confidential and proprietary data and is being submitted 
with the claim that it is entitled to confidential treatment under 5 
U.S.C. 552(b)(4) (as incorporated by reference in and modified by the 
statute under which the information is being submitted);
    (3) I hereby request that the information contained in (pertinent 
document(s)) be protected for (requested period of time);
    (4) This certification is based on the information provided by the 
responsible (company) personnel who have authority in the normal course 
of business to release the information for which a claim of 
confidentiality has been made to ascertain whether such information has 
ever been released outside (company);
    (5) Based upon that information, to the best of my knowledge, 
information and belief, the information for which (company) has claimed 
confidential treatment has never been released or become available 
outside (company); (except as hereinafter specified);
    (6) I make no representations beyond those contained in this 
certificate and, in particular, I make no representations as to whether 
this information may become available outside (company) because of 
unauthorized or inadvertent disclosure (except as stated in paragraph 
5); and
    (7) I certify under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true 
and correct. Executed on this the ------ day of ------, ------. (If 
executed outside of the United States of America: I certify under 
penalty of perjury under the laws of the United States of America that 
the foregoing is true and correct). (signature of official)


<R05>
        Sec. Appendix B to Part 512--General Class Determinations

    The Chief Counsel has determined that the following types of 
information would presumptively be likely to result in substantial 
competitive harm if disclosed to the public:
    (1) Blueprints and engineering drawings containing process and 
production data where the subject could not be manufactured without the 
blueprints or engineering drawings except after significant reverse 
engineering;
    (2) Future specific model plans (to be protected only until the date 
on which the specific model to which the plan pertains is first offered 
for sale); and
    (3) Future vehicle production or sales figures for specific models 
(to be protected only until the termination of the production period for 
the model year vehicle to which the information pertains).

[68 FR 44228, July 28, 2003, as amended at 69 FR 21425, Apr. 21, 2004]


<R05>
       Sec. Appendix C to Part 512--Early Warning Reporting Class 

                             Determinations

    (a) The Chief Counsel has determined that the following information 
required to be submitted to the agency under 49 CFR 579, Subpart C, if 
released, is likely to cause substantial harm to the competitive 
position of the manufacturer submitting the information and is likely to 
impair the government's ability to obtain necessary information in the 
future:
    (1) Reports and data relating to warranty claim information and 
warranty adjustment information for manufacturers of tires;
    (2) Reports and data relating to field reports, including dealer 
reports, product evaluation reports, and hard copies of field reports; 
and
    (3) Reports and data relating to consumer complaints.
    (b) The Chief Counsel has determined that the following information 
required to be submitted to the agency under 49 CFR 579, Subpart C, if 
released, is likely to cause substantial harm to the competitive 
position of the manufacturer submitting the information:
    (1) Reports of production numbers for child restraint systems, 
tires, and vehicles other than light vehicles, as defined in 49 CFR 
579.4(c); and
    (2) Lists of common green tire identifiers.

[72 FR 59470, Oct. 19, 2007]


<R05>
 Sec. Appendix D to Part 512--Vehicle Identification Number Information

    The Chief Counsel has determined that the disclosure of the last six 
(6) characters, when disclosed along with the first eleven (11) 
characters, of vehicle identification numbers reported in information on 
incidents involving death or injury pursuant to the early warning 
information requirements of 49 CFR part 579 will constitute a clearly 
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy within the meaning of 5 U.S.C. 
552(b)(6).

[72 FR 59470, Oct. 19, 2007]

[[Page 67]]


<R05>
  Sec. Appendix E to Part 512--Consumer Assistance to Recycle and Save 

                       (CARS) Class Determinations

    (a) The Chief Counsel has determined that the following information 
required to be submitted to the agency under 49 CFR part 599, if 
released, is likely to cause substantial harm to the competitive 
position of the entity submitting the information:
    (1) Vehicle Manufacturer Issued Dealer Identification Code;
    (2) Dealer Bank Name, ABA Routing Number and Bank Account Number; 
and
    (3) CARS Dealer Code and Authorization Code.
    (b) The Chief Counsel has determined that the disclosure of the new 
vehicle owner's name, home address, telephone number, state 
identification number and last six (6) characters, when disclosed along 
with the first eleven (11) characters, of the new vehicle identification 
numbers reported in transactions submitted to the agency under 49 CFR 
Part 599 will constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal 
privacy within the meaning of 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(6).

[74 FR 37897, July 29, 2009]


<R05>
               Sec. Appendix F to Part 512--OMB Clearance

    The OMB clearance number for this part 512 is 2127-0025.

[74 FR 37897, July 29, 2009]


<R03>
PART 520_PROCEDURES FOR CONSIDERING ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS--Table of Contents



                            Subpart A_General

Sec.
520.1 Purpose and scope.
520.2 Policy.
520.3 Definitions.
520.4 Applicability.
520.5 Guidelines for identifying major actions significantly affecting 
          the environment.

                          Subpart B_Procedures

520.21 Preparation of environmental reviews, negative declarations, and 
          notices of intent.
520.22 Maintenance of a list of actions.
520.23 Preparation of draft environmental impact statements.
520.24 Internal processing of draft environmental impact statements.
520.25 External review of draft environmental impact statements.
520.26 Public hearings.
520.27 Legislative actions.
520.28 Preparation of final environmental impact statements.
520.29 Internal review of final environmental impact statements.
520.30 Availability of final environmental impact statements.
520.31 Amendments or supplements.
520.32 Emergency action procedures.
520.33 Timing of proposed NHTSA actions.
520.34 Comments on environmental statements prepared by other agencies.

Attachment 1 to Part 520--Form and Content of Statement
Attachment 2 to Part 520--Areas of Environmental Impact and Federal 
          Agencies and Federal-State Agencies With Jurisdiction by Law 
          or Special Expertise To Comment Thereon [Note]
Attachment 3 to Part 520--Offices Within Federal Agencies and Federal-
          State Agencies for Information Regarding the Agencies' Impact 
          Statements for Which Comments Are Requested [Note]
Attachment 4 to Part 520--State and Local Agency Review of Impact 
          Statements

    Authority: Secs. 102(2)(A), 102(2)(C), Pub. L. 91-190, 83 Stat. 853 
(42 U.S.C. 4332); secs. 2(b), 4(f), Pub. L. 89-670, 80 Stat. 931 (49 
U.S.C. 1651(b), 1653(f)); E.O. 11514, 35 FR 4247; 40 CFR part 1500; DOT 
Order 5610.1B, 39 FR 35234; delegations of authority at 49 CFR 1.45, 
1.51.

    Source: 40 FR 52396, Nov. 10, 1975, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                            Subpart A_General


<R05>
Sec. 520.1  Purpose and scope.

    (a) Section 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 
1969 (83 Stat. 853; 42 U.S.C. 4332(2)(C)), as implemented by Executive 
Order 11514 (3 CFR, 1966-1970 Comp., p. 902) and the Council on 
Environmental Quality's Guidelines of April 23, 1971 (36 FR 7724), 
requires that all agencies of the Federal Government prepare detailed 
environmental statements on proposals for legislation and other major 
Federal actions significantly affecting the quality of the human 
environment. The purpose of the Act is to build into the agency 
decision-making process careful consideration of all environmental 
aspects of proposed actions.
    (b) This part specifies National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration (NHTSA) procedures for conducting environmental 
assessments and reviews, and for the preparation of environmental impact 
statements on proposals for legislation and other major agency

[[Page 68]]

actions significantly affecting the quality of the human environment.


<R05>
Sec. 520.2  Policy.

    The agency will strive to carry out the full intent and purpose of 
the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 and related orders and 
statutes, and take positive steps to avoid any action which could 
adversely affect the quality of the human environment.


<R05>
Sec. 520.3  Definitions.

    (a) Environmental assessment is a written analysis describing the 
environmental impact of a proposed or ongoing agency action, submitted 
to the agency either by its grantees or contractors, or by any person 
outside the agency as part of any program or project proposal within the 
scope of activities listed in Sec. 520.4(b).
    (b) Environmental review is a formal evaluation undertaken by the 
agency, culminating in a brief document (the environmental review 
report), to determine whether a proposed or ongoing NHTSA action may 
have a significant impact on the environment. The review document will 
be included in the proposed or ongoing agency action, and either support 
a negative declaration or recommend the preparation of a draft 
environmental impact statement.
    (c) Draft environmental impact statement (DEIS) means a preliminary 
statement on the environmental impact of a proposed or ongoing NHTSA 
action which is circulated for comment and review within and outside 
NHTSA.
    (d) Final environmental impact statement (FEIS) means a detailed 
statement which, pursuant to section 102(2)(C) of the National 
Environmental Policy Act, identifies and analyzes the anticipated 
environmental impact of a proposed or ongoing NHTSA action.
    (e) Negative declaration means a statement prepared subsequent to an 
environmental review, which states that a proposed or ongoing NHTSA 
action will have no significant environmental impact and therefore does 
not require a draft or final environmental impact statement.


<R05>
Sec. 520.4  Applicability.

    (a) Scope. This part applies to all elements of NHTSA, including the 
Regional Offices.
    (b) Actions covered. Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this 
section, this part applies to the following agency actions and such 
actions and proposals as may be sponsored jointly with another agency:
    (1) New and continuing programs and projects; budget proposals; 
legislative proposals by the agency; requests for appropriations; 
reports on legislation initiated elsewhere where the agency has primary 
responsibility for the subject matter involved; and any renewals or 
reapprovals of the foregoing;
    (2) Research, development, and demonstration projects; formal 
approvals of work plans; and associated contracts;
    (3) Rulemaking and regulatory actions, including Notices of Proposed 
Rulemaking (NPRM); requests for procurement (RFP); requests for grants 
(Annual Work Programs); and contracts;
    (4) All grants, loans or other financial assistance for use in State 
and Community projects;
    (5) Annual State Highway Safety Work Programs;
    (6) Construction; leases; purchases; operation of Federal 
facilities; and
    (7) Any other activity, project, or action likely to have a 
significant effect on the environment.
    (c) Continuing actions. This part applies to any action enumerated 
in paragraph (b) of this section, even though such actions arise from a 
project or program initiated prior to enactment of the National 
Environmental Policy Act on January 1, 1970.
    (d) Environmental assessments. Within the scope of activities listed 
in Sec. 520.4(b), any person outside the agency submitting a program or 
project proposal may be requested to prepare an environmental assessment 
of such proposed action to be included in his submission to the agency.
    (e) Exceptions. (1) Assistance in the form of general revenue 
sharing funds, distributed under the State and Local Fiscal Assistance 
Act of 1972, 31 U.S.C. 1221, with no control by the NHTSA over the 
subsequent use of such funds;

[[Page 69]]

    (2) Personnel actions;
    (3) Administrative procurements (e.g., general supplies) and 
contracts for personal services;
    (4) Legislative proposals originating in another agency and relating 
to matters not within NHTSA's primary areas of responsibility;
    (5) Project amendments (e.g., increases in costs) which have no 
environmental significance; and
    (6) Minor agency actions that are determined by the official 
responsible for the actions to be of such limited scope that they 
clearly will not have a significant effect on the quality of the human 
environment.
    (f) Consolidation of statements. Proposed actions (and alternatives 
thereto) having substantially similar environmental impacts may be 
covered by a single environmental review and environmental impact 
statement or negative declaration.


<R05>
Sec. 520.5  Guidelines for identifying major actions significantly affecting 

the environment.

    (a) General guidelines. The phrase, ``major Federal actions 
significantly affecting the quality of the human environment,'' as used 
in this part, shall be construed with a view to the overall, cumulative 
impact of the actions, other Federal projects or actions in the area, 
and any further contemplated or anticipated actions. Therefore, an 
environmental impact statement should be prepared in any of the 
following situations:
    (1) Proposed actions which are localized in their impact but which 
have a potential for significantly affecting the environment;
    (2) Any proposed action which is likely to be controversial on 
environmental grounds;
    (3) Any proposed action which has unclear but potentially 
significant environmental consequences.
    (b) Specific guidelines. While a precise definition of environmental 
significance that is valid in all contexts is not possible, any of the 
following actions should ordinarily be considered as significantly 
affecting the quality of the human environment:
    (1) Any matter falling under section 4(f) of the Department of 
Transportation Act (49 U.S.C. 1653(f)) and section 138 of Federal-aid 
highway legislation (23 U.S.C. 138), requiring the use of any publicly 
owned land from a park, recreation area, or wildlife and waterfowl 
refuge of national, State, or local significance as determined by the 
Federal, State, or local officials having jurisdiction thereof, or any 
land from an historic site of national, State, or local significance;
    (2) Any matter falling under section 106 of the National Historic 
Preservation Act of 1966 (16 U.S.C. 470(f)), requiring consideration of 
the effect of the proposed action on any building included in the 
National Register of Historic Preservation and reasonable opportunity 
for the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation to comment on such 
action;
    (3) Any action that is likely to affect the preservation and 
enhancement of sites of historical, architectural, or archaeological 
significance;
    (4) Any action that is likely to be highly controversial regarding 
relocation housing;
    (5) Any action that (i) divides or disrupts an established 
community, disrupts orderly, planned development, or is inconsistent 
with plans or goals that have been adopted by the community in which the 
project is located; or (ii) causes significantly increased congestion;
    (6) Any action that (i) involves inconsistency with any Federal, 
State, or local law or administrative determination relating to the 
environment; (ii) has a significantly detrimental impact on air or water 
quality or on ambient noise levels for adjoining areas; (iii) involves a 
possibility of contamination of a public water supply system; or (iv) 
affects ground water, flooding, erosion, or sedimentation;
    (7) Any action that may directly or indirectly result in a 
significant increase in noise levels, either within a motor vehicle's 
closed environment or upon nearby areas;
    (8) Any action that may directly or indirectly result in a 
significant increase in the energy or fuel necessary to operate a motor 
vehicle, including but not limited to the following: (i) Actions which 
may directly or indirectly result in a significant increase in the

[[Page 70]]

weight of a motor vehicle; and (ii) actions which may directly or 
indirectly result in a significant adverse effect upon the aerodynamic 
drag of a motor vehicle;
    (9) Any action that may directly or indirectly result in a 
significant increase in the amount of harmful emissions resulting from 
the operation of a motor vehicle;
    (10) Any action that may directly or indirectly result in a 
significant increase in either the use of or the exposure to toxic or 
hazardous materials in the manufacture, operation, or disposal of motor 
vehicles or motor vehicle equipment;
    (11) Any action that may directly or indirectly result in a 
significant increase in the problem of solid waste, as in the disposal 
of motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment;
    (12) Any action that may directly or indirectly result in a 
significant depletion of scarce natural resources associated with the 
manufacture or operation of motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment; 
and
    (13) Any other action that causes significant environment impact by 
directly or indirectly affecting human beings through adverse impacts on 
the environment.
    (c) Research activities. (1) In accord-ance with DOT Order 5610.1B, 
the Assistant Secretary for Systems Development and Technology (TST) 
will prepare, with the concurrence of the NHTSA, proposed procedures for 
assessing the environmental consequences of research activities. Until 
final procedures are promulgated, the following factors are to be 
considered for periodic evaluation to determine when an environmental 
statement is required for such programs:
    (i) The magnitude of Federal investment in the program;
    (ii) The likelihood of widespread application of the technology;
    (iii) The degree of environmental impact which would occur if the 
technology were widely applied; and
    (iv) The extent to which continued investment in the new technology 
is likely to restrict future alternatives.
    (2) The statement or environmental review culminating in a negative 
declaration must be written late enough in the development process to 
contain meaningful information, but early enough so that this 
information can practically serve as an input in the decision-making 
process. Where it is anticipated that an environmental impact statement 
may ultimately be required but its preparation is still premature, the 
office shall prepare a publicly available record briefly setting forth 
the reasons for its determination that a statement is not yet necessary. 
This record shall be updated at least quarterly, or as may be necessary 
when significant new information becomes available concerning the 
potential environmental impact of the program. In any case, a statement 
or environmental review culminating in a negative declaration must be 
prepared before research activities have reached a state of investment 
or commitment to implementation likely to determine subsequent 
development or restrict later alternatives. Statements on technology 
research and development programs shall include an analysis not only of 
alternative forms of the same technology that might reduce any adverse 
environmental impacts but also of alternative technologies that would 
serve the same function as the technology under consideration. Efforts 
shall be made to involve other Federal agencies and interested groups 
with relevant expertise in the preparation of such statements because 
the impacts and alternatives to be considered are likely to be less well 
defined than in other types of statements.


<R04>
                          Subpart B_Procedures


<R05>
Sec. 520.21  Preparation of environmental reviews, negative declarations, and 

notices of intent.

    (a) General responsibilities--(1) Associate Administrators and Chief 
Counsel. Each Associate Administrator and the Chief Counsel is 
responsible for determining, in accordance with Subpart A, whether the 
projects and activities under his jurisdiction require an environmental 
review, and for preparing all such reviews, negative declarations, and 
notices of intent.
    (2) Regional Administrators. Each Regional Administrator, in 
consultation with the Governor's Representative, is

[[Page 71]]

responsible for determining, in accordance with Subpart A, whether 
proposed State activities in his Region, as stated in Annual Work 
Programs, require an environmental review, and for the preparing all 
such reviews, negative declarations, and notices of intent.
    (3) Associate Administrator for Planning and Evaluation. The 
Associate Administrator for Planning and Evaluation may request in 
accordance with the requirements of this order, that the appropriate 
Associate Administrator or Regional Administrator prepare an 
Environmental review or Environmental Impact Statement for any proposed 
or continuing NHTSA action, or comment on any environmental statement 
prepared by other agencies.
    (b) Coordination. Coordination with appropriate local, State and 
Federal agencies should be accomplished during the early stages by the 
responsible official to assist in identifying areas of significance and 
concern. Existing procedures, including those established under the 
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Revised Circular A-95, should be 
used to the greatest extent practicable to accomplish this early 
coordination.
    (c) Applicants. (1) Each applicant for a grant, loan, or other 
financial assistance for use in State and community projects may be 
requested to submit, with the original application, an environmental 
assessment of the proposed project.
    (2) Under OMB Revised Circular A-95, ``Evaluation, Review, and 
Coordination of Federal Assistance Programs and Projects,'' and DOT 
4600.4B, ``Evaluation, Review and Coordination of DOT Assistance 
Programs and Projects,'' dated February 27, 1974, a grant applicant must 
notify the clearinghouse of its intention to apply for Federal program 
assistance. The notification must solicit comments on the project and 
its impacts from appropriate State and local agencies. Since it is the 
NHTSA's policy to assure that (i) interested parties and Federal, State, 
and local agencies receive early notification of the decision to prepare 
an environmental impact statement, and (ii) their comments on the 
environmental effects of the proposed Federal action are solicited at an 
early stage in the preparation of the draft impact statement, this early 
notification requirement may be met by a grant applicant by sending the 
notification to interested parties and agencies at the same time it is 
sent to the clearinghouse.
    (d) Consultants. Consultants may prepare background or preliminary 
material and assist in preparing a draft or final environmental 
statement for which the NHTSA takes responsibility. Care should be 
exercised in selecting consultants, and in reviewing their work, to 
insure complete and objective consideration of all relevant project 
impacts and alternatives, particularly if the consultant may expect 
further contracts based on the outcome of the environmental decision.
    (e) Environmental review report. The environmental review shall 
culminate in a brief written report of the same title, which shall be 
included in the proposed or ongoing agency action, and which:
    (1) Describes the proposed or ongoing NHTSA action, the environment 
affected, and the anticipated benefits;
    (2) Evaluates the potential environmental impact, including those 
adverse impacts which cannot be avoided, should the proposal be 
implemented or the action continued;
    (3) Assesses the alternatives to the proposed or ongoing action and 
their potential environmental impact;
    (4) Evaluates the cumulative and long-term environmental effects of 
the proposed or ongoing action;
    (5) Describes the irreversible and irretrievable commitments of 
resources involved in the proposal's implementation or the action's 
continuance;
    (6) Identifies any known or potential conflicts with State, 
regional, or local plans and programs;
    (7) Weighs and analyzes the anticipated benefits against the 
environmental and other costs of the proposed or ongoing action in a 
manner which reflects similar comparisons of reasonably available 
alternatives; and
    (8) Concludes with a negative declaration or recommends the 
preparation of a DEIS.
    (f) Negative declarations. (1) If the responsible official judges 
that the environmental impact of a proposed or ongoing action under his 
jurisdiction will

[[Page 72]]

not significantly affect the quality of the human environment, the 
following declaration will be included in the environmental review 
report:

It is the judgment of this agency, based on available information, that 
no significant environmental impact will result from execution of this 
action.

    (2) A DEIS may be changed to a negative declaration if the public 
review process indicates that the proposal or ongoing action will not 
have a significant effect upon the environment.
    (3) An index of all negative declarations and a copy of each 
environmental review report shall be retained by the responsible 
official under whose jurisdiction it was prepared and shall be made 
available for public inspection upon request.
    (g) Notice of intent to prepare a draft environmental impact 
statement. If the responsible official under whose jurisdiction an 
environmental review is prepared determines that the proposed or ongoing 
action could have a potentially significant effect on the quality of the 
environment, he shall: coordinate with the Associate Administrator for 
Planning and Evaluation and the Chief Counsel, transmit to appropriate 
Federal, State and local agencies and have published in the Federal 
Register a notice of intent to prepare an environmental statement as 
soon as is practicable after the determination to prepare such a 
statement.


<R05>
Sec. 520.22  Maintenance of a list of actions.

    (a) The Associate Administrator for Planning and Evaluation shall be 
responsible for the preparation and maintenance of a list of actions for 
which draft or final environmental impact statements have been or are to 
be prepared. This list shall be on file with the Associate Administrator 
for Planning and Evaluation and shall be available for public inspection 
in the Docket Section upon request. A copy of the initial list and its 
updatings at the end of each calendar quarter shall be transmitted by 
the Associate Administrator for Planning and Evaluation to TES and CEQ.
    (b) If a determination is made that an environmental statement is 
not necessary for a proposed action (1) which has been identified as 
normally requiring preparation of a statement, (2) which is similar to 
actions for which a significant number of statements have been prepared, 
(3) which the agency has previously announced would be the subject of a 
statement, or (4) for which the official responsible for such proposal 
has made a negative determination in response to a request from the CEQ, 
a record briefly setting forth the decision and the reasons for that 
determination shall be prepared by the responsible official. Such a 
record of negative determinations and any evaluations made pursuant to 
Sec. 520.21 which conclude that preparation of a statement is not yet 
timely shall be prepared by the responsible official, submitted to the 
Associate Administrator for Planning and Evaluation, and made available 
by the Associate Administrator for Planning and Evaluation in the same 
manner as provided in paragraph (a) of this section for lists of 
statements under preparation.


<R05>
Sec. 520.23  Preparation of draft environmental impact statements.

    (a) Planning stage. (1) When a DEIS is to be prepared, the 
responsible official shall promptly initiate its preparation and develop 
a schedule in consultation with the Associate Administrator for Planning 
and Evaluation, to assure completion prior to the first significant 
point of decision in the program or project development process.
    (2) The environmental impacts of proposed activities should be 
initially assessed concurrently with the initial technical and economic 
studies.
    (3) Section 102(2)(A) of NEPA requires each Federal agency to 
utilize a ``systematic, interdisciplinary approach'' to plans and 
programs affecting the environment. To assure that all environmental 
impacts are identified and assessed, all relevant disciplines should be 
represented. If the necessary disciplines are not represented on the 
staff of the applicant or NHTSA, it is appropriate to use professional 
services available in other Federal, State or local agencies, 
universities, or consulting firms. The use of the interdisciplinary 
approach should not be limited to the environmental statement. This 
approach should also be

[[Page 73]]

used in the early planning stages to help assure a systematic evaluation 
of reasonable alternative courses of action and their potential social, 
economic, and environmental consequences.
    (b) Form and content requirements. Attachment 1 of this order 
prescribes the form and content requirements to be followed for each 
draft and final environmental impact statement. The DEIS must fulfill 
and satisfy, to the fullest extent possible at the time it is prepared, 
the requirements established for final statements.
    (c) Lead agency. CEQ guidelines provide that when more than one 
Federal agency (1) directly sponsors an action, or is directly involved 
in an action through funding, licenses, or permits, or (2) is involved 
in a group of actions directly related to each other because of their 
functional interdependence and geographical proximity, consideration 
should be given to preparing one statement for all the Federal actions 
involved. Agencies in such cases should consider the designation of a 
single ``lead agency'' to assume supervisory responsibility for 
preparation of a joint statement. Where a lead agency prepares the 
statement, the other agencies involved should provide assistance with 
respect to their areas of jurisdiction and expertise. The statement 
should contain an evaluation of the full range of Federal actions 
involved, should reflect the views of all participating agencies, and 
should be prepared before major or irreversible actions have been taken 
by any of the participating agencies. Some relevant factors in 
determining an appropriate lead agency are: The time sequence in which 
the agencies become involved, the magnitude of their respective 
involvement, and their relative expertise with respect to the project's 
environmental effects. Questions concerning ``lead agency'' decisions 
should be raised with CEQ through TES. For projects serving and 
primarily involving land owned by or under the jurisdiction of another 
Federal agency, that agency may be the appropriate lead agency.
    (d) Applicants. Where the agency requests an applicant for financial 
assistance or other agency approval to submit an environmental 
assessment, the responsible official will (1) assist the applicant by 
outlining the information required, and (2) in all cases make his own 
evaluation of the environmental issues involved and take responsibility 
for the scope and content of draft and final environmental statements.


<R05>
Sec. 520.24  Internal processing of draft environmental impact statements.

    Before circulating a DEIS for external review, the official 
responsible for the DEIS shall receive the concurrence of the Associate 
Administrator for Planning and Evaluation and the Chief Counsel; and 
prepare a memorandum for approval by the Administrator which shall:
    (a) Set forth the basis on which it was determined that a 
potentially significant environmental effect exists;
    (b) Attach the DEIS;
    (c) Identify the Federal, State, and local agencies and private 
sources from which comments on the DEIS are proposed to be solicited 
(see Attachment 2); \1\ and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Filed as part of the original document.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (d) Include a recommendation on whether a public hearing on the 
proposed action should be held.


<R05>
Sec. 520.25  External review of draft environmental impact statements.

    (a) Requirements. The official responsible for the DEIS shall:
    (1) Transmit 5 copies of the DEIS to the CEQ and 2 copies to TES;
    (2) Solicit comments from all Federal, State, and local agencies 
which have jurisdiction by law or special expertise with respect to the 
possible environmental impact involved, and from the public (see 
Attachment 2); and
    (3) Inform the public and interested parties of the availability of 
the DEIS and provide copies as appropriate; and
    (4) Allow a comment period of not less than 45 days from the Friday 
of the week following receipt of the draft impact statement by CEQ. 
Requests for extensions shall be granted whenever possible, and 
particularly when warranted by the magnitude and complexity of the 
statement or the extent of citizen interest.
    (b) Procedures--(1) Federal and Federal-State agency review. (i) The 
DEIS

[[Page 74]]

shall be circulated for review to the Federal and Federal-State agencies 
with special expertise or jurisdiction by law with regard to the 
potential environmental impact involved. These agencies and their 
relevant areas of expertise are identified in Attachment 2.
    (ii) For actions within the jurisdiction of the Environmental 
Protection Agency (air or water quality, solid wastes, pesticides, 
radiation standards, noise), the DEIS shall be sent to EPA.
    (iii) For actions which would affect any property that is included 
in the National Register of Historic Preservation, the DEIS should be 
sent to the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation and the State 
Liaison Office for Historic Preservation.
    (2) State and local review. Where a review of the proposed action by 
State and local agencies authorized to develop and enforce environmental 
stand-ards is relevant, comments are to be solicited directly from such 
agencies with known responsibilities in environmental matters, and shall 
be obtained as follows:
    (i) Where review of direct Federal development projects, and of 
projects assisted under programs listed in Attachment D to revised OMB 
Circular A-95 (as implemented by DOT 4600.4B ``Evaluation, Review and 
Coordination of DOT Assistance Programs and Projects'', dated February 
27, 1974), takes place prior to preparation of an environmental 
statement, comments of the reviewing agencies on the environmental 
effects of the proposed project are inputs to the environmental 
statement. These comments shall be attached to the draft statement when 
it is circulated for review and copies of the draft shall be sent to 
those who commented. A-05 clearinghouses or other agencies designated by 
the Governor may also secure comments on environmental statements. In 
all cases, copies of the draft environmental statements shall be sent to 
clearinghouses and to the applicant whose project is the subject of the 
statement.
    (ii) Comments shall be directly obtained from appropriate State and 
local agencies, except where review is secured by agreement through A-95 
clearinghouses, unless the Governor of the appropriate State has 
designated some other point for obtaining his review. Instructions for 
obtaining the views of such agencies are contained in the joint OMB-CEQ 
memorandum (see Attachment 4). Comments shall be solicited from 
municipalities and counties on all projects located therein.
    (iii) State and local review of NHTSA procedures, regulations, and 
policies for administering Federal programs of assistance to State and 
local governments shall be obtained pursuant to procedures established 
by OMB Circular No. A-85.
    (iv) Generally, environmental statements on legislative and budget 
proposals may be excluded from State and local review.
    (3) General public review. (i) At the time the DEIS is circulated to 
Federal, State, and local agencies, public availability of the DEIS for 
comment and review will be announced by the CEQ in the Federal Register. 
Copies of the DEIS should be sent to known interested parties, and press 
releases should be sent to local news media advising where the DEIS is 
available and how copies may be obtained. The Office of Public Affairs 
and Consumer Services shall maintain a list of groups, including 
conservation organizations and motor vehicle manufacturers, known to be 
interested in the agency's activities, and directly notify such groups 
of the availability of the DEIS or send them a copy as soon as it has 
been prepared.
    (ii) A DEIS should be available to the public at least 30 days prior 
to the time of a public hearing on the DEIS.
    (iii) Copies of the DEIS will be made available at the NHTSA Docket 
Section, Room 5109, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590, and, 
where appropriate, NHTSA Regional Offices, at the offices of any 
applicants or grantees, at appropriate State, regional, and metropolitan 
clearing houses, and local public libraries, and furnished to public and 
private organizations and individuals with special expertise with 
respect to the potential environmental impact involved, and to those 
with an interest in the action who request an opportunity to comment. 
Copies to be made available to the public shall be provided without 
charge to the extent practicable, or at

[[Page 75]]

a fee which is not more than the actual cost of reproducing copies 
required to be sent to other Federal agencies, including the CEQ.
    (iv) A copy of the DEIS should in all cases be sent to any applicant 
whose project is the subject of the statement.
    (v) If a DEIS is changed to a negative declaration as a result of 
the public review process, all agencies and individuals that received 
copies and/or commented on the DEIS must be informed that a negative 
declaration was substituted for the DEIS and given a brief explanation 
of the reason for such substitution.
    (c) Utilization of comments. Comments received on the draft 
statement, and inputs (in summary form, if appropriate) from the 
processes for citizen participation, shall accompany the environmental 
statement through the normal internal project or program review process.


<R05>
Sec. 520.26  Public hearings.

    (a) A public hearing on a proposed or ongoing action covered by a 
DEIS shall be held upon the determination by the official responsible 
for such action, in consultation with the Associate Administrator for 
Planning and Evaluation, that a public hearing would be appropriate and 
in the public interest. In deciding whether a public hearing is 
appropriate, the responsible official should consider:
    (1) The magnitude of the proposal in terms of economic costs, the 
geographic area involved, and the uniqueness or size of the commitment 
of the resources involved;
    (2) The degree of interest in the proposal, as evidenced by requests 
from the public and from Federal, State, and local authorities that a 
hearing be held;
    (3) The likelihood that information will be presented at the hearing 
which will be of assistance to the agency in fulfilling its 
responsibilities under the NEPA;
    (4) The extent to which public involvement already has been achieved 
through other means, such as earlier public hearings, meetings with 
citizen representatives, and/or written comments on the proposed action; 
and
    (5) The extent of potential environmental impact.
    (b) If it is determined that a public hearing is to be held in 
accordance with paragraph (a) of this section, the official responsible 
for the action shall both announce the hearing through newspaper 
articles, direct notification to interested parties, and clearinghouses, 
and cause a notice to be issued in the Federal Register at least 30 days 
prior to the time of such hearing:
    (1) Identifying the subject matter of the hearing;
    (2) Announcing the date, time, and place of the hearing and the 
procedures to be followed; and
    (3) Announcing the availability of the DEIS and any other 
information, as appropriate, for public inspection at one or more 
locations in the area affected by the action.


<R05>
Sec. 520.27  Legislative actions.

    (a) A DEIS on both legislative proposals and reports for which NHTSA 
either develops the Departmental position or originates the legislation 
will be cleared with TES, filed with CEQ, and submitted to the Office of 
Management and Budget through the normal DOT and NHTSA legislative 
process.
    (b) The preparation, circulation, and filing of the environmental 
statement shall be in accordance with OMB Bulletin 72-6, ``Proposed 
Federal Actions Affecting the Environment.''
    (c) A DEIS and any comments that have been received should be 
available to the Congress and to the public for consideration in 
connection with the proposed legislation or report on proposed 
legislation. In cases where the scheduling of Congressional hearings on 
recommendations or reports on proposals for legislation which the 
Department has forwarded to the Congress does not allow adequate time 
for the completion of a FEIS, a DEIS may be furnished to the Congress 
and made available to the public pending transmittal of the comments as 
received and the final text.


<R05>
Sec. 520.28  Preparation of final environmental impact statements.

    (a) If the action is to go forward and the DEIS has not been changed 
to a

[[Page 76]]

negative declaration, as soon as practicable after the expiration of the 
comment period and hearing process, if any, the official responsible for 
the action shall prepare a final environmental impact statement (FEIS), 
taking into account all comments received and issues raised during such 
period and process.
    (b) The FEIS shall conform to the guidelines for form and content in 
Attachment 1.
    (c) The FEIS shall then be submitted to the Chief Counsel by the 
official responsible for the action, for determination of legal 
sufficiency.


<R05>
Sec. 520.29  Internal review of final environmental impact statements.

    (a) Upon completion of the review for legal sufficiency of the FEIS, 
the Chief Counsel shall transmit 2 copies of the FEIS to TES for 
concurrence. Unless other notification is provided within 2 weeks after 
receipt in TES, the statement will be considered concurred in by TES.
    (b) After concurrence by TES, the FEIS will be transmitted by the 
Chief Counsel to the Administrator for approval.
    (c) If an action requires the personal approval of the Secretary or 
Deputy Secretary pursuant to a request by them or by TES, TGC, or the 
NHTSA office originating the action, the final environmental statement 
shall be accompanied by a brief cover memorandum requesting the 
Secretary's or Deputy Secretary's approval of the action.
    (1) The memorandum shall have signature lines for the concurrence of 
the Assistant Secretary for Environment, Safety, and Consumer Affairs, 
the General Counsel, and the Deputy Secretary, and for the approval of 
the Secretary or Deputy Secretary.
    (2) TES, in conjunction with the Executive Secretary, is responsible 
for informing the Assistant Secretary for Congressional and 
Intergovernmental Affairs and the Office of Public Affairs of the 
Secretary's decisions so that they, in coordination with the operating 
administrations or other Secretarial Offices involved, may take the 
appropriate actions.


<R05>
Sec. 520.30  Availability of final environmental impact statements.

    (a) Pending final approval and filing with CEQ, a proposed FEIS may 
be made available to the public and Federal, State, or local agencies if 
it carries a notation that it is not approved and filed.
    (b) After approval by the Administrator, the Associate Administrator 
for Planning and Evaluation will send 5 copies of the FEIS (together 
with comments) to the CEQ; individual copies with comments attached to 
the EPA and all Federal, State, and local agencies and members of the 
public who submitted comments on the DEIS or requested copies of the 
FEIS. If the length of the statement or the number of comments make this 
distribution requirement highly impractical, TES should be consulted to 
consider an alternative arrangement.
    (c) Copies of the FEIS will be made available in the NHTSA Docket 
Section, Room 5109, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20590, and, 
where appropriate, NHTSA Regional Offices, at the offices of any 
applicants or grantees, and at appropriate State, regional, and 
metropolitan clearinghouses and, where the impact is localized, public 
libraries.
    (d) The official responsible for the action shall, upon request, 
make available copies of the FEIS and substantive comments received on 
the DEIS without charge to the extent practicable, or at a fee which is 
not more than the actual cost of reproducing copies.

(Authority: Secs. 102(a)(A), 102(2)(C), Pub. L. 91-190, 83 Stat. 853 (42 
U.S.C. 4332); secs. 2(b), 4(f), Pub. L. 89-670, 80 Stat. 931 (49 U.S.C. 
1651(b), 1653(f); E. O. 11514, 35 FR 4247; 40 CFR Part 1500; DOT Order 
5610.1B, 39 FR 35234; delegations of authority at 49 CFR 1.45, 1.50 and 
501.7)

[40 FR 52396, Nov. 10, 1975, as amended at 48 FR 44081, Sept. 27, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 520.31  Amendments or supplements.

    A draft or final environmental impact statement may be amended or 
supplemented. Supplements or amendments should be considered when 
substantial changes are made in the proposed or ongoing action that will 
introduce a new or changed environmental effect of significance to the 
quality of

[[Page 77]]

the environment, or significant new information becomes available 
concerning its environmental aspects. In such cases, the supplement or 
amendment shall be processed in consultation with TES with respect to 
the need for, or desirability of, recirculating the statement for the 
appropriate period. TES concurrence must be secured before issuance.


<R05>
Sec. 520.32  Emergency action procedures.

    The CEQ Guidelines allow modification of requirements in case of a 
national emergency, a disaster or similar great urgency. The processing 
times may be reduced, or if the emergency situation warrants, 
preparation and processing of a DEIS, FEIS, or negative declaration may 
be abbreviated. Such procedural changes, however, should be requested 
only for those projects where the need for immediate action requires 
processing in other than the normal manner.


<R05>
Sec. 520.33  Timing of proposed NHTSA actions.

    To the maximum extent practicable, no administrative action (i.e., 
any proposed action to be taken by the agency other than agency 
proposals for legislation to Congress, budget proposals, or agency 
reports on legislation) subject to this part and covered by an 
environmental impact statement shall be taken sooner than 90 days after 
a DEIS has been circulated for comment, furnished to the CEQ, and made 
public. Neither shall such administrative action be taken sooner than 30 
days after the FEIS (together with comments) has been filed with CEQ, 
and made available to commenting agencies and the public. If the FEIS is 
filed within 90 days after a DEIS has been circulated for comment, 
furnished to the CEQ and made public, the 30-day period and 90-day 
period may run concurrently to the extent that they overlap. The 90-day 
time period is measured from the date of publication in the Federal 
Register of the list of weekly filings of environmental impact 
statements with the CEQ, but the 30-day period is computed from the date 
of receipt by the CEQ.


<R05>
Sec. 520.34  Comments on environmental statements prepared by other agencies.

    (a) All requests for NHTSA's views on a DEIS or a proposed action 
undergoing environmental review by another agency will be transmitted to 
the Associate Administrator for Planning and Evaluation for action or 
referral to TES where appropriate. Offices within NHTSA may be requested 
by the Associate Administrator for Planning and Evaluation to supply any 
pertinent information and comments for a coordinated agency response.
    (b) NHTSA's comments and the comments of any offices responding to a 
request by the Associate Administrator for Planning and Evaluation 
should be organized in a manner consistent with the structure of an 
environmental review set out in Sec. 520.21(e). NHTSA programs that are 
environmentally related to the proposed action under review should be 
identified so interrelationships may receive due consideration.
    (c) Copies of NHTSA's comments on environmental statements prepared 
by other agencies shall be distributed as follows:
    (1) The original and 1 copy to the requesting agency;
    (2) 1 copy to TES-70; and
    (3) 5 copies to CEQ.
    (d) Requests by the public for copies should be referred to the 
agency originating the statement.


<R05>
            Sec. Attachment 1--Form and Content of Statement

    1. Form. a. Each statement will be headed as follows:

      department of transportation national highway traffic safety 
                             administration

    (Draft) Environmental Impact Statement Pursuant to section 
102(2)(C), Pub. L. 91-190; 83 Stat. 853; 42 U.S.C. 4332(2)(C).
    b. The heading specified above shall be modified to indicate that 
the statement also covers sections 4(f) of the DOT Act or 106 of the 
National Historic Preservation Act, when appropriate.
    c. Each statement will, as a minimum, contain sections corresponding 
to paragraph 3 herein, supplemented as necessary to cover other matters 
provided in this Attachment.
    d. The format for the summary to accompany draft and final 
environmental statements is as follows:

[[Page 78]]

                                 summary

    (Check one) ( ) Draft ( ) Final; Department of Transportation, 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Name, address, and 
telephone number of individual who can be contacted for additional 
information about the proposed action or the statement. (Note: DOT Order 
2100.2 prescribes procedures for reporting public contacts in 
rulemaking.)
    (1) Name of Action. (Check one) ( ) Administrative Action. ( ) 
Legislative Action.
    (2) Brief description of action indicating what States (and 
counties) are particularly affected.
    (3) Summary of environmental impact and adverse environmental 
effects.
    (4) List alternatives considered.
    (5)(a) (For draft statements) List all Federal, State, and local 
agencies from which comments have been requested.
    (b) (For final statements) List all Federal, State, and local 
agencies and other sources from which written comments have been 
received.
    (6) Dates the draft statement and the final statement if issued were 
made available to the Council on Environmental Quality and the public.
    2. Guidance as to content of statement. The following paragraphs of 
this Attachment are intended to be considered, where relevant, as 
guidance regarding the content of environmental statements. This 
guidance is expected to be supplemented by research reports, guidance on 
methodology, and other material from the literature as may be pertinent 
to evaluation of relevant environmental factors.
    3. General content. The following points are to be covered:
    a. A description of the proposed Federal action (e.g., ``The 
proposed Federal action is approval of a grant application to construct 
* * *''), a statement of its purpose, and a description of the 
environment affected, including information, summary technical data, and 
maps and diagrams where relevant, adequate to permit an assessment of 
potential environmental impact by commenting offices and the public.
    (1) Highly technical and specialized analyses and data should 
generally be avoided in the body of the draft impact statement. Such 
materials should be appropriately summarized in the body of the 
environmental statement and attached as appendices or footnoted with 
adequate bibliographic references.
    (2) The statement should succinctly describe the environment of the 
area affected as it exists prior to a proposed action, including other 
related Federal activities in the area, their interrelationships, and 
cumulative environmental impact. The amount of detail provided in such 
descriptions should be commensurate with the extent and expected impact 
of the action, and with the amount of information required at the 
particular level of decision making (planning, feasibility, design, 
etc.). In order to insure accurate descriptions and environmental 
considerations, site visits should be made where appropriate.
    (3) The statement should identify, as appropriate, population and 
growth characteristics of the affected area and any population and 
growth assumptions used to justify the project or program or to 
determine secondary population and growth impacts resulting from the 
proposed action and its alternatives (see paragraph 3c(2)). In 
discussing these population aspects, the statement should give 
consideration to using the rates of growth in the region of the project 
contained in the projection compiled for the Water Resources Council by 
the Bureau of Economic Analysis of the Department of Commerce and the 
Economic Research Service of the Department of Agriculture (the OBERS 
projection).
    (4) The sources of data used to identify, quantify, or evaluate any 
or all environmental consequences must be expressly noted.
    b. The relationship of the proposed action and how it may conform to 
or conflict with adopted or proposed land use plans, policies, controls, 
and goals and objectives as have been promulgated by affected 
communities. Where a conflict or inconsistency exists, the statement 
should describe the extent of reconciliation and the reasons for 
proceeding notwithstanding the absence of full reconciliation.
    c. The probable impact of the proposed action on the environment. 
(1) This requires assessment of the positive and negative effects of the 
proposed action is it affects both national and international human 
environment. The attention given to different environmental factors will 
vary according to the nature, scale, and location of proposed actions. 
Among factors to be considered should be the potential effect of the 
action on such aspects of the environment as those listed in Attachment 
2, and in section 520.5(b), supra. Primary attention should be given in 
the statement to discussing those factors most evidently impacted by the 
proposed action.
    (2) Secondary and other foreseeable effects, as well as primary 
consequences for the environment, should be included in the analyses. 
Secondary effects, such as the impact on fuel consumption, emissions, or 
noise levels of automobiles or in the use of toxic or scarce materials, 
may be more substantial than the primary effects of the original action.
    d. Alternatives to the proposed action, including, where relevant, 
those not within the

[[Page 79]]

existing authority of the responsible preparing office. Section 
102(2)(D) of NEPA requires the responsible agency to ``study, develop, 
and describe appropriate alternatives to recommended courses of action 
in any proposal which involves unresolved conflicts concerning 
alternative uses of available resources.'' A rigorous exploration and an 
objective evaluation of the environmental impacts of all reasonable 
alternative actions, particularly those that might enhance environmental 
quality or avoid some or all of the adverse environmental effects, are 
essential. Sufficient analysis of such alternatives and their 
environmental benefits, costs, and risks should accompany the proposed 
action through the review process in order not to foreclose prematurely 
options which might enhance environmental quality or have less 
detrimental effects. Examples of such alternatives include: The 
alternatives of not taking any action or of postponing action pending 
further study; alternatives requiring actions of a significantly 
different nature which would provide similar benefits with different 
environmental impacts, e.g., low capital intensive improvements, mass 
transit alternatives to highway construction; alternatives related to 
different locations or designs or details of the proposed action which 
would present different environmental impacts. In each case, the 
analysis should be sufficiently detailed to reveal comparative 
evaluation of the environmental benefits, costs, and risks of the 
proposed action and each reasonable alternative. Where an existing 
impact statement already contains such an analysis its treatment of 
alternatives may be incorporated, provided such treatment is current and 
relevant to the precise purpose of the proposed action.
    e. Any probable adverse environmental effacts which cannot be 
avoided (such as water or air pollution, noise, undesirable land use 
patterns, or impacts on public parks and recreation areas, wildlife and 
waterfowl refuges, or on historic sites, damage to life systems, traffic 
congestion, threats to health, or other consequences adverse to the 
environmental goals set out in section 101(b) of NEPA). This should be a 
brief section summarizing in one place those effects discussed in 
paragraph 3c that are adverse and unavoidable under the proposed action. 
Included for purposes of contrast should be a clear statement of how all 
adverse effects will be mitigated. Where mitigating steps are included 
in the statement, the responsible official shall see that they are 
carried out.
    f. The relationship between local short-term uses of man's 
environment and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term 
productivity. This section should contain a brief discussion of the 
extent to which the proposed action involves tradeoffs between short-
term environmental gains at the expense of long-term losses, or vice 
versa, and a discussion of the extent to which the proposed action 
forecloses future options.
    g. Any irreversible and irretrievable commitments of resources that 
would be involved in the proposed action should it be implemented. This 
requires identification of unavoidable impacts and the extent to which 
the action irreversibly curtails the range of potential uses of the 
environment. ``Resources'' means not only the labor and materials 
devoted to an action but also the natural and cultural resources lost or 
destroyed.
    h. An indication of what other interests and considerations of 
Federal policy are thought to offset the adverse environmental effects 
of the proposed action identified pursuant to subparagraphs (c) and (e) 
of this paragraph. The statement should also indicate the extent to 
which these stated countervailing benefits could be realized by 
following reasonable alternatives to the proposed action (as identified 
in subparagraph (d) of this paragraph) that would avoid some or all of 
the adverse environmental effects. In this connection if a cost-benefit 
analysis of the proposed action has been prepared, it, or a summary, 
should be attached to the environmental impact statement, and should 
clearly indicate the extent to which environmental costs have not been 
reflected in such analysis.
    i. A discussion of problems and objections raised by other Federal 
agencies, State and local entities, and citizens in the review process, 
and the disposition of the issues involved and the reasons therefor. 
(This section shall be added to the final environmental statement at the 
end of the review process.)
    (1) The draft and final statements should document issues raised 
through consultations with Federal, State, and local agencies with 
jurisdiction or special expertise and with citizens, of actions taken in 
response to comments, public hearings, and other citizens involvement 
proceedings.
    (2) Any unresolved environmental issues and efforts to resolve them, 
through further consultations or otherwise, should be identified in the 
final statement. For instance, where an agency comments that the 
statement has inadequate analysis or that the agency has reservations 
concerning the impacts, or believes that the impacts are too adverse for 
approval, either the issue should be resolved or the final statement 
should reflect efforts to resolve the issue and set forth any action 
that will result.
    (3) The statement should reflect that every effort was made to 
discover and discuss all major points of view on the environmental 
effects of the proposed action and alternatives in the draft statement. 
However, where opposing professional views and responsible opinion have 
been overlooked in the draft statement and are raised through

[[Page 80]]

the commenting process, the environmental effects of the action should 
be reviewed in light of those views. A meaningful reference should be 
made in the final statement to the existence of any responsible opposing 
view not adequately discussed in the draft statement indicating 
responses to the issues raised.
    (4) All substantive comments received on the draft (or summaries of 
responses from the public which have been exceptionally voluminous) 
should be attached to the final statement, whether or not each such 
comment is thought to merit individual discussion in the text of the 
statement.
    j. Draft statement should indicate at appropriate points in the text 
any underlying studies, reports, and other information obtained and 
considered in preparing the statement, including any cost-benefit 
analyses prepared. In the case of documents not likely to be easily 
accessible (such as internal studies or reports), the statement should 
indicate how such information may be obtained. If such information is 
attached to the statement, care should be taken to insure that the 
statement remains an essentially self-contained instrument, capable of 
being understood by the reader without the need for undue cross 
reference.
    4. Publicly owned parklands, recreational areas, wildlife and 
waterfowl refuges and historic sites. The following points are to be 
covered:
    a. Description of ``any publicly owned land from a public park, 
recreational area or wildlife and waterfowl refuge'' or ``any land from 
an historic site'' affected or taken by the project. This includes its 
size, available activities, use, patronage, unique or irreplaceable 
qualities, relationship to other similarly used lands in the vicinity of 
the project, maps, plans, slides, photographs, and drawings showing a 
sufficient scale and detail the project. This also includes its impact 
on park, recreation, wildlife, or historic areas, and changes in 
vehicular or pedestrian access.
    b. Statement of the ``national, State or local significance'' of the 
entire park, recreational area, refuge, or historic site ``as determined 
by the Federal, State or local officials having jurisdiction thereof.''
    (1) In the absence of such a statement lands will be presumed to be 
significant. Any statement of ``insignificance'' by the official having 
jurisdiction is subject to review by the Department as to whether such 
statement is capricious.
    (2) Where Federal lands are administered for multiple uses, the 
Federal official having jurisdiction over the lands shall determine 
whether the subject lands are in fact being used for park, recreation, 
wildlife, waterfowl, or historic purposes.
    c. Similar data, as appropriate, for alternative designs and 
locations, including detailed cost estimates (with figures showing 
percentage differences in total project costs) and technical 
feasibility, and appropriate analysis of the alternatives, including any 
unique problems present and evidence that the cost or community 
disruptions resulting from alternative routes reach extraordinary 
magnitudes. This portion of the statement should demonstrate compliance 
with the Supreme Court's statement in the Overton Park case, as follows:
    [The] very existence of the statute indicates that protection of 
parkland was to be given paramount importance. The few green havens that 
are public parks were not to be lost unless there were truly unusual 
factors present in a particular case or the cost or community disruption 
resulting from alternative routes reached extraordinary magnitudes. If 
the statutes are to have any meaning, the Secretary cannot approve the 
destruction of parkland unless he finds that alternative routes present 
unique problems. 401 U.S. 402, 412 (1971).
    d. If there is no feasible and prudent alternative, description of 
all planning undertaken to minimize harm to the protected area and 
statement of actions taken or to be taken to implement this planning, 
including measures to maintain or enhance the natural beauty of the 
lands traversed.
    (1) Measures to minimize harm may include replacement of land and 
facilities, providing land or facilities, provision for functional 
replacement of the facility (see 49 CFR 25.267).
    (2) Design measures to minimize harm; e.g., tunneling, cut and 
cover, cut and fill, treatment of embankments, planting, screening, 
maintenance of pedestrian or bicycle paths and noise mitigation measures 
all reflecting utilization of appropriate interdisciplinary design 
personnel.
    e. Evidence of concurrence or description of efforts to obtain 
concurrence of Federal, State or local officials having jurisdiction 
over the section 4(f) property regarding the action proposed and the 
measures planned to minimize harm.
    f. If Federally-owned properties are involved in highway projects, 
the final statement shall include the action taken or an indication of 
the expected action after filing a map of the proposed use of the land 
or other appropriate documentation with the Secretary of the Department 
supervising the land (23 U.S.C. 317).
    g. If land acquired with Federal grant money (Department of Housing 
and Urban Development open space or Bureau of Outdoor Recreation land 
and water conservation funds) is involved, the final statement shall 
include appropriate communications with the grantor agency.
    h. TGC will determine application of section 4(f) to public 
interests in lands, such as easements, reversions, etc.

[[Page 81]]

    i. A specific finding by the Administrator that there is no feasible 
and prudent alternative and that the proposal includes all possible 
planning to minimize harm to the ``4(f) area'' involved.
    5. Properties and sites of historic and cultural significance. The 
statement should document actions taken to preserve and enhance 
districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects of historical, 
architectural, archeological, or cultural significance affected by the 
action.
    a. Draft environmental statements should include identification, 
through consulting the National Register and applying the National 
Register Criteria (36 CFR part 800), of properties that are included in 
or eligible for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places 
that may be affected by the project. The National Register is published 
in its entirety each February in the Federal Register. Monthly additions 
and listings of eligible properties are published in the Federal 
Register the first Tuesday of each month. The Secretary of the Interior 
will advise, upon request, whether properties are eligible for the 
National Register.
    b. If application of the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation's 
(ACHP) Criteria of Effect (36 CFR part 800) indicates that the project 
will have an effect upon a property included in or eligible for 
inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places, the draft 
environmental statement should document the effect. Evaluation of the 
effect should be made in consultation with the State Historic 
Preservation Officer (SHPO) and in accordance with the ACHP's criteria 
of Adverse Effect (36 CFR part 800).
    c. Determinations of no adverse effect should be documented in the 
draft statement with evidence of the application of the ACHP's Criteria 
of Adverse Effect, the views of the appropriate State Historic 
Preservation Officer, and submission of the determination to the ACHP 
for review.
    d. If the project will have an adverse effect upon a property 
included in or eligible for inclusion in the National Register of 
Historic Places, the final environmental statement should include either 
an executed Memorandum of Agreement or comments from the Council after 
consideration of the project at a meeting of the ACHP and an account of 
actions to be taken in response to the comments of the ACHP. Procedures 
for obtaining a Memorandum of Agreement and the comments of the Council 
are found in 36 CFR part 800.
    e. To determine whether the project will have an effect on 
properties of State or local historical, architectural, archaeological, 
or cultural significance not included in or eligible for inclusion in 
the National Register, the responsible official should consult with the 
State Historic Preservation Officer, with the local official having 
jurisdiction of the property, and where appropriate, with historical 
societies, museums, or academic institutions having expertise with 
regard to the property. Use of land from historic properties of Federal, 
State and local significance as determined by the official having 
jurisdiction thereof involves section 4(f) of the DOT Act and 
documentation should include information necessary to consider a 4(f) 
determination (see paragraph 4).
    6. Impacts of the proposed action on the human environment involving 
community disruption and relocation. a. The statement should include a 
description of probable impact sufficient to enable an understanding of 
the extent of the environmental and social impact of the project 
alternatives and to consider whether relocation problems can be properly 
handled. This would include the following information obtainable by 
visual inspection of the proposed affected area and from secondary 
sources and community sources when available.
    (1) An estimate of the households to be displaced including the 
family characteristics (e.g., minorities, and income levels, tenure, the 
elderly, large families).
    (2) Impact on the human environment of an action which divides or 
disrupts an established community, including where pertinent, the effect 
of displacement on types of families and individuals affected, effect of 
streets cut off, separation of residences from community facilities, 
separation of residential areas.
    (3) Impact on the neighborhood and housing to which relocation is 
likely to take place (e.g., lack of sufficient housing for large 
families, doublings up).
    (4) An estimate of the businesses to be displaced, and the general 
effect of business dislocation on the economy of the community.
    (5) A discussion of relocation housing in the area and the ability 
to provide adequate relocation housing for the types of families to be 
displaced. If the resources are insufficient to meet the estimated 
displacement needs, a description of the actions proposed to remedy this 
situation including, if necessary, use of housing of last resort.
    (6) Results of consultation with local officials and community 
groups regarding the impacts to the community affected. Relocation 
agencies and staff and other social agencies can help to describe 
probable social impacts of this proposed action.
    (7) Where necessary, special relocation advisory services to be 
provided the elderly, handicapped and illiterate regarding 
interpretations of benefits, assistance in selecting replacement housing 
and consultation with respect to acquiring, leasing, and occupying 
replacement housing.
    b. This data should provide the preliminary basis for assurance of 
the availability of relocation housing as required by DOT

[[Page 82]]

5620.1, Replacement Housing Policy, dated June 24, 1970, and 49 CFR 
25.53.
    7. Considerations relating to pedestrians and bicyclists. Where 
appropriate, the statement should discuss impacts on and consideration 
to be given in the development of the project to pedestrian and bicycle 
access, movement and safety within the affected area, particularly in 
medium and high density commercial and residential areas.
    8. Other social impacts. The general social groups specially 
benefitted or harmed by the proposed action should be identified in the 
statement including the following:
    a. Particular effects of a proposal on the elderly, handicapped, 
non-drivers, transit dependent, or minorities should be described to the 
extent reasonably predictable.
    b. How the proposal will facilitate or inhibit their access to jobs, 
educational facilities, religious institutions, health and welfare 
services, recreational facilities, social and cultural facilities, 
pedestrian movement facilities, and public transit services.
    9. Standards as to noise, air, and water pollution. The statement 
shall reflect sufficient analysis of the effects of the proposed action 
on attainment and maintenance of any environmental standards established 
by law or administrative determination (e.g., noise, ambient air 
quality, water quality) including the following documentation:
    a. With respect to water quality, there should be consultation with 
the agency responsible for the State water pollution control program as 
to conformity with standards and regulations regarding storm sewer 
discharge sedimentation control, and other non-point source discharges.
    b. The comments or determinations of the offices charged with 
administration of the State's implementation plan for air quality as to 
the consistency of the project with State plans for the implementation 
of ambient air quality standards.
    c. Conformity to adopted noise standards, compatible, if 
appropriate, with different land uses.
    10. Energy supply and natural resources development. Where 
applicable, the statement should reflect consideration of whether the 
project or program will have any effect on either the production or 
consumption of energy and other natural resources, and discuss such 
effects if they are significant.
    11. Flood hazard evaluation. When an alternative under consideration 
encroaches on a flood plain, the statement should include evidence that 
studies have been made and evidence of consultations with agencies with 
expertise have been carried out. Necessary measures to handle flood 
hazard problems should be described. In compliance with Executive Order 
11296, and Flood Hazard Guidelines for Federal Executive Agencies, 
promulgated by the Water Resources Council, or how such requirements can 
be met during project development.
    12. Considerations relating to wetlands or coastal zones. Where 
wetlands or coastal zones are involved, the statement should include:
    a. Information on location, types, and extent of wetlands areas 
which might be affected by the proposed action.
    b. An assessment of the impacts resulting from both construction and 
operation of the project on the wetlands and associated wildlife, and 
measures to minimize adverse impacts.
    c. A statement by the local representative of the Department of the 
Interior, and any other responsible officials with special expertise, 
setting forth his views on the impacts of the project on the wetlands, 
the worth of the particular wetlands areas involved to the community and 
to the Nation, and recommendations as to whether the proposed action 
should proceed, and, if applicable, along what alternative route.
    d. Where applicable, a discussion of how the proposed project 
relates to the State coastal zone management program for the particular 
State in which the project is to take place.
    13. Construction impacts. In general, adverse impacts during 
construction will be of less importance than long-term impacts of a 
proposal. Nonetheless, statements should appropriately address such 
matters as the following identifying any special problem areas:
    a. Noise impacts from construction and any specifications setting 
maximum noise levels.
    b. Disposal of spoil and effect on borrow areas and disposal sites 
(include specifications where special problems are involved).
    c. Measures to minimize effects on traffic and pedestrians.
    14. Land use and urban growth. The statement should include, to the 
extent relevant and predictable:
    a. The effect of the project on land use, development patterns, and 
urban growth.
    b. Where significant land use and development impacts are 
anticipated, identify public facilities needed to serve the new 
development and any problems or issues which would arise in connection 
with these facilities, and the comments of agencies that would provide 
these facilities.

[[Page 83]]


<R05>
 Sec. Attachment 2--Areas of Environmental Impact and Federal Agencies 

and Federal-State Agencies With Jurisdiction by Law or Special Expertise 

                           To Comment Thereon

    Editorial Note: Filed as part of the original document. For text see 
39 FR 32546, Sept. 30, 1975.


<R05>
  Sec. Attachment 3--Offices Within Federal Agencies and Federal-State 

 Agencies for Information Regarding the Agencies' Impact Statements for 

                      Which Comments Are Requested

    Editorial Note: Filed as part of the original document. For text see 
39 FR 35248, Sept. 30, 1975.


<R05>
  Sec. Attachment 4--State and Local Agency Review of Impact Statements

    1. OBM Revised Circular No. A-95 through its system of 
clearinghouses provides a means for securing the views of State and 
local environmental agencies, which can assist in the preparation of 
impact statements. Under A-95, review of the proposed project in the 
case of federally assisted projects (Part I of A-95) generally takes 
place prior to the preparation of the impact statement. Therefore, 
comments on the environmental effects of the proposed project that are 
secured during this stage of the A-95 process represent inputs to the 
environmental impact statement.
    2. In the case of direct Federal development (Part II of A-95), 
Federal agencies are required to consult with clearinghouses at the 
earliest practicable time in the planning of the project or activity. 
Where such consultation occurs prior to completion of the draft impact 
statement, comments relating to the environmental effects of the 
proposed action would also represent inputs to the environmental impact 
statement.
    3. In either case, whatever comments are made on environmental 
effects of proposed Federal or federally assisted projects by 
clearinghouses, or by State and local environmental agencies through 
clearinghouses, in the course of the A-95 review should be attached to 
the draft impact statement when it is circulated for review. Copies of 
the statement should be sent to the agencies making such comments. 
Whether those agencies then elect to comment again on the basis of the 
draft impact statement is a matter to be left to the discretion of the 
commenting agency depending on its resources, the significance of the 
project and the extent to which its earlier comments were considered in 
preparing the draft statement.
    4. The clearinghouses may also be used, by mutual agreement, for 
securing reviews of the draft environmental impact statement. However, 
the Federal agency may wish to deal directly with appropriate State or 
local agencies in the review of impact statements because the 
clearinghouses may be unwilling or unable to handle this phase of the 
process. In some cases, the Governor may have designated a specific 
agency, other than the clearinghouse, for securing reviews of impact 
statements. In any case, the clearinghouses should be sent copies of the 
impact statement.
    5. To aid clearinghouses in coordinating State and local comments, 
draft statements should include copies of State and local agency 
comments made earlier under the A-95 process and should indicate on the 
summary sheet those other agencies from which comments have been 
requested, as specified in Attachment 1.


<R03>
PART 523_VEHICLE CLASSIFICATION--Table of Contents



Sec.
523.1 Scope.
523.2 Definitions.
523.3 Automobile.
523.4 Passenger automobile.
523.5 Non-passenger automobile.
523.6 Heavy-duty vehicle.
523.7 Heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans.
523.8 Heavy-duty vocational vehicle.
523.9 Truck tractors.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 32901, delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.


<R05>
Sec. 523.1  Scope.

    This part establishes categories of vehicles that are subject to 
title V of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, 15 U.S.C. 
2001 et seq.

(Sec. 301, Pub. L. 94-163, 80 Stat. 901 (15 U.S.C. 2001))

[42 FR 38362, July 28, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 523.2  Definitions.

    Approach angle means the smallest angle, in a plane side view of an 
automobile, formed by the level surface on which the automobile is 
standing and a line tangent to the front tire static loaded radius arc 
and touching the underside of the automobile forward of the front tire.
    Axle clearance means the vertical distance from the level surface on 
which an automobile is standing to the lowest

[[Page 84]]

point on the axle differential of the automobile.
    Base tire means the tire specified as standard equipment by a 
manufacturer on each vehicle configuration of a model type.
    Basic vehicle frontal area is used as defined in 40 CFR 86.079-2.
    Breakover angle means the supplement of the largest angle, in the 
plan side view of an automobile, that can be formed by two lines tangent 
to the front and rear static loaded radii arcs and intersecting at a 
point on the underside of the automobile.
    Cargo-carrying volume means the luggage capacity or cargo volume 
index, as appropriate, and as those terms are defined in 40 CFR 600.315, 
in the case of automobiles to which either of those terms apply. With 
respect to automobiles to which neither of those terms apply ``cargo-
carrying volume'' means the total volume in cubic feet rounded to the 
nearest 0.1 cubic feet of either an automobile's enclosed nonseating 
space that is intended primarily for carrying cargo and is not 
accessible from the passenger compartment, or the space intended 
primarily for carrying cargo bounded in the front by a vertical plane 
that is perpendicular to the longitudinal centerline of the automobile 
and passes through the rearmost point on the rearmost seat and elsewhere 
by the automobile's interior surfaces.
    Curb weight is defined the same as vehicle curb weight in 40 CFR 
part 86.
    Departure angle means the smallest angle, in a plane side view of an 
automobile, formed by the level surface on which the automobile is 
standing and a line tangent to the rear tire static loaded radius arc 
and touching the underside of the automobile rearward of the rear tire.
    Footprint is defined as the product of track width (measured in 
inches, calculated as the average of front and rear track widths, and 
rounded to the nearest tenth of an inch) times wheelbase (measured in 
inches and rounded to the nearest tenth of an inch), divided by 144 and 
then rounded to the nearest tenth of a square foot. For purposes of this 
definition, track width is the lateral distance between the centerlines 
of the base tires at ground, including the camber angle. For purposes of 
this definition, wheelbase is the longitudinal distance between front 
and rear wheel centerlines.
    Gross vehicle weight rating means the value specified by the 
manufacturer as the loaded weight of a single vehicle.
    Light truck means a non-passenger automobile as defined in Sec. 
523.5.
    Medium duty passenger vehicle means a vehicle which would satisfy 
the criteria in Sec. 523.5 (relating to light trucks) but for its gross 
vehicle weight rating or its curb weight, which is rated at more than 
8,500 lbs GVWR or has a vehicle curb weight of more than 6,000 pounds or 
has a basic vehicle frontal area in excess of 45 square feet, and which 
is designed primarily to transport passengers, but does not include a 
vehicle that:
    (1) Is an ``incomplete truck'' as defined in this subpart; or
    (2) Has a seating capacity of more than 12 persons; or
    (3)Is designed for more than 9 persons in seating rearward of the 
driver's seat; or
    (4) Is equipped with an open cargo area (for example, a pick-up 
truck box or bed) of 72.0 inches in interior length or more. A covered 
box not readily accessible from the passenger compartment will be 
considered an open cargo area for purposes of this definition.
    Passenger-carrying volume means the sum of the front seat volume 
and, if any, rear seat volume, as defined in 40 CFR 600.315, in the case 
of automobiles to which that term applies. With respect to automobiles 
to which that term does not apply, ``passenger-carrying volume'' means 
the sum in cubic feet, rounded to the nearest 0.1 cubic feet, of the 
volume of a vehicle's front seat and seats to the rear of the front 
seat, as applicable, calculated as follows with the head room, shoulder 
room, and leg room dimensions determined in accordance with the 
procedures outlined in Society of Automotive Engineers Recommended 
Practice J1100a, Motor Vehicle Dimensions (Report of Human Factors 
Engineering Committee, Society of Automotive Engineers, approved 
September 1973 and last revised September 1975).
    (a) For front seat volume, divide 1,728 into the product of the 
following SAE

[[Page 85]]

dimensions, measured in inches to the nearest 0.1 inches, and round the 
quotient to the nearest 0.001 cubic feet.
    (1) H61-Effective head room--front.
    (2) W3-Shoulder room--front.
    (3) L34-Maximum effective leg room-accelerator.
    (b) For the volume of seats to the rear of the front seat, divide 
1,728 into the product of the following SAE dimensions, measured in 
inches to the nearest 0.1 inches, and rounded the quotient to the 
nearest 0.001 cubic feet.
    (1) H63-Effective head room--second.
    (2) W4-Shoulder room--second.
    (3) L51-Minimum effective leg room--second.
    Running clearance means the distance from the surface on which an 
automobile is standing to the lowest point on the automobile, excluding 
unsprung weight.
    Static loaded radius arc means a portion of a circle whose center is 
the center of a standard tire-rim combination of an automobile and whose 
radius is the distance from that center to the level surface on which 
the automobile is standing, measured with the automobile at curb weight, 
the wheel parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline, and the 
tire inflated to the manufacturer's recommended pressure.
    Temporary living quarters means a space in the interior of an 
automobile in which people may temporarily live and which includes 
sleeping surfaces, such as beds, and household conveniences, such as a 
sink, stove, refrigerator, or toilet.
    Work truck means a vehicle that is rated at more than 8,500 and less 
than or equal to 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, and is not a 
medium-duty passenger vehicle as defined in 40 CFR 86.1803-01 effective 
as of December 20, 2007.

(Sec. 9, Pub. L. 89-670, 80 Stat. 981 (49 U.S.C. 1657); sec. 301, Pub. 
L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 901 (15 U.S.C. 2002); delegation of authority at 41 
FR 25015, June 22, 1976)

[42 FR 38362, July 28, 1977, as amended at 43 FR 12013, Mar. 23, 1978; 
71 FR 17676, Apr. 6, 2006; 71 FR 19450, Apr. 14, 2006; 74 FR 14449, Mar. 
30, 2009]

    Effective Date Note: At 76 FR 57490, Sept. 15, 2011, Sec. 523.2 was 
revised, effective November 14, 2011. For the convenience of the user, 
the revised text is set forth as follows:


<R05>
Sec. 523.2  Definitions.

    As used in this part:
    Approach angle means the smallest angle, in a plane side view of an 
automobile, formed by the level surface on which the automobile is 
standing and a line tangent to the front tire static loaded radius arc 
and touching the underside of the automobile forward of the front tire.
    Axle clearance means the vertical distance from the level surface on 
which an automobile is standing to the lowest point on the axle 
differential of the automobile.
    Base tire means the tire specified as standard equipment by a 
manufacturer on each subconfiguration of a model type.
    Basic vehicle frontal area is used as defined in 40 CFR 86.1803.
    Breakover angle means the supplement of the largest angle, in the 
plan side view of an automobile that can be formed by two lines tangent 
to the front and rear static loaded radii arcs and intersecting at a 
point on the underside of the automobile.
    Cab-complete vehicle means a vehicle that is first sold as an 
incomplete vehicle that substantially includes the vehicle cab section 
as defined in 40 CFR 1037.801. For example, vehicles known commercially 
as chassis-cabs, cab-chassis, box-deletes, bed-deletes, cut-away vans 
are considered cab-complete vehicles. A cab includes a steering column 
and passenger compartment. Note a vehicle lacking some components of the 
cab is a cab-complete vehicle if it substantially includes the cab.
    Cargo-carrying volume means the luggage capacity or cargo volume 
index, as appropriate, and as those terms are defined in 40 CFR 600.315, 
in the case of automobiles to which either of those terms apply. With 
respect to automobiles to which neither of those terms apply ``cargo-
carrying volume'' means the total volume in cubic feet rounded to the 
nearest 0.1 cubic feet of either an automobile's enclosed nonseating 
space that is intended primarily for carrying cargo and is not 
accessible from the passenger compartment, or the space intended 
primarily for carrying cargo bounded in the front by a vertical plane 
that is perpendicular to the longitudinal centerline of the automobile 
and passes through the rearmost point on the rearmost seat and elsewhere 
by the automobile's interior surfaces.
    Class 2b vehicles are vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating 
(GVWR) ranging from 8,501 to 10,000 pounds.
    Class 3 through Class 8 vehicles are vehicles with a gross vehicle 
weight rating (GVWR) of 10,001 pounds or more as defined in 49 CFR 
565.15.
    Commercial medium- and heavy-duty on-highway vehicle means an on-
highway vehicle

[[Page 86]]

with a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more as defined 
in 49 U.S.C. 32901(a)(7).
    Complete vehicle means a vehicle that requires no further 
manufacturing operations to perform its intended function and is a 
functioning vehicle that has the primary load carrying device or 
container (or equivalent equipment) attached or that is designed to pull 
a trailer. Examples of equivalent equipment would include fifth wheel 
trailer hitches, firefighting equipment, and utility booms.
    Curb weight is defined the same as vehicle curb weight in 40 CFR 
86.1803-01.
    Departure angle means the smallest angle, in a plane side view of an 
automobile, formed by the level surface on which the automobile is 
standing and a line tangent to the rear tire static loaded radius arc 
and touching the underside of the automobile rearward of the rear tire.
    Final stage manufacturer has the meaning given in 49 CFR 567.3.
    Footprint is defined as the product of track width (measured in 
inches, calculated as the average of front and rear track widths, and 
rounded to the nearest tenth of an inch) times wheelbase (measured in 
inches and rounded to the nearest tenth of an inch), divided by 144 and 
then rounded to the nearest tenth of a square foot. For purposes of this 
definition, track width is the lateral distance between the centerlines 
of the base tires at ground, including the camber angle. For purposes of 
this definition, wheelbase is the longitudinal distance between front 
and rear wheel centerlines.
    Gross combination weight rating or GCWR means the value specified by 
the manufacturer as the maximum allowable loaded weight of a combination 
vehicle (e.g. tractor plus trailer).
    Gross vehicle weight rating or GVWR means the value specified by the 
vehicle manufacturer as the maximum design loaded weight of a single 
vehicle (e.g. vocational vehicle).
    Heavy-duty engine means any engine used for (or for which the engine 
manufacturer could reasonably expect to be used for) motive power in a 
heavy-duty vehicle. For purposes of this definition in this part, the 
term ``engine'' includes internal combustion engines and other devices 
that convert chemical fuel into motive power. For example, a fuel cell 
and motor used in a heavy-duty vehicle is a heavy-duty engine.
    Heavy-duty off-road vehicle means a heavy-duty vocational vehicle or 
vocational tractor that is intended for off-road use meeting either of 
the following criteria:
    (1) Vehicles with tires installed having a maximum speed rating at 
or below 55 mph.
    (2) Vehicles primarily designed to perform work off-road (such as in 
oil fields, forests, or construction sites), and meeting at least one of 
the criteria of paragraph (2)(i) of this definition and at least one of 
the criteria of paragraph (2)(ii) of this definition.
    (i) Vehicle must have affixed components designed to work in an off-
road environment (for example, hazardous material equipment or drilling 
equipment) or was designed to operate at low speeds making them 
unsuitable for normal highway operation.
    (ii) Vehicles must:
    (A) Have an axle that has a gross axle weight rating (GAWR) of 
29,000 pounds or more;
    (B) Have a speed attainable in 2 miles of not more than 33 mph; or
    (C) Have a speed attainable in 2 miles of not more than 45 mph, an 
unloaded vehicle weight that is not less than 95 percent of its gross 
vehicle weight rating (GVWR), and no capacity to carry occupants other 
than the driver and operating crew.
    Heavy-duty vehicle means a vehicle as defined in Sec. 523.6.
    Incomplete vehicle means a vehicle which does not have the primary 
load carrying device or container attached when it is first sold as a 
vehicle or any vehicle that does not meet the definition of a complete 
vehicle. This may include vehicles sold to secondary vehicle 
manufacturers. Incomplete vehicles include cab-complete vehicles.
    Innovative technology means technology certified under 40 CFR 
1037.610.
    Light truck means a non-passenger automobile meeting the criteria in 
Sec. 523.5.
    Medium duty passenger vehicle means a vehicle which would satisfy 
the criteria in Sec. 523.5 (relating to light trucks) but for its gross 
vehicle weight rating or its curb weight, which is rated at more than 
8,500 lbs GVWR or has a vehicle curb weight of more than 6,000 pounds or 
has a basic vehicle frontal area in excess of 45 square feet, and which 
is designed primarily to transport passengers, but does not include a 
vehicle that:
    (1) Is an ``incomplete vehicle''' as defined in this subpart; or
    (2) Has a seating capacity of more than 12 persons; or
    (3) Is designed for more than 9 persons in seating rearward of the 
driver's seat; or
    (4) Is equipped with an open cargo area (for example, a pick-up 
truck box or bed) of 72.0 inches in interior length or more. A covered 
box not readily accessible from the passenger compartment will be 
considered an open cargo area for purposes of this definition.
    Motor home has the meaning given in 49 CFR 571.3.
    Motor vehicle has the meaning given in 40 CFR 85.1703.
    Passenger-carrying volume means the sum of the front seat volume 
and, if any, rear seat volume, as defined in 40 CFR 600.315, in the case 
of automobiles to which that term applies. With respect to automobiles 
to which

[[Page 87]]

that term does not apply, ``passenger-carrying volume'' means the sum in 
cubic feet, rounded to the nearest 0.1 cubic feet, of the volume of a 
vehicle's front seat and seats to the rear of the front seat, as 
applicable, calculated as follows with the head room, shoulder room, and 
leg room dimensions determined in accordance with the procedures 
outlined in Society of Automotive Engineers Recommended Practice J1100a, 
Motor Vehicle Dimensions (Report of Human Factors Engineering Committee, 
Society of Automotive Engineers, approved September 1973 and last 
revised September 1975).
    (1) For front seat volume, divide 1,728 into the product of the 
following SAE dimensions, measured in inches to the nearest 0.1 inches, 
and round the quotient to the nearest 0.001 cubic feet.
    (i) H61-Effective head room--front.
    (ii) W3-Shoulder room--front.
    (iii) L34-Maximum effective leg room-accelerator.
    (2) For the volume of seats to the rear of the front seat, divide 
1,728 into the product of the following SAE dimensions, measured in 
inches to the nearest 0.1 inches, and rounded the quotient to the 
nearest 0.001 cubic feet.
    (i) H63-Effective head room--second.
    (ii) W4-Shoulder room--second.
    (iii) L51-Minimum effective leg room--second.
    Pickup truck means a non-passenger automobile which has a passenger 
compartment and an open cargo area (bed).
    Recreational vehicle or RV means a motor vehicle equipped with 
living space and amenities found in a motor home.
    Running clearance means the distance from the surface on which an 
automobile is standing to the lowest point on the automobile, excluding 
unsprung weight.
    Static loaded radius arc means a portion of a circle whose center is 
the center of a standard tire-rim combination of an automobile and whose 
radius is the distance from that center to the level surface on which 
the automobile is standing, measured with the automobile at curb weight, 
the wheel parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline, and the 
tire inflated to the manufacturer's recommended pressure.
    Temporary living quarters means a space in the interior of an 
automobile in which people may temporarily live and which includes 
sleeping surfaces, such as beds, and household conveniences, such as a 
sink, stove, refrigerator, or toilet.
    Van means a vehicle with a body that fully encloses the driver and a 
cargo carrying or work performing compartment. The distance from the 
leading edge of the windshield to the foremost body section of vans is 
typically shorter than that of pickup trucks and sport utility vehicles.
    Vocational tractor means a tractor that is classified as a 
vocational vehicle according to 40 CFR 1037.630.
    Vocational vehicle means a vehicle that is equipped for a particular 
industry, trade or occupation such as construction, heavy hauling, 
mining, logging, oil fields, refuse and includes vehicles such as school 
buses, motorcoaches and RVs.
    Work truck means a vehicle that is rated at more than 8,500 pounds 
and less than or equal to 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, and is not 
a medium-duty passenger vehicle as defined in 40 CFR 86.1803 effective 
as of December 20, 2007.


<R05>
Sec. 523.3  Automobile.

    (a) An automobile is any 4-wheeled vehicle that is propelled by 
fuel, or by alternative fuel, manufactured primarily for use on public 
streets, roads, and highways and rated at less than 10,000 pounds gross 
vehicle weight, except:
    (1) A vehicle operated only on a rail line;
    (2) A vehicle manufactured in different stages by 2 or more 
manufacturers, if no intermediate or final-stage manufacturer of that 
vehicle manufactures more than 10,000 multi-stage vehicles per year; or
    (3) A work truck.
    (b) The following vehicles rated at more than 6,000 pounds and less 
than 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight are determined to be 
automobiles:
    (1) Vehicles which would satisfy the criteria in Sec. 523.4 
(relating to passenger automobiles) but for their gross vehicle weight 
rating.
    (2) Vehicles which would satisfy the criteria in Sec. 523.5 
(relating to light trucks) but for their gross vehicle weight rating, 
and which
    (i) Have a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less,
    (ii) Have a curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less,
    (iii) Have a gross vehicle weight rating of 8,500 pounds or less, 
and
    (iv) Are manufactured during the 1980 model year or thereafter.
    (3) Vehicles that are defined as medium duty passenger vehicles, and

[[Page 88]]

which are manufactured during the 2011 model year or thereafter.

(Sec. 9, Pub. L. 89-670, 80 Stat. 981 (49 U.S.C. 1657); sec. 301, Pub. 
L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 901 (15 U.S.C. 2002); delegation of authority at 41 
FR 25015, June 22, 1976)

[42 FR 38362, July 28, 1977, as amended at 43 FR 12013, Mar. 23, 1978; 
44 FR 4493, Jan. 2, 1979; 71 FR 17676, Apr. 6, 2006; 74 FR 14449, Mar. 
30, 2009]


<R05>
Sec. 523.4  Passenger automobile.

    A passenger automobile is any automobile (other than an automobile 
capable of off-highway operation) manufactured primarily for use in the 
transportation of not more than 10 individuals.

(Sec. 301, Pub. L. 94-163, 80 Stat. 901 (15 U.S.C. 2001))

[42 FR 38362, July 28, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 523.5  Non-passenger automobile.

    A non-passenger automobile means an automobile that is not a 
passenger automobile or a work truck and includes vehicles described in 
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section:
    (a) An automobile designed to perform at least one of the following 
functions:
    (1) Transport more than 10 persons;
    (2) Provide temporary living quarters;
    (3) Transport property on an open bed;
    (4) Provide, as sold to the first retail purchaser, greater cargo-
carrying than passenger-carrying volume, such as in a cargo van; if a 
vehicle is sold with a second-row seat, its cargo-carrying volume is 
determined with that seat installed, regardless of whether the 
manufacturer has described that seat as optional; or
    (5) Permit expanded use of the automobile for cargo-carrying 
purposes or other nonpassenger-carrying purposes through:
    (i) For non-passenger automobiles manufactured prior to model year 
2012, the removal of seats by means installed for that purpose by the 
automobile's manufacturer or with simple tools, such as screwdrivers and 
wrenches, so as to create a flat, floor level, surface extending from 
the forwardmost point of installation of those seats to the rear of the 
automobile's interior; or
    (ii) For non-passenger automobiles manufactured in model year 2008 
and beyond, for vehicles equipped with at least 3 rows of designated 
seating positions as standard equipment, permit expanded use of the 
automobile for cargo-carrying purposes or other nonpassenger-carrying 
purposes through the removal or stowing of foldable or pivoting seats so 
as to create a flat, leveled cargo surface extending from the 
forwardmost point of installation of those seats to the rear of the 
automobile's interior.
    (b) An automobile capable of off-highway operation, as indicated by 
the fact that it:
    (1)(i) Has 4-wheel drive; or
    (ii) Is rated at more than 6,000 pounds gross vehicle weight; and
    (2) Has at least four of the following characteristics calculated 
when the automobile is at curb weight, on a level surface, with the 
front wheels parallel to the automobile's longitudinal centerline, and 
the tires inflated to the manufacturer's recommended pressure--
    (i) Approach angle of not less than 28 degrees.
    (ii) Breakover angle of not less than 14 degrees.
    (iii) Departure angle of not less than 20 degrees.
    (iv) Running clearance of not less than 20 centimeters.
    (v) Front and rear axle clearances of not less than 18 centimeters 
each.


(Sec. 9, Pub. L. 89-670, 80 Stat. 981 (49 U.S.C. 1657); sec. 301, Pub. 
L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 901 (15 U.S.C. 2002); delegation of authority at 41 
FR 25015, June 22, 1976.)

[74 FR 14449, Mar. 30, 2009]


<R05>
Sec. 523.6  Heavy-duty vehicle.

    (a) A heavy-duty vehicle is any commercial medium- and heavy-duty on 
highway vehicle or a work truck, as defined in 49 U.S.C. 32901(a)(7) and 
(19). For the purpose of this part, heavy-duty vehicles are divided into 
three regulatory categories as follows:
    (1) Heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans;
    (2) Heavy-duty vocational vehicles; and

[[Page 89]]

    (3) Truck tractors with a GVWR above 26,000 pounds.
    (b) The heavy-duty vehicle classification does not include:
    (1) Vehicles defined as medium duty passenger vehicles.
    (2) Vehicles excluded from the definition of ``heavy-duty vehicle'' 
because of vehicle weight or weight rating (such as light duty vehicles 
as defined in Sec. 523.5).
    (3) Vehicles excluded from the definition of motor vehicle in 40 CFR 
85.1703.

[76 FR 57491, Sept. 15, 2011]

    Effective Date Note: At 76 FR 57491, Sept. 15, 2011, Sec. 523.6 was 
added, effective November 14, 2011.


<R05>
Sec. 523.7  Heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans.

    Heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans are pickup trucks and vans with a 
gross vehicle weight rating between 8,501 pounds and 14,000 pounds 
(Class 2b through 3 vehicles) manufactured as complete vehicles by a 
single or final stage manufacturer or manufactured as incomplete 
vehicles as designated by a manufacturer. A manufacturer may also 
optionally designate incomplete or complete Class 4 or 5 vehicles as 
heavy-duty pickup trucks or vans or spark-ignition (or gasoline) engines 
certified and sold as loose engines manufactured for use in heavy-duty 
pickup trucks or vans. See references in 40 CFR 1037.104 and 40 CFR 
1037.150.

[76 FR 57491, Sept. 15, 2011]

    Effective Date Note: At 76 FR 57491, Sept. 15, 2011, Sec. 523.7 was 
added, effective November 14, 2011.


<R05>
Sec. 523.8  Heavy-duty vocational vehicle.

    Heavy-duty vocational vehicles are vehicles with a gross vehicle 
weight rating (GVWR) above 8,500 pounds excluding:
    (a) Heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans defined in Sec. 523.7;
    (b) Medium duty passenger vehicles; and
    (c) Truck tractors, except vocational tractors, with a GVWR above 
26,000 pounds;

[76 FR 57491, Sept. 15, 2011]

    Effective Date Note: At 76 FR 57491, Sept. 15, 2011, Sec. 523.8 was 
added, effective November 14, 2011.


<R05>
Sec. 523.9  Truck tractors.

    Truck tractors for the purpose of this part are considered as any 
truck tractor as defined in 49 CFR part 571 having a GVWR above 26,000 
pounds.

[76 FR 57492, Sept. 15, 2011]

    Effective Date Note: At 76 FR 57492, Sept. 15, 2011, Sec. 523.9 was 
added, effective November 14, 2011.


<R03>
PART 525_EXEMPTIONS FROM AVERAGE FUEL ECONOMY STANDARDS--Table of Contents



Sec.
525.1 Scope.
525.2 Purpose.
525.3 Applicability.
525.4 Definitions.
525.5 Limitation on eligibility.
525.6 Requirements for petition.
525.7 Basis for petition.
525.8 Processing of petitions.
525.9 Duration of exemption.
525.10 Renewal of exemption.
525.11 Termination of exemption; amendment of alternative average fuel 
          economy standard.
525.12 Public inspection of information.

    Authority: 15 U.S.C. 2002; 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 42 FR 38376, July 28, 1977, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 525.1  Scope.

    This part establishes procedures under section 502(c) of the Motor 
Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, as amended (15 U.S.C. 2002) 
for the submission and disposition of petitions filed by low volume 
manufacturers of passenger automobiles to exempt them from the average 
fuel economy standards for passenger automobiles and to establish 
alternative average fuel economy standards for those manufacturers.


<R05>
Sec. 525.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to provide content and format 
requirements for low volume manufacturers of passenger automobiles which 
desire to petition the Administrator for exemption from applicable 
average fuel economy standards and for establishment of appropriate 
alternative average fuel economy standards and to give interested 
persons an opportunity to present data,

[[Page 90]]

views and arguments on those petitions.


<R05>
Sec. 525.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to passenger automobile manufacturers.


<R05>
Sec. 525.4  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory terms. (1) The terms fuel, manufacture, manufacturer, 
and model year, are used as defined in section 501 of the Act.
    (2) The terms average fuel economy, fuel economy, and model type are 
used as defined in 40 CFR 600.002-77.
    (3) The term automobile means a vehicle determined by the 
Administrator under 49 CFR part 523 to be an automobile.
    (4) The term passenger automobile means an automobile determined by 
the Administrator under 49 CFR part 523 to be a passenger automobile.
    (5) The term customs territory of the United States is used as 
defined in 19 U.S.C. 1202.
    (b) Other terms. (1) The term base level and vehicle configuration 
are used as defined in 40 CFR 600.002-77.
    (2) The term vehicle curb weight is used as defined in 40 CFR 
85.002.
    (3) The term interior volume index is used as defined in 40 CFR 
600.315-77.
    (4) The term frontal area is used as defined in 40 CFR 86.129-79.
    (5) The term basic engine is used as defined in 40 CFR 600.002-
77(a)(21).
    (6) The term designated seating position is defined in 49 CFR 571.3.
    (7) As used in this part, unless otherwise required by the context:
    Act means the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act (Pub. 
L. 92-513), as amended by the Energy Policy and Conservation Act (Pub. 
L. 94-163);
    Administrator means the Administrator of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration;
    Affected model year means a model year for which an exemption and 
alternative average fuel economy standard are requested under this part;
    Production mix means the number of passenger automobiles, and their 
percentage of the petitioner's annual total production of passenger 
automobiles, in each vehicle configuration which a petitioner plans to 
manufacture in a model year; and
    Total drive ratio means the ratio of an automobile's engine 
rotational speed (in revolutions per minute) to the automobile's forward 
speed (in miles per hour).

(Sec. 301, Pub. L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 871 (15 U.S.C. 2002); delegation of 
authority at 41 FR 25015, June 22, 1976; sec. 9, Pub. L. 89-670, 80 
Stat. 981 (49 U.S.C. 1657))

[42 FR 38376, July 28, 1977, as amended at 44 FR 55579, Sept. 27, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 525.5  Limitation on eligibility.

    Any manufacturer that manufactures (whether or not in the customs 
territory of the United States) 10,000 or more passenger automobiles in 
the second model year preceding an affected model year or in the 
affected model year is ineligible for an exemption for that affected 
model year.


<R05>
Sec. 525.6  Requirements for petition.

    Each petition filed under this part must--
    (a) Identify the model year or years for which exemption is 
requested;
    (b) Be submitted not later than 24 months before the beginning of 
the affected model year, unless good cause for later submission is 
shown;
    (c) Be submitted in three copies to: Administrator, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, Washington, DC 20590;
    (d) Be written in the English language;
    (e) State the full name, address, and title of the official 
responsible for preparing the petition, and the name and address of the 
manufacturer;
    (f) Set forth in full data, views and arguments of the petitioner 
supporting the exemption and alternative average fuel economy standard 
requested by the petitioner, including the information and data 
specified by Sec. 525.7 and the calculations and analyses used to 
develop that information and data. No documents may be incorporated by 
reference in a petition unless the documents are submitted with the 
petition;
    (g) Specify and segregate any part of the information and data 
submitted under this part that the petitioner wishes to have withheld 
from public

[[Page 91]]

disclosure in accordance with part 512 of this chapter.

(Sec. 301, Pub. L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 871 (15 U.S.C. 2002); delegation of 
authority at 41 FR 25015, June 22, 1976; sec. 9, Pub. L. 89-670, 80 
Stat. 981 (49 U.S.C. 1657))

[42 FR 38376, July 28, 1977, as amended at 44 FR 55579, Sept. 27, 1979; 
46 FR 2063, Jan. 8, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 525.7  Basis for petition.

    (a) The petitioner shall include the information specified in 
paragraphs (b) through (h) in its petition.
    (b) Whether the petitioner controls, is controlled by, or is under 
common control with another manufacturer of passenger automobiles, and 
if so, the nature of that control relationship, and the total number of 
passenger automobiles manufactured by such other manufacturer or 
manufacturers.
    (c) The total number of passenger automobiles manufactured or likely 
to be manufactured (whether or not in the customs territory of the 
United States) by the petitioner in the second model year immediately 
preceding each affected model year.
    (d) For each affected model year, the petitioner's projections of 
the most fuel efficient production mix of vehicle configurations and 
base levels of its passenger automobiles which the petitioner could sell 
in that model year, and a discussion demonstrating that these 
projections are reasonable. The discussion shall include information 
showing that the projections are consistent with--
    (1) The petitioner's annual total production and production mix of 
passenger automobiles manufactured or likely to be manufactured in each 
of the four model years immediately preceding that affected model year;
    (2) Its passenger automobile production capacity for that affected 
model year;
    (3) Its efforts to comply with that average fuel economy standard; 
and
    (4) Anticipated consumer demand in the United States for passenger 
automobiles during that affected model year.
    (e) For each affected model year, a description of the following 
features of each vehicle configuration of the petitioner's passenger 
automobiles to be manufactured in that affected model year;
    (1) Maximum overall body width, overall length, and overall height, 
determined in accordance with Motor Vehicle Dimensions SAE J1100a 
(report of Human Engineering Committee, approved September 1973, as 
revised September 1975);
    (2) Vehicle curb weight;
    (3) Number of designated seating positions and interior volume 
index;
    (4) Basic engine, displacement, and SAE rated net power, kilowatts;
    (5) Fuel metering system, including the number of carburetor 
barrels, if applicable;
    (6) Drive train configuration and total drive ratio;
    (7) Emission control system;
    (8) Dynamometer road load setting, determined in accordance with 40 
CFR part 86, and the method used to determine that setting, including 
information indicating whether the road load setting was adjusted to 
account for the presence of air conditioning and whether the setting was 
based on the use of radial ply tires; and
    (9) Use of synthetic lubricants, low viscosity lubricants, or 
lubricants with additives that affect friction characteristics in the 
crankcase, differential, and transmission of the vehicles tested under 
the requirements of 40 CFR parts 86 and 600. With respect to automobiles 
which will use these lubricants, indicate which one will be used and 
explain why that type was chosen. With respect to automobiles which will 
not use these lubricants, explain the reasons for not so doing.
    (f) For each affected model year, a fuel economy value for each 
vehicle configuration specified in 40 CFR 600.506(a)(2), base level, and 
model type of the petitioner's passenger automobiles to be manufactured 
in that affected model year calculated in accordance with subpart C of 
40 CFR part 600 and based on tests or analyses comparable to those 
prescribed or permitted under 40 CFR part 600 and a description of the 
test procedures or analytical methods.
    (g) For each affected model year, an average fuel economy figure for 
the petitioner's passenger automobiles to be manufactured in that 
affected model

[[Page 92]]

year calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 600.510(e) and based upon the 
fuel economy values provided under paragraph (f) of this section and 
upon the petitioner's production mix projected under paragraph (d) of 
this section for the affected model year.
    (h) Information demonstrating that the average fuel economy figure 
provided for each affected model year under paragraph (g) of this 
section is the maximum feasible average fuel economy achievable by the 
petitioner for that model year, including--
    (1) For each affected model year and each of the two model years 
immediately following the first affected model year, a description of 
the technological means selected by the petitioner for improving the 
average fuel economy of its automobiles to be manufactured in that model 
year.
    (2) A chronological description of the petitioner's past and planned 
efforts to implement the means described under paragraph (h)(1) of this 
section.
    (3) A description of the effect of other Federal motor vehicle 
standards on the fuel economy of the petitioner's automobiles.
    (4) For each affected model year, a discussion of the alternative 
and additional means considered but not selected by the petitioner that 
would have enabled its passenger automobiles to achieve a higher average 
fuel economy than is achievable with the means described under paragraph 
(h)(1) of this section. This discussion must include an explanation of 
the reasons the petitioner had for rejecting these additional and 
alternative means.
    (5) In the case of a petitioner which plans to increase the average 
fuel economy of its passenger automobiles to be manufactured in either 
of the two model years immediately following the first affected model 
year, an explanation of the petitioner's reasons for not making those 
increases in that affected model year.

(Sec. 301, Pub. L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 871 (15 U.S.C. 2002); delegation of 
authority at 41 FR 25015, June 22, 1976; sec. 9, Pub. L. 89-670, 80 
Stat. 981 (49 U.S.C. 1657))

[42 FR 38376, July 28, 1977, as amended at 44 FR 55579, Sept. 27, 1979; 
58 FR 18029, Apr. 7, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 525.8  Processing of petitions.

    (a) If a petition is found not to contain the information required 
by this part, the petition is informed about the areas of insufficiency 
and advised that the petition will not receive further consideration 
until the required information is submitted.
    (b) The Administrator may request the petitioner to provide 
information in addition to that required by this part.
    (c) The Administrator publishes a proposed decision in the Federal 
Register. The proposed decision indicates the proposed grant of the 
petition and establishment of an alternative average fuel economy 
standard, or the proposed denial of the petition, specifies the reasons 
for the proposal and invites written public comment on the proposal.
    (d) Any interested person may, upon written request to the 
Administrator not later than 15 days after the publication of a notice 
under paragraph (c) of this section, meet informally with an appropriate 
official of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration to 
discuss the petition or notice.
    (e) After the conclusion of the period for public comment on the 
proposal, the Administrator publishes a final decision in the Federal 
Register. The final decision is based on the petition, written public 
comments, and other available information. The final decision sets forth 
the grant of the exemption and establishes an alternative average fuel 
economy standard or the denial of the petition, and the reasons for the 
decision.

(Sec. 301, Pub. L. 94-163, 89 Stat. 871 (15 U.S.C. 2002); delegation of 
authority at 41 FR 25015, June 22, 1976); sec. 9, Pub. L. 89-670, 80 
Stat. 981 (49 U.S.C. 1657))

[42 FR 38376, July 28, 1977, as amended at 44 FR 55579, Sept. 27, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 525.9  Duration of exemption.

    An exemption may be granted under this part for not more than three 
model years.

[[Page 93]]


<R05>
Sec. 525.10  Renewal of exemption.

    A manufacturer exempted under this part may request renewal of its 
exemption by submitting a petition meeting the requirements of 
Sec. Sec. 525.6 and 525.7.


<R05>
Sec. 525.11  Termination of exemption; amendment of alternative average fuel 

economy standard.

    (a) Any exemption granted under this part for an affected model year 
does not apply to a manufacturer that is ineligible under Sec. 525.5 
for an exemption in that model year.
    (b) The administrator may initiate rulemaking either on his own 
motion or on petition by an interested person to terminate an exemption 
granted under this part or to amend an alternative average fuel economy 
standard established under this part.
    (c) Any interested persons may petition the Administrator to 
terminate an exemption granted under this part or to amend an 
alternative average fuel economy standard established under this part.


<R05>
Sec. 525.12  Public inspection of information.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b), any person may inspect 
available information relevant to a petition under this part, including 
the petition and any supporting data, memoranda of informal meetings 
with the petitioner or any other interested persons, and the notices 
regarding the petition, in the Docket Section of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration. Any person may obtain copies of the 
information available for inspection under this paragraph in accordance 
with part 7 of the regulations of the Office of the Secretary of 
Transportation (49 CFR part 7).
    (b) Except for the release of confidential information authorized by 
section 505 of the Act and part 512 of this chapter, information made 
available for public inspection does not include information for which 
confidentiality is requested under Sec. 525.6(g) and is granted in 
accordance with part 512 and sections 502 and 505 of the Act and section 
552(b) of title 5 of the U.S.C.

[46 FR 2063, Jan. 8, 1981]


<R03>
PART 526_PETITIONS AND PLANS FOR RELIEF UNDER THE AUTOMOBILE FUEL EFFICIENCY 

ACT OF 1980--Table of Contents



Sec.
526.1 General provisions.
526.2 U.S. production by foreign manufacturer.
526.3 Transfer of vehicle from non-domestic to domestic fleet.
526.4 [Reserved]
526.5 Earning offsetting monetary credits in future model years.

    Authority: 15 U.S.C. 2002 and 2003; delegation of authority at 49 
CFR 1.50.

    Source: 47 FR 7248, Feb. 18, 1982, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 526.1  General provisions.

    (a) Applicability. These regulations apply to petitions and plans 
submitted under the Automobile Fuel Efficiency Act of 1980, Pub. L. 96-
425, as codified in Title V of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost 
Savings Act, 15 U.S.C. 2001 et seq.
    (b) Address. Each petition and plan submitted under the applicable 
provisions of sections 502 and 503 of the Motor Vehicle Information and 
Cost Savings Act must be addressed to the Administrator, National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., 
Washington DC 20590.
    (c) Authority and scope of relief. Each petition or plan must 
specify the specific provision of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost 
Savings Act under which relief is being sought. The petition or plan 
must also specify the model years for which relief is being sought.

[47 FR 7248, Feb. 18, 1982, as amended at 59 FR 25576, May 17, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 526.2  U.S. production by foreign manufacturer.

    Each petition filed under section 503(b)(3) of the Motor Vehicle 
Information and Cost Savings Act must contain the following information:
    (a) For each model type (as defined by the Environmental Protection 
Agency in 40 CFR part 600) planned by the petitioner to be sold in the 
United States (regardless of place of manufacture), and for each model 
year beginning with the year before the first one

[[Page 94]]

for which relief is sought by the petition through the last year covered 
by the petition, the following information based on the petitioner's 
current product plan and the assumption that the petition will be 
granted:
    (1) A description of the model type, including car line designation, 
engine displacement and type, transmission type, and average fuel 
economy;
    (2) U.S. sales projected for the model type;
    (3) The average percentage of the cost to the manufacturer of the 
model type which is attributable to value added in the United States or 
Canada, determined in accordance with 40 CFR 600.511-80, and the total 
manufacturing cost per vehicle; and
    (4) In the case of model types not offered for sale in the United 
States before the first year for which relief is sought in the petition 
or other model types for which expansions in production capacity are 
planned during the years covered by the petition, information (including 
any marketing surveys) indicating from where the additional sales will 
be captured. If sales are projected to be captured from U.S. 
manufacturers, the petition must provide an estimate of the employment 
impact on those manufacturers of the lost sales and the gain in 
employment for the petitioner and its U.S. suppliers.
    (b) The total number of persons employed in the United States by the 
petitioner, excluding non-motor vehicle industry related employees, for 
each model year covered by the petition and for the model year 
immediately prior to those years.
    (c) A description of how the petitioner's responses to paragraphs 
(a) and (b) of this section would differ if the petition were denied.

[47 FR 7248, Feb. 18, 1982, as amended at 59 FR 25576, May 17, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 526.3  Transfer of vehicle from non-domestic to domestic fleet.

    Each plan submitted under section 503(b)(4) of the Motor Vehicle 
Information and Cost Savings Act must contain the following information:
    (a) For each model year for which relief is sought in the plan and 
for each model type of automobile sought to be included by the submitter 
in its domestic fleet under the plan (i.e., those with at least 50 
percent but less than 75 percent U.S. or Canadian value added), provide 
the following information:
    (1) A description of the model type, including engine type and 
displacement, transmission class, car line designation, and fuel 
economy;
    (2) The projected U.S. sales of the model type;
    (3) The average total manufacturing cost per vehicle for the model 
type;
    (4) The percentage of the cost to the manufacturer attributable to 
value added in the United States or Canada for the model type:
    (b) For each year covered by the plan, a list of individual product 
actions (e.g., change from imported engine to domestically manufactured 
engine) which will increase the domestic content of the affected 
vehicles. For each action, provide the model year in which the action 
will take effect, a description of the nature of the action, and the 
percentage change in domestic content resulting from the action.

[47 FR 7248, Feb. 18, 1982, as amended at 59 FR 25576, May 17, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 526.4  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 526.5  Earning offsetting monetary credits in future model years.

    Each plan submitted under section 502(l) of the Motor Vehicle 
Information and Cost Savings Act must contain the following information:
    (a) Projected average fuel economy and production levels for the 
class of automobiles which may fail to comply with a fuel economy 
standard and for any other classes of automobiles from which credits may 
be transferred, for the current model year and for each model year 
thereafter ending with the last year covered by the plan.
    (b) A list and full description of each planned product action 
(e.g., new model, mix change) which will affect the average fuel economy 
of the class of automobiles subject to the credit earning plan, for each 
model year beginning with the current model year and ending with the 
last year covered by the credit earning plan.
    (c) The portion of the petitioner's fleet affected by each product 
action

[[Page 95]]

(e.g., all K-cars with 6-cylinder engines) and the number of affected 
vehicles.
    (d) The fuel economy effect of each product action specified under 
paragraph (b) of this section per affected vehicle.

[47 FR 7248, Feb. 18, 1982, as amended at 59 FR 25576, May 17, 1994]


<R03>
PART 529_MANUFACTURERS OF MULTISTAGE AUTOMOBILES--Table of Contents



Sec.
529.1 Scope and purpose.
529.2 Applicability.
529.3 Definitions.
529.4 Requirements for incomplete automobile manufacturers.
529.5 Requirements for intermediate manufacturers.
529.6 Requirements for final-stage manufacturers.

    Authority: Sec. 301, Pub. L. 94-163, 80 Stat. 901 (15 U.S.C. 2001); 
delegation of authority at 41 FR 25015, June 22, 1976.

    Source: 42 FR 38372, July 28, 1977, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 529.1  Scope and purpose.

    This part determines, in cases where more than one person is the 
manufacturer of an automobile, which person is to be treated as the 
manufacturer for purposes of compliance with Title V of the Motor 
Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, as amended (15 U.S.C. 2001 et 
seq.) and rules issued thereunder.


<R05>
Sec. 529.2  Applicability.

    This part applies to incomplete automobile manufacturers, 
intermediate manufacturers, and final-stage manufacturers of automobiles 
that are manufactured in two or more stages.


<R05>
Sec. 529.3  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory terms. (1) The term automobile is used as defined in 
section 501 of the Act and in accordance with the determinations in 49 
CFR part 523.
    (2) The terms manufacture, manufacturer, and fuel economy are used 
as defined in section 501 of the Act.
    (b) Other terms. (1) Act means the Motor Vehicle Information and 
Cost Savings Act (Pub. L. 92-513), as amended by the Energy Policy and 
Conservation Act (Pub. L. 94-163).
    (2) Completed automobile means an automobile that requires no 
further manufacturing operations to perform its intended function, other 
than the addition of readily attachable components, such as mirrors or 
tire and rim assemblies, or minor finishing operations such as painting.
    (3) Curb weight is defined the same as vehicle curb weight in 40 CFR 
part 86.
    (4) Final-stage manufacturer means a person who performs such 
manufacturing operations on an incomplete automobile that it becomes a 
completed automobile.
    (5) Frontal area is used as defined in 40 CFR 86.079-2.
    (6) Incomplete automobile means an assemblage consisting, as a 
minimum, of frame and chassis structure, power train, steering system, 
suspension system, and braking system to the extent that those systems 
are to be part of the completed automobile, that requires further 
manufacturing operations, other than the addition of readily attachable 
components, such as mirrors or tire and rim assemblies, or minor 
finishing operations such as painting, to become a completed automobile.
    (7) Incomplete automobile manufacturer means a person who 
manufactures an incomplete automobile by assembling components none of 
which, taken separately, constitute a complete automobile.
    (8) Intermediate manufacturer means a person, other than the 
incomplete automobile manufacturer or the final-stage manufacturer, who 
performs manufacturing operations on an incomplete automobile.

[42 FR 38372, July 28, 1977, as amended at 42 FR 39983, Aug. 8, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 529.4  Requirements for incomplete automobile manufacturers.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, Sec. Sec. 
529.5 and 529.6, each incomplete automobile manufacturer is considered, 
with respect to multistage automobiles incorporating its incomplete 
automobiles, the manufacturer of the multistage automobiles for purposes 
of the requirements of Title V and rules issued thereunder.

[[Page 96]]

    (b) Each incomplete automobile manufacturer shall furnish with each 
of its incomplete automobiles, when it is delivered to the subsequent 
manufacturer, (1) a document that contains the following information--
    (i) Name and mailing address of the incomplete automobile 
manufacturer.
    (ii) Month and year during which the incomplete automobile 
manufacturer performed its last manufacturing operation on the 
incomplete automobile.
    (iii) Identification of the incomplete automobile or group of 
incomplete automobiles to which the document applies. The identification 
may be by serial number or otherwise, but it must be sufficient to 
enable a subsequent manufacturer to ascertain positively that the 
document applies to a particular incomplete automobile even if the 
document is not attached to that automobile.
    (iv) Fuel economy values determined by the incomplete automobile 
manufacturer for the automobile in accordance with 40 CFR part 600 and a 
statement that a fuel economy label containing those values has been 
prepared in accordance with Environmental Protection Agency regulation 
by the manufacturer identified in the document.
    (v) Maximum curb weight that may not be exceeded by a subsequent 
manufacturer without invalidating the fuel economy values determined by 
the incomplete automobile manufacturer.
    (vi) Maximum frontal area that may not be exceeded by a subsequent 
manufacturer without invalidating the fuel economy values determined by 
the incomplete automobile manufacturer.
    (vii) Whether the fuel economy values have been computed with the 
road load horsepower set to take into account the presence of air 
conditioning.
    (2) A fuel economy label conforming with 40 CFR part 600.
    (c)(1) The incomplete automobile manufacturer shall either attach 
the document specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section to the 
incomplete automobile in such a manner that it will not be inadvertently 
detached or send that document directly to the subsequent manufacturer 
to which that automobile is delivered.
    (2)(i) If the incomplete automobile manufacturer places the portion 
of the body including the windshield and front seat side windows on the 
incomplete automobile, that manufacturer shall attach the fuel economy 
label specified in paragaph (b)(2) of this section to that automobile in 
accordance with 40 CFR part 600. If the incomplete automobile 
manufacturer does not place that portion of the body on the incomplete 
automobile, that manufacturer shall send that label directly to the 
subsequent manufacturer to which that automobile is delivered.
    (ii) Upon request by an intermediate or final-stage manufacturer for 
a copy of a fuel economy label that is required by paragraph (b)(2) of 
this section to have been prepared by the incomplete automobile 
manufacturer for one of its incomplete automobiles, identified by the 
requesting manufacturer in the same fashion as in the document specified 
in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, the incomplete automobile 
manufacturer shall send that manufacturer a copy of the label.


<R05>
Sec. 529.5  Requirements for intermediate manufacturers.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section and in Sec. 
529.6, each intermediate manufacturer whose manufacturing operations on 
an incomplete automobile cause it to exceed the maximum curb weight or 
maximum frontal area set forth in the document furnished it by the 
incomplete automobile manufacturer under Sec. 529.4(c)(1) or by a 
previous intermediate manufacturer under paragraph (b) of this section, 
as appropriate, is considered the manufacturer of the multistage 
automobile manufactured from that automobile for the purpose of the 
requirements of Title V and rules issued thereunder, other than that in 
part 537, Fuel Economy Reports.
    (b) Each intermediate manufacturer of an incomplete automobile shall 
furnish, in the manner specified in Sec. 529.4(c), to the subsequent 
manufacturer of that automobile the document required by Sec. 529.4(b) 
regarding that automobile. If any of the changes in the automobile made 
by the intermediate manufacturer affect the validity of the fuel economy 
values or other statement in the document or any addendum attached to 
the document by a

[[Page 97]]

previous manufacturer of the automobile, the intermediate manufacturer 
shall furnish an addendum to the document that contains its name and 
mailing address and an indication of all changes that should be made in 
the document to reflect changes that it made in the automobile.
    (c) Each intermediate manufacturer that is required by paragraph (b) 
of this section to furnish an addendum to a document required by Sec. 
529.4(b) shall, within 10 days after completing its manufacturing 
operations, send a copy of the document and addendum to the 
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency and to the 
manufacturer previously considered under this part to be the 
manufacturer of the automobile.
    (d)(1) If the intermediate manufacturer's manufacturing operations 
on an incomplete automobile cause it to exceed the maximum curb weight 
or maximum frontal area set forth in the document furnished it by the 
incomplete automobile manufacturer under Sec. 529.4(c)(1) or a previous 
intermediate manufacturer under paragraph (b) of this section, as 
appropriate, that manufacturer shall prepare a new fuel economy label 
for that automobile in accordance with 40 CFR part 600.
    (2) If neither the intermediate manufacturer of an incomplete 
automobile nor any previous manufacturer of that automobile has placed 
the portion of the body including the windshield and front seat side 
windows on that automobile, the intermediate manufacturer shall send the 
fuel economy label furnished it by the incomplete automobile 
manufacturer under Sec. 529.4(c)(2)(i) or a previous intermediate 
manufacturer under paragraph (d)(2) of this section or prepared by it 
under paragraph (d)(1) of this section, as appropriate, directly to the 
subsequent manufacturer to which that automobile is delivered.
    (3) If the intermediate manufacturer places the portion of the body 
including the windshield and front seat side windows on the incomplete 
automobile, that manufacturer shall attach the fuel economy label 
furnished it under Sec. 529.4(c)(i) or paragraph (d)(2) of this section 
or the fuel economy label prepared by it under paragraph (d)(1) of this 
section, as appropriate, to that automobile in accordance with 40 CFR 
part 600.
    (4) The intermediate manufacturer shall attach to the incomplete 
automobile in accordance with 40 CFR part 600 a fuel economy label 
identical to the label that is required under this part to have been 
prepared by the manufacturer considered under this part to be the 
manufacturer of that automobile if:
    (i) The portion of the body including the windshield and front seat 
side windows was added to the incomplete automobile by a previous 
manufacturer;
    (ii) The intermediate manufacturer's manufacturing operations do not 
cause that automobile to exceed either of the maxima specified in 
paragraph (d)(1) of this section; and
    (iii) That label is not on that automobile when received by the 
intermediate manufacturer or is removed from that automobile while it is 
in the possession of that manufacturer.
    (5) Upon request by a subsequent intermediate manufacturer or by a 
final-stage manufacturer for a copy of a fuel economy label prepared by 
the intermediate manufacturer under paragraph (d)(1) of this section for 
one of its incomplete automobiles, identified by the requesting 
manufacturer in the same fashion as in the document specified in Sec. 
529.4(b)(1), the intermediate manufacturer shall send that manufacturer 
a copy of that label.


<R05>
Sec. 529.6  Requirements for final-stage manufacturers.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, each final-
stage manufacturer whose manufacturing operations on an incomplete 
automobile cause the completed automobile to exceed the maximum curb 
weight or maximum frontal area set forth in the document specified in 
Sec. 529.4(b) and furnished it by the incomplete automobile 
manufacturer under Sec. 529.4(c)(1) or by the last intermediate 
manufacturer under Sec. 529.5(b), as appropriate, is considered the 
manufacturer of the completed automobile for the purpose of the 
requirements of Title V and rules issued thereunder, other than those in 
part 537, Fuel Economy Reports.

[[Page 98]]

    (b) Each final-stage manufacturer that becomes the manufacturer of a 
multistage automobile under paragraph (a) of this section shall, within 
10 days after completing its manufacturing operations on that 
automobile, send written notification of its exceeding the curb weight 
or frontal area maximum to the Administrator of the Environmental 
Protection Agency and to the manufacturer previously considered under 
this part to be the manufacturer of the automobile.
    (c)(1) If the final-stage manufacturer becomes the manufacturer of a 
multistage automobile under paragraph (a)(1) of this section, that 
manufacturer shall prepare a new fuel economy label for that automobile 
in accordance with 40 CFR part 600.
    (2) If the final-stage manufacturer places the portion of the body 
including the windshield and front seat side windows on the incomplete 
automobile, that manufacturer shall attach the fuel economy label 
furnished by the incomplete automobile manufacturer under Sec. 
529.4(c)(2) or by the last intermediate manufacturer under Sec. 
529.5(d)(2) or the fuel economy label prepared by the final-stage 
manufacturer under paragraph (c)(1) of this section, as appropriate, to 
that automobile in accordance with 40 CFR part 600.
    (3) The final-stage manufacturer shall attach to the completed 
automobile in accordance with 40 CFR part 600 a fuel economy label 
identical to the label that is required under this part to have been 
prepared by the manufacturer considered under this part to be the 
manufacturer of that automobile if:
    (i) The portion of the body including the windshield and front seat 
side windows was added to the completed automobile by a previous 
manufacturer;
    (ii) The final-stage manufacturer's manufacturing operations do not 
cause that automobile to exceed either of the maxima specified in 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section; and
    (iii) That fuel economy label is not on that automobile when 
received by that manufacturer or is removed from that automobile while 
it is in the possession of that manufacturer.


<R03>
PART 531_PASSENGER AUTOMOBILE AVERAGE FUEL ECONOMY STANDARDS--Table of 

Contents



Sec.
531.1 Scope.
531.2 Purpose.
531.3 Applicability.
531.4 Definitions.
531.5 Fuel economy standards.
531.6 Measurement and calculation procedures.

Appendix A to Part 531--Example of Calculating Compliance Under Sec. 
          531.5(c)

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 32902, delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 42 FR 33552, June 30, 1977, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 531.1  Scope.

    This part establishes average fuel economy standards pursuant to 
section 502 (a) and (c) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost 
Savings Act, as amended, for passenger automobiles.

[43 FR 28204, June 29, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 531.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to increase the fuel economy of 
passenger automobiles by establishing minimum levels of average fuel 
economy for those vehicles.


<R05>
Sec. 531.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to manufacturers of passenger automobiles.


<R05>
Sec. 531.4  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory terms. (1) The terms average fuel economy, 
manufacture, manufacturer, and model year are used as defined in section 
501 of the Act.
    (2) The terms automobile and passenger automobile are used as 
defined in section 501 of the Act and in accordance with the 
determination in part 523 of this chapter.
    (b) Other terms. As used in this part, unless otherwise required by 
the context--
    (1) Act means the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, as 
amended by Pub. L. 94-163.


<R05>
Sec. 531.5  Fuel economy standards.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, each 
manufacturer

[[Page 99]]

of passenger automobiles shall comply with the average fuel economy 
standards in Table I, expressed in miles per gallon, in the model year 
specified as applicable:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30MR09.101

    (b) For model year 2011, a manufacturer's passenger automobile fleet 
shall comply with the fuel economy level calculated for that model year 
according to Figure 1 and the appropriate values in Table II.


Figure 1:

[[Page 100]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30MR09.102

Where:

N is the total number (sum) of passenger automobiles produced by a 
          manufacturer,
N<INF>i</INF> is the number (sum) of the ith model passenger automobile 
          produced by the manufacturer, and
T<INF>i</INF> is fuel economy target of the ith model passenger 
          automobile, which is determined according to the following 
          formula, rounded to the nearest hundredth:
          [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30MR09.103
          
Where:

    Parameters a, b, c, and d are defined in Table II;
    e = 2.718; and
    x = footprint (in square feet, rounded to the nearest tenth) of the 
vehicle model
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30MR09.104

    (c) For model years 2012-2016, a manufacturer's passenger automobile 
fleet shall comply with the fuel economy level calculated for that model 
year according to Figure 2 and the appropriate values in Table III.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07MY10.060

Where:

CAFErequired is the required level for a given fleet (domestic passenger 
automobiles or import passenger automobiles),
Subscript i is a designation of multiple groups of automobiles, where 
each group's designation, i.e., i = 1, 2, 3, etc., represents 
automobiles that share a unique model type and footprint within the 
applicable

[[Page 101]]

fleet, either domestic passenger automobiles or import passenger 
automobiles.
    Productioni is the number of passenger automobiles produced for sale 
in the United States within each ith designation, i.e., which shares the 
same model type and footprint.
    TARGET<INF>i</INF> is the fuel economy target in miles per gallon 
(mpg) applicable to the footprint of passenger automobiles within each 
ith designation, i.e., which shares the same model type and footprint, 
calculated according to Figure 3 and rounded to the nearest hundredth of 
a mpg, i.e., 35.455 = 35.46 mpg, and the summations in the numerator and 
denominator are both performed over all models in the fleet in question.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07MY10.061

Where:

TARGET is the fuel economy target (in mpg) applicable to vehicles of a 
given footprint (FOOTPRINT, in square feet),
Parameters a, b, c, and d are defined in Table III, and
The MIN and MAX functions take the minimum and maximum, respectively, of 
the included values.

                     Table III--Parameters for the Passenger Automobile Fuel Economy Targets
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Parameters
                   Model year                    ---------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         a               b               c               d
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012............................................           35.95           27.95       0.0005308        0.006057
2013............................................           36.80           28.46       0.0005308        0.005410
2014............................................           37.75           29.03       0.0005308        0.004725
2015............................................           39.24           29.90       0.0005308        0.003719
2016............................................           41.09           30.96       0.0005308        0.002573
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (d) In addition to the requirement of paragraphs (b) and (c) of this 
section, each manufacturer shall also meet the minimum standard for 
domestically manufactured passenger automobiles expressed in Table IV:

                                Table IV
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Minimum
                       Model year                            standard
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2011....................................................            27.8
2012....................................................            30.7
2013....................................................            31.4
2014....................................................            32.1
2015....................................................            33.3
2016....................................................            34.7
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (e) The following manufacturers shall comply with the standards 
indicated below for the specified model years:
    (1) Avanti Motor Corporation.

                      Average Fuel Economy Standard
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Miles per
                         Model year                             gallon
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1978........................................................        16.1
1979........................................................        14.5
1980........................................................        15.8
1981........................................................        18.2
1982........................................................        18.2
1983........................................................        16.9
1984........................................................        16.9
1985........................................................        16.9
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (2) Rolls-Royce Motors, Inc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Average
                                                                 fuel
                                                                economy
                         Model year                            standard
                                                              (miles per
                                                                gallon)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1978........................................................        10.7
1979........................................................        10.8
1980........................................................        11.1
1981........................................................        10.7
1982........................................................        10.6
1983........................................................         9.9
1984........................................................        10.0
1985........................................................        10.0
1986........................................................        11.0
1987........................................................        11.2
1988........................................................        11.2

[[Page 102]]

 
1989........................................................        11.2
1990........................................................        12.7
1991........................................................        12.7
1992........................................................        13.8
1993........................................................        13.8
1994........................................................        13.8
1995........................................................        14.6
1996........................................................        14.6
1997........................................................        15.1
1998........................................................        16.3
1999........................................................        16.3
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (3) Checker Motors Corporation.

                      Average Fuel Economy Standard
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Miles per
                         Model year                             gallon
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1978........................................................        17.6
1979........................................................        16.5
1980........................................................        18.5
1981........................................................        18.3
1982........................................................        18.4
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (4) Aston Martin Lagonda, Inc.

                      Average Fuel Economy Standard
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Miles per
                         Model year                             gallon
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1979........................................................        11.5
1980........................................................        12.1
1981........................................................        12.2
1982........................................................        12.2
1983........................................................        11.3
1984........................................................        11.3
1985........................................................        11.4
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (5) Excalibur Automobile Corporation.

                      Average Fuel Economy Standard
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Miles per
                         Model year                             gallon
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1978........................................................        11.5
1979........................................................        11.5
1980........................................................        16.2
1981........................................................        17.9
1982........................................................        17.9
1983........................................................        16.6
1984........................................................        16.6
1985........................................................        16.6
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (6) Lotus Cars Ltd.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Average
                                                                 fuel
                                                               economy
                         Model year                            standard
                                                              (miles per
                                                               gallon)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1994.......................................................         24.2
1995.......................................................         23.3
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (7) Officine Alfieri Maserati, S.p.A.

                      Average Fuel Economy Standard
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Miles per
                         Model year                             gallon
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1978........................................................        12.5
1979........................................................        12.5
1980........................................................         9.5
1984........................................................        17.9
1985........................................................        16.8
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (8) Lamborghini of North America.

                      Average Fuel Economy Standard
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Miles per
                         Model year                             gallon
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1983........................................................        13.7
1984........................................................        13.7
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (9) LondonCoach Co., Inc.

                      Average Fuel Economy Standard
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Miles per
                         Model year                             gallon
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1985........................................................        21.0
1986........................................................        21.0
1987........................................................        21.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (10) Automobili Lamborghini S.p.A./Vector Aeromotive Corporation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Average
                                                                 fuel
                                                                economy
                         Model year                            standard
                                                              (miles per
                                                                gallon)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1995........................................................        12.8
1996........................................................        12.6
1997........................................................        12.5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (11) Dutcher Motors, Inc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Average
                                                                 fuel
                                                                economy
                         Model year                            standard
                                                              (miles per
                                                                gallon)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1986........................................................        16.0
1987........................................................        16.0
1988........................................................        16.0
1992........................................................        17.0
1993........................................................        17.0
1994........................................................        17.0
1995........................................................        17.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (12) MedNet, Inc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Average
                                                                 fuel
                                                                economy
                         Model year                            standard
                                                              (miles per
                                                                gallon)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1996........................................................        17.0
1997........................................................        17.0
1998........................................................        17.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (13) Vector Aeromotive Corporation.

[[Page 103]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Average
                                                                 fuel
                                                                economy
                         Model year                            standard
                                                              (miles per
                                                                gallon)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1998........................................................        12.1
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (14) Qvale Automotive Group Srl.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Average
                                                                 fuel
                                                                economy
                         Model year                            standard
                                                              (miles per
                                                                gallon)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2000........................................................        22.0
2001........................................................        22.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (15) Spyker Automobielen B.V.

                      Average Fuel Economy Standard
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Miles per
                         Model year                             gallon
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2006.......................................................         18.9
2007.......................................................         18.9
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[43 FR 28204, June 29, 1978]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 531.5 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected which appears in the Finding Aids 
section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.


<R05>
Sec. 531.6  Measurement and calculation procedures.

    (a) The average fuel economy of all passenger automobiles that are 
manufactured by a manufacturer in a model year shall be determined in 
accordance with procedures established by the Administrator of the 
Environmental Protection Agency under section 502(a)(1) of the Act and 
set forth in 40 CFR part 600.
    (b) A manufacturer that is eligible to elect a model year in which 
to include value added in Mexico as domestic value, under subparagraphs 
(B)(i) and (B)(iii) of 49 U.S.C. 32904(b)(3), shall notify the 
Administrators of the Environmental Protection Agency and the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration of its election not later than 60 
days before it begins production of automobiles for the model year. If 
an eligible manufacturer does not elect a model year before January 1, 
2004, any value added in Mexico will be considered domestic value for 
automobiles manufactured in the next model year beginning after January 
1, 2004, and in subsequent model years.

[42 FR 33552, June 30, 1977, as amended at 64 FR 27203, May 19, 1999]


<R05>
  Sec. Appendix A to Part 531--Example of Calculating Compliance Under 

                             Sec. 531.5(c)

    Assume a hypothetical manufacturer (Manufacturer X) produces a fleet 
of domestic passenger automobiles in MY 2012 as follows:

                           Appendix A, Table 1

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Model type
----------------------------------------------------------------                      Actual
                                  Basic engine    Transmission     Description     measured fuel      Volume
     Group        Carline name         (L)            class                       economy  (mpg)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.............  PC A FWD.......             1.8              A5  2-door sedan...            34.0           1,500
2.............  PC A FWD.......             1.8              M6  2-door sedan...            34.6           2,000
3.............  PC A FWD.......             2.5              A6  4-door wagon...            33.8           2,000
4.............  PC A AWD.......             1.8              A6  4-door wagon...            34.4           1,000
5.............  PC A AWD.......             2.5              M6  2-door                     32.9           3,000
                                                                  hatchback.
6.............  PC B RWD.......             2.5              A6  4-door wagon...            32.2           8,000
7.............  PC B RWD.......             2.5              A7  4-door sedan...            33.1           2,000
8.............  PC C AWD.......             3.2              A7  4-door sedan...            30.6           5,000
9.............  PC C FWD.......             3.2              M6  2-door coupe...            28.5           3,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Total.......................................................................................          27,500
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Note to Appendix A, Table 1. Manufacturer X's required corporate 
average fuel economy level standard under Sec. 531.5(c) would first be 
calculated by determining the fuel economy targets applicable to each 
unique model type and footprint combination for model type groups 1-9 as 
illustrated in Appendix A, Table 2:

                           Appendix A, Table 2

    Manufacturer X calculates a fuel economy target standard for each 
unique model type and footprint combination.

[[Page 104]]



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Model type                                                                                                             Fuel
-----------------------------------------------------------------                                               Track                           economy
                                           Basic                      Description      Base tire   Wheelbase  width F&R  Footprint    Volume     target
     Group            Carline name         engine   Transmission                          size      (inches)    average    (ft\2\)              standard
                                            (L)         class                                                  (inches)                          (mpg)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1a............  PC A FWD...............        1.8           A5   2-door sedan......    205/75R14       99.8       61.2       42.4        900      35.01
1b............  PC A FWD...............        1.8           A5   2-door sedan......    215/70R15       99.8       60.9       42.2        600      35.14
2.............  PC A FWD...............        1.8           M6   2-door sedan......    215/70R15       99.8       60.9       42.2      2,000      35.14
3.............  PC A FWD...............        2.5           A6   4-door wagon......    215/70R15      100.0       60.9       42.3      2,000      35.08
4.............  PC A AWD...............        1.8           A6   4-door wagon......    235/60R15      100.0       61.2       42.5      1,000      35.95
5.............  PC A AWD...............        2.5           M6   2-door hatchback..    225/65R16       99.6       59.5       41.2      3,000      35.81
6a............  PC B RWD...............        2.5           A6   4-door wagon......    235/65R16      109.2       67.2       51.0      4,000      30.19
6b............  PC B RWD...............        2.5           A6   4-door wagon......    265/55R18      109.2       66.8       50.7      4,000      30.33
7.............  PC B RWD...............        2.5           A7   4-door sedan......    235/65R17      109.2       67.8       51.4      2,000      29.99
8.............  PC C AWD...............        3.2           A7   4-door sedan......    265/55R18      111.3       67.8       52.4      5,000      29.52
9.............  PC C FWD...............        3.2           M6   2-door coupe......    225/65R16      111.3       67.2       51.9      3,000      29.76
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Total.........................................................................................................................     27,500
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 105]]

    Note to Appendix A, Table 2. With the appropriate fuel economy 
targets determined for each unique model type and footprint combination, 
Manufacturer X's required fuel economy target standard would be 
calculated as illustrated in Appendix A, Figure 1.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07MY10.062


[[Page 106]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07MY10.063

    Note to Appendix A, Figure 2. Since the actual average fuel economy 
of Manufacturer X's fleet is 32.0 mpg, as compared to its required fuel 
economy level of 31.8 mpg, Manufacturer X complied with the CAFE 
standard for MY 2012 as set forth in Sec. 531.5(c).

[75 FR 25719, May 7, 2010]


<R03>
PART 533_LIGHT TRUCK FUEL ECONOMY STANDARDS--Table of Contents



Sec.
533.1 Scope.
533.2 Purpose.
533.3 Applicability.
533.4 Definitions.
533.5 Requirements.
533.6 Measurement and calculation procedures.

Appendix A to Part 533--Example of Calculating Compliance Under Sec. 
          533.5 Paragraph (g)

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 32902; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.


<R05>
Sec. 533.1  Scope.

    This part establishes average fuel economy standards pursuant to 
section 502(b) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, as 
amended, for light trucks.

[42 FR 13807, Mar. 14, 1977, as amended at 43 FR 12013, Mar. 23, 1978]

[[Page 107]]


<R05>
Sec. 533.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to increase the fuel economy of light 
trucks by establishing minimum levels of average fuel economy for those 
vehicles.

[42 FR 13807, Mar. 14, 1977, as amended at 43 FR 12013, Mar. 23, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 533.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to manufacturers of light trucks.

[42 FR 13807, Mar. 14, 1977, as amended at 43 FR 12013, Mar. 23, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 533.4  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory terms. (1) The terms average fuel economy, average 
fuel economy standard, fuel economy, import, manufacture, manufacturer, 
and model year are used as defined in section 501 of the Act.
    (2) The term automobile is used as defined in section 501 of the Act 
and in accordance with the determinations in part 523 of this chapter.
    (3) The term domestically manufactured is used as defined in section 
503(b)(2)(E) of the Act.
    (b) Other terms. As used in this part, unless otherwise required by 
the context--
    (1) Act means the Motor Vehicle Information Cost Savings Act, as 
amended by Pub. L. 94-163.
    (2) Light truck is used in accordance with the determinations in 
part 523 of this chapter.
    Captive import means with respect to a light truck, one which is not 
domestically manufactured but which is imported in the 1980 model year 
or thereafter by a manufacturer whose principal place of business is in 
the United States.
    4-wheel drive, general utility vehicle means a 4-wheel drive, 
general purpose automobile capable of off-highway operation that has a 
wheelbase of not more than 280 centimeters, and that has a body shape 
similar to 1977 Jeep CJ-5 or CJ-7, or the 1977 Toyota Land Cruiser.
    Basic engine means a unique combination of manufacturer, engine 
displacement, number of cylinders, fuel system (as distinguished by 
number of carburetor barrels or use of fuel injection), and catalyst 
usage.
    Limited product line light truck means a light truck manufactured by 
a manufacturer whose light truck fleet is powered exclusively by basic 
engines which are not also used in passenger automobiles.

[42 FR 13807, Mar. 14, 1977, as amended at 43 FR 12013, Mar. 23, 1978; 
43 FR 46547, Oct. 10, 1978; 58 FR 18029, Apr. 7, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 533.5  Requirements.

    (a) Each manufacturer of light trucks shall comply with the 
following average fuel economy standards, expressed in miles per gallon, 
in the model year specified as applicable:

                                                     Table I
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                       2-wheel drive     4-wheel drive   Limited
                                                                       light trucks      light trucks    product
                             Model year                             ------------------------------------   line
                                                                     Captive           Captive            light
                                                                     imports   Other   imports   Other    trucks
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1979...............................................................  .......     17.2  .......     15.8  .......
1980...............................................................     16.0     16.0     14.0     14.0     14.0
1981...............................................................     16.7     16.7     15.0     15.0     14.5
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                                    Table II
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                   Combined      2-wheel drive    4-wheel drive
                                                                   standard       light trucks     light trucks
                          Model year                          --------------------------------------------------
                                                               Captive          Captive          Captive
                                                               imports  Others  imports  Others  imports  Others
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1982.........................................................     17.5    17.5     18.0    18.0     16.0    16.0
1983.........................................................     19.0    19.0     19.5    19.5     17.5    17.5
1984.........................................................     20.0    20.0     20.3    20.3     18.5    18.5
1985.........................................................     19.5    19.5     19.7    19.7     18.9    18.9
1986.........................................................     20.0    20.0     20.5    20.5     19.5    19.5
1987.........................................................     20.5    20.5     21.0    21.0     19.5    19.5
1988.........................................................     20.5    20.5     21.0    21.0     19.5    19.5
1989.........................................................     20.5    20.5     21.5    21.5     19.0    19.0
1990.........................................................     20.0    20.0     20.5    20.5     19.0    19.0
1991.........................................................     20.2    20.2     20.7    20.7     19.1    19.1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                Table III
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       Combined standard
                                                     -------------------
                     Model Year                        Captive
                                                       imports    Other
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1992................................................       20.2     20.2
1993................................................       20.4     20.4
1994................................................       20.5     20.5
1995................................................       20.6     20.6
------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                Table IV
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Model year                            Standard
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2001........................................................        20.7
2002........................................................        20.7

[[Page 108]]

 
2003........................................................        20.7
2004........................................................        20.7
2005........................................................        21.0
2006........................................................        21.6
2007........................................................        22.2
2008........................................................        22.5
2009........................................................        23.1
2010........................................................        23.5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                                              [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14AP06.001
                                                              

Where:

N is the total number (sum) of light trucks produced by a manufacturer, 
    N<INF>i</INF> is the number (sum) of the i<SUP>th</SUP> light truck 
    model type produced by the manufacturer, and
T<INF>i</INF> is fuel economy target of the i<SUP>th</SUP> light truck 
    model type, which is determined according to the following formula, 
    rounded to the nearest hundredth:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14AP06.000
    

Where:

Parameters a, b, c, and d are defined in Sec. 533.3 Table V;
e = 2.718; and
x = footprint (in square feet, rounded to the nearest tenth) of the 
    model type

[[Page 109]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30MR09.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07MY10.064

Where:

CAFErequired is the required level for a given fleet,
Subscript i is a designation of multiple groups of light trucks, where 
each group's designation, i.e., i = 1, 2, 3, etc., represents light 
trucks that share a unique model type and footprint within the 
applicable fleet.
Productioni is the number of units of light trucks produced for sale in 
the United States within each ith designation, i.e., which share the 
same model type and footprint.
TARGETi is the fuel economy target in miles per gallon (mpg) applicable 
to the footprint of light trucks within each ith designation, i.e., 
which shares the same model type and footprint, calculated according to 
Figure 3 and rounded to the nearest hundredth of a mpg, i.e., 35.455 = 
35.46 mpg, and the summations in the numerator and denominator are both 
performed over all models in the fleet in question.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07MY10.065

Where:

TARGET is the fuel economy target (in mpg) applicable to vehicles of a 
given footprint (FOOTPRINT, in square feet),
Parameters a, b, c, and d are defined in Table VI, and
The MIN and MAX functions take the minimum and maximum, respectively of 
the included values.

[[Page 110]]



                          Table VI--Parameters for the Light Truck Fuel Economy Targets
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Parameters
                   Model year                    ---------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         a               b               c               d
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2012............................................           29.82           22.27       0.0004546        0.014900
2013............................................           30.67           22.74       0.0004546        0.013968
2014............................................           31.38           23.13       0.0004546        0.013225
2015............................................           32.72           23.85       0.0004546        0.011920
2016............................................           34.42           24.74       0.0004546        0.010413
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b)(1) For model year 1979, each manufacturer may:
    (i) Combine its 2- and 4-wheel drive light trucks and comply with 
the average fuel economy standard in paragraph (a) of this section for 
2-wheel drive light trucks; or
    (ii) Comply separately with the two standards specified in paragraph 
(a) of this section.
    (2) For model year 1979, the standard specified in paragraph (a) of 
this section for 4-wheel drive light trucks applies only to 4-wheel 
drive general utility vehicles. All other 4-wheel drive light trucks in 
that model year shall be included in the 2-wheel drive category for 
compliance purposes.
    (c) For model years 1980 and 1981, manufacturers of limited product 
line light trucks may:
    (1) Comply with the separate standard for limited product line light 
trucks, or
    (2) Comply with the other standards specified in Sec. 533.5(a), as 
applicable.
    (d) For model years 1982-91, each manufacture may:
    (1) Combine its 2- and 4-wheel drive light trucks (segregating 
captive import and other light trucks) and comply with the combined 
average fuel economy standard specified in paragraph (a) of this 
section; or
    (2) Comply separately with the 2-wheel drive standards and the 4-
wheel drive standards (segregating captive import and other light 
trucks) specified in paragraph (a) of this section.
    (e) For model year 1992, each manufacturer shall comply with the 
average fuel economy standard specified in paragraph (a) of this section 
(segregating captive import and other light trucks).
    (f) For model year 1996 and thereafter, each manufacturer shall 
combine its captive imports with its other light trucks and comply with 
the average fuel economy standard in paragraph (a) of this section.
    (g) For model years 2008-2010, at a manufacturer's option, a 
manufacturer's light truck fleet may comply with the fuel economy level 
calculated according to Figure I and the appropriate values in Table V, 
with said option being irrevocably chosen for that model year and 
reported as specified in Sec. 537.8.
    (h) For model year 2011, a manufacturer's light truck fleet shall 
comply with the fuel economy level calculated for that model year 
according to Figure 1 and the appropriate values in Table V.
    (i) For model years 2012-2016, a manufacturer's light truck fleet 
shall comply with the fuel economy level calculated for that model year 
according to Figures 2 and 3 and the appropriate values in Table VI.

[43 FR 12014, Mar. 23, 1978]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 533.5 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected which appears in the Finding Aids 
section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.


<R05>
Sec. 533.6  Measurement and calculation procedures.

    (a) Any reference to a class of light trucks manufactured by a 
manufacturer shall be deemed--
    (1) To include all light trucks in that class manufactured by 
persons who control, are controlled by, or are under common control 
with, such manufacturer; and
    (2) To exclude all light trucks in that class manufactured (within 
the meaning of paragraph (a)(1) of this section) during a model year by 
such manufacturer which are exported prior to the expiration of 30 days 
following the end of such model year.

[[Page 111]]

    (b) The average fuel economy of all nonpassenger automobiles that 
are manufactured by a manufacturer and are subject to Sec. 533.5(b) or 
to Sec. 533.5(c) shall be determined in accordance with procedures 
established by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency 
under section 503(a)(2) of the Act.

[42 FR 13807, Mar. 14, 1977, as amended at 43 FR 12013, Mar. 23, 1978]


<R05>
  Sec. Appendix A to Part 533--Example of Calculating Compliance Under 

                        Sec. 533.5 Paragraph (g)

    Assume a hypothetical manufacturer (Manufacturer X) produces a fleet 
of light trucks in MY 2012 as follows:

                           Appendix A, Table 1

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Model type
----------------------------------------------------------------                      Actual
                                  Basic engine    Transmission     Description     measured fuel      Volume
     Group        Carline name         (L)            class                       economy  (mpg)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.............  Pickup A 2WD...               4              A5  Reg cab, MB....            27.1             800
2.............  Pickup B 2WD...               4              M5  Reg cab, MB....            27.6             200
3.............  Pickup C 2WD...             4.5              A5  Reg cab, LB....            23.9             300
4.............  Pickup C 2WD...               4              M5  Ext cab, MB....            23.7             400
5.............  Pickup C 4WD...             4.5              A5  Crew cab, SB...            23.5             400
6.............  Pickup D 2WD...             4.5              A6  Crew cab, SB...            23.6             400
7.............  Pickup E 2WD...               5              A6  Ext cab, LB....            22.7             500
8.............  Pickup E 2WD...               5              A6  Crew cab, MB...            22.5             500
9.............  Pickup F 2WD...             4.5              A5  Reg cab, LB....            22.5           1,600
10............  Pickup F 4WD...             4.5              A5  Ext cab, MB....            22.3             800
11............  Pickup F 4WD...             4.5              A5  Crew cab, SB...            22.2             800
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Total.......................................................................................           6,700
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Note to Appendix A, Table 1. Manufacturer X's required corporate 
average fuel economy level under Sec. 533.5(i) would first be 
calculated by determining the fuel economy targets applicable to each 
unique model type and footprint combination for model type groups (1-11) 
illustrated in Appendix A, Table 2:

                           Appendix A, Table 2

    Manufacturer X calculates a fuel economy target standard value for 
each unique model type and footprint combination.

[[Page 112]]



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Model type                                                                                                             Fuel
-----------------------------------------------------------------                                               Track                           economy
                                           Basic                      Description      Base tire   Wheelbase  width F&R  Footprint    Volume     target
     Group            Carline name         engine   Transmission                          size      (inches)   average     (ft\2\)              standard
                                            (L)         class                                                  (inches)                          (mpg)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.............  Pickup A 2WD...........          4           A5   Reg cab, MB.......    235/75R15      100.0       68.8       47.8        800      27.30
2a............  Pickup B 2WD...........          4           M5   Reg cab, MB.......    235/75R15      100.0       68.2       47.4        100      27.44
2b............  Pickup B 2WD...........          4           M5   Reg cab, MB.......    235/70R16      100.0       68.4       47.5        100      27.40
3.............  Pickup C 2WD...........        4.5           A5   Reg cab, LB.......    255/70R17      125.0       68.8       59.7        300      23.79
4.............  Pickup C 2WD...........          4           M5   Ext cab, MB.......    255/70R17      125.0       68.8       59.7        400      23.79
5.............  Pickup C 4WD...........        4.5           A5   Crew cab, SB......    275/70R17      150.0       69.0       71.9        400      22.27
6a............  Pickup D 2WD...........        4.5           A6   Crew cab, SB......    255/70R17      125.0       68.8       59.7        200      23.79
6b............  Pickup D 2WD...........        4.5           A6   Crew cab, SB......    285/70R17      125.0       69.2       60.1        200      23.68
7.............  Pickup E 2WD...........          5           A6   Ext cab, LB.......    255/70R17      125.0       68.8       59.7        500      23.79
8.............  Pickup E 2WD...........          5           A6   Crew cab, MB......    285/70R17      125.0       69.2       60.1        500      23.68
9.............  Pickup F 2WD...........        4.5           A5   Reg cab, LB.......    255/70R17      125.0       68.9       59.8      1,600      23.76
10............  Pickup F 4WD...........        4.5           A5   Ext cab, MB.......    275/70R17      150.0       69.0       71.9        800      22.27
11............  Pickup F 4WD...........        4.5           A5   Crew cab, SB......    285/70R17      150.0       69.2       72.1        800      22.27
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Total.........................................................................................................................      6,700
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 113]]

    Note to Appendix A, Table 2. With the appropriate fuel economy 
targets determined for each unique model type and footprint combination, 
Manufacturer X's required fuel economy target standard would be 
calculated as illustrated in Appendix A, Figure 1.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07MY10.066


[[Page 114]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07MY10.067

    Note to Appendix A, Figure 2. Since the actual average fuel economy 
of Manufacturer X's fleet is 23.3 mpg, as compared to its required fuel 
economy level of 23.5 mpg, Manufacturer X did not comply with the CAFE 
standard for MY 2012 as set forth in section 533.5(i).

[[Page 115]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR06AP06.041

    Note to Appendix A Figure 3. Since the actual average fuel economy 
of Manufacturer X's fleet is 23.2 mpg, as compared to its required fuel 
economy level of 23.1 mpg, Manufacturer X complies with the Reformed 
CAFE standard for MY 2008 as set forth in Sec. 533.7(g).

[71 FR 17677, Apr. 6, 2006; 71 FR 19451, Apr. 14, 2006, as amended at 75 
FR 25724, May 7, 2010]


<R03>
PART 534_RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF MANUFACTURERS IN THE CONTEXT OF 

CHANGES IN CORPORATE RELATIONSHIPS--Table of Contents



Sec.
534.1 Scope.
534.2 Applicability.
534.3 Definitions.
534.4 Successors and predecessors.
534.5 Manufacturers within control relationships.
534.6 Reporting corporate transactions.
534.7 Situations not directly addressed by this part.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 32901; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 69 FR 77671, Dec. 28, 2004, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 534.1  Scope.

    This part defines the rights and responsibilities of manufacturers 
in the context of changes in corporate relationships for purposes of the 
automotive fuel economy program established by 49 U.S.C. Chapter 329.

    Effective Date Note: At 76 FR 57492, Sept. 15, 2011, Sec. 534.1 was 
revised, effective November 14, 2011. For the convenience of the user, 
the revised text is set forth as follows:


<R05>
Sec. 534.1  Scope.

    This part defines the rights and responsibilities of manufacturers 
in the context of changes in corporate relationships for purposes of the 
fuel economy and fuel consumption programs established by 49 U.S.C. 
chapter 329.


<R05>
Sec. 534.2  Applicability.

    This part applies to manufacturers of passenger automobiles and non-
passenger automobiles.

    Effective Date Note: At 76 FR 57492, Sept. 15, 2011, Sec. 534.2 was 
revised, effective November 14, 2011. For the convenience of the user, 
the revised text is set forth as follows:


<R05>
Sec. 534.2  Applicability.

    This part applies to manufacturers of passenger automobiles, light 
trucks, heavy-duty vehicles and the engines manufactured for use in 
heavy-duty vehicles as defined in 49 CFR part 523.


<R05>
Sec. 534.3  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory definitions and terms. All terms used in 49 U.S.C. 
Chapter 329 are used according to their statutory meaning.
    (b) As used in this part--
    ``Control relationship'' means the relationship that exists between 
manufacturers that control, are controlled by, or are under common 
control with, one or more other manufacturers.

[[Page 116]]

    ``Predecessor'' means a manufacturer whose rights have been vested 
in and whose burdens have been assumed by another manufacturer.
    ``Successor'' means a manufacturer that has become vested with the 
rights and assumed the burdens of another manufacturer.


<R05>
Sec. 534.4  Successors and predecessors.

    For purposes of the automotive fuel economy program, 
``manufacturer'' includes ``predecessors'' and ``successors'' to the 
extent specified in paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section.
    (a) Successors are responsible for any civil penalties that arise 
out of fuel economy shortfalls incurred and not satisfied by 
predecessors.
    (b) If one manufacturer has become the successor of another 
manufacturer during a model year, all of the vehicles produced by those 
manufacturers during the model year are treated as though they were 
manufactured by the same manufacturer. A manufacturer is considered to 
have become the successor of another manufacturer during a model year if 
it is the successor on September 30 of the corresponding calendar year 
and was not the successor for the preceding model year.
    (c) Credits earned by a predecessor before or during model year 2007 
may be used by a successor, subject to the availability of credits and 
the general three-year restriction on carrying credits forward and the 
general three-year restriction on carrying credits backward. Credits 
earned by a predecessor after model year 2007 may be used by a 
successor, subject to the availability of credits and the general five-
year restriction on carrying credits forward and the general three-year 
restriction on carrying credits backward.
    (d) Credits earned by a successor before or during model year 2007 
may be used to offset a predecessor's shortfall, subject to the 
availability of credits and the general three-year restriction on 
carrying credits forward and the general three-year restriction on 
carrying credits backward. Credits earned by a successor after model 
year 2007 may be used to offset a predecessor's shortfall, subject to 
the availability of credits and the general five-year restriction on 
carrying credits forward and the general three-year restriction on 
carrying credits backward.

[69 FR 77671, Dec. 28, 2004, as amended at 74 FR 14452, Mar. 30, 2009]

    Effective Date Note: At 76 FR 57492, Sept. 15, 2011, Sec. 534.4 was 
revised, effective November 14, 2011. For the convenience of the user, 
the revised text is set forth as follows:


<R05>
Sec. 534.4  Successors and predecessors.

    For purposes of the fuel economy and fuel consumption programs, 
``manufacturer'' includes ``predecessors'' and ``successors'' to the 
extent specified in this section.
    (a) Successors are responsible for any civil penalties that arise 
out of fuel economy and fuel consumption shortfalls incurred and not 
satisfied by predecessors.
    (b) If one manufacturer has become the successor of another 
manufacturer during a model year, all of the vehicles or engines 
produced by those manufacturers during the model year are treated as 
though they were manufactured by the same manufacturer. A manufacturer 
is considered to have become the successor of another manufacturer 
during a model year if it is the successor on September 30 of the 
corresponding calendar year and was not the successor for the preceding 
model year.
    (c)(1) For passenger automobiles and light trucks, fuel economy 
credits earned by a predecessor before or during model year 2007 may be 
used by a successor, subject to the availability of credits and the 
general three-year restriction on carrying credits forward and the 
general three-year restriction on carrying credits backward. Fuel 
economy credits earned by a predecessor after model year 2007 may be 
used by a successor, subject to the availability of credits and the 
general five-year restriction on carrying credits forward and the 
general three-year restriction on carrying credits backward.
    (2) For heavy-duty vehicles and heavy-duty vehicle engines, 
available fuel consumption credits earned by a predecessor after model 
year 2015, and in model years 2013, 2014 and 2015 if a manufacturer 
voluntarily complies in those model years, may be used by a successor, 
subject to the availability of credits and the general five-year 
restriction on carrying credits forward and the general three year 
restriction on carrying credits backward.
    (d)(1) For passenger automobiles and light trucks, fuel economy 
credits earned by a successor before or during model year 2007 may be 
used to offset a predecessor's shortfall, subject to the availability of 
credits and the general three-year restriction on carrying credits 
forward and the general three-year restriction on carrying credits 
backward. Credits earned by a successor after model

[[Page 117]]

year 2007 may be used to offset a predecessor's shortfall, subject to 
the availability of credits and the general five-year restriction on 
carrying credits forward and the general three-year restriction on 
carrying credits backward.
    (2) For heavy-duty vehicles and heavy-duty vehicle engines, 
available credits earned by a successor after model year 2015, and in 
model years 2013, 2014 and 2015, if a manufacturer voluntarily complies 
in those model years, may be used by a predecessor subject to the 
availability of credits and the general five-year restriction on 
carrying credits forward and the general three year restriction on 
carrying credits backward.


<R05>
Sec. 534.5  Manufacturers within control relationships.

    (a) If a civil penalty arises out of a fuel economy shortfall 
incurred by a group of manufacturers within a control relationship, each 
manufacturer within that group is jointly and severally liable for the 
civil penalty.
    (b) A manufacturer is considered to be within a control relationship 
for an entire model year if and only if it is within that relationship 
on September 30 of the calendar year in which the model year ends.
    (c) Credits of a manufacturer within a control relationship may be 
used by the group of manufacturers within the control relationship to 
offset shortfalls, subject to the agreement of the other manufacturers, 
the availability of the credits, and the general three-year restriction 
on carrying credits forward or backward prior to or during model year 
2007, or the general five-year restriction on carrying credits forward 
and the general three-year restriction on carrying credits backward 
after model year 2007.
    (d) If a manufacturer within a group of manufacturers is sold or 
otherwise spun off so that it is no longer within that control 
relationship, the manufacturer may use credits that were earned by the 
group of manufacturers within the control relationship while the 
manufacturer was within that relationship, subject to the agreement of 
the other manufacturers, the availability of the credits, and the 
general three-year restriction on carrying credits forward or backward 
prior to or during model year 2007, or the general five-year restriction 
on carrying credits forward and the general three-year restriction on 
carrying credits backward after model year 2007.
    (e) Agreements among manufacturers in a control relationship related 
to the allocation of credits or liabilities addressed by this section 
shall be filed with the agency within 60 days of the end of each model 
year in the same form as specified in section 534.6. The manufacturers 
may seek confidential treatment for information provided in the 
certified report in accordance with 49 CFR Part 512.

[69 FR 77671, Dec. 28, 2004, as amended at 74 FR 14452, Mar. 30, 2009]

    Effective Date Note: At 76 FR 57492, Sept. 15, 2011, Sec. 534.5 was 
amended by revising paragraphs (a), (c) and (d), effective November 14, 
2011. For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as 
follows:


<R05>
Sec. 534.5  Manufacturers within control relationships.

    (a) If a civil penalty arises out of a fuel economy or fuel 
consumption shortfall incurred by a group of manufacturers within a 
control relationship, each manufacturer within that group is jointly and 
severally liable for the civil penalty.

                                * * * * *

    (c)(1) For passenger automobiles and light trucks, fuel economy 
credits of a manufacturer within a control relationship may be used by 
the group of manufacturers within the control relationship to offset 
shortfalls, subject to the agreement of the other manufacturers, the 
availability of the credits, and the general three year restriction on 
carrying credits forward or backward prior to or during model year 2007, 
or the general five year restriction on carrying credits forward and the 
general three-year restriction on carrying credits backward after model 
year 2007.
    (2) For heavy-duty vehicles and heavy-duty engines, credits of a 
manufacturer within a control relationship may be used by the group of 
manufacturers within the control relationship to offset shortfalls, 
subject to the agreement of the other manufacturers, the availability of 
the credits, the general 5-year restriction on carrying credits forward, 
and the general three year restriction on offsetting past credit 
shortfalls as specified in the requirements of 49 CFR 535.7.
    (d)(1) For passenger automobiles and light trucks, if a manufacturer 
within a group of manufacturers is sold or otherwise spun off so that it 
is no longer within that control relationship, the manufacturer may use 
credits that were earned by the group of manufacturers within the 
control relationship while

[[Page 118]]

the manufacturer was within that relationship, subject to the agreement 
of the other manufacturers, the availability of the credits, and the 
general three-year restriction on carrying credits forward or backward 
prior to or during model year 2007, or the general five-year restriction 
on carrying credits forward and the general three-year restriction on 
carrying credits backward after model year 2007.
    (2) For heavy-duty vehicles and heavy-duty vehicle engines, if a 
manufacturer within a group of manufacturers is sold or otherwise spun 
off so that it is no longer within that control relationship, the 
manufacturer may use credits that were earned by the group of 
manufacturers within the control relationship while the manufacturer was 
within that relationship, subject to the agreement of the other 
manufacturers, the availability of the credits, the general 5-year 
restriction on carrying credits forward, and the general three year 
restriction on offsetting past credit shortfalls as specified in the 
requirements of 49 CFR 535.7.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 534.6  Reporting corporate transactions.

    Manufacturers who have entered into written contracts transferring 
rights and responsibilities such that a different manufacturer owns the 
controlling stock or exerts control over the design, production or sale 
of automobiles to which a Corporate Average Fuel Economy standard 
applies shall report the contract to the agency as follows:
    (a) The manufacturers must file a certified report with the agency 
affirmatively stating that the contract transfers rights and 
responsibilities between them such that one manufacturer has assumed a 
controlling stock ownership or control over the design, production or 
sale of vehicles. The report must also specify the first full model year 
to which the transaction will apply.
    (b) Each report shall--
    (i) Identify each manufacturer;
    (ii) State the full name, title, and address of the official 
responsible for preparing the report;
    (iii) Identify the production year being reported on;
    (iv) Be written in the English language; and
    (v) Be submitted to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590.
    (c) The manufacturers may seek confidential treatment for 
information provided in the certified report in accordance with 49 CFR 
part 512.

    Effective Date Note: At 76 FR 57493, Sept. 15, 2011, Sec. 534.5 was 
revised, effective November 14, 2011. For the convenience of the user, 
the revised text is set forth as follows:


<R05>
Sec. 534.6  Reporting corporate transactions.

    Manufacturers who have entered into written contracts transferring 
rights and responsibilities such that a different manufacturer owns the 
controlling stock or exerts control over the design, production or sale 
of automobiles or heavy-duty vehicles to which Corporate Average Fuel 
Economy or Fuel Consumption standards apply shall report the contract to 
the agency as follows:
    (a) The manufacturers must file a certified report with the agency 
affirmatively stating that the contract transfers rights and 
responsibilities between them such that one manufacturer has assumed a 
controlling stock ownership or control over the design, production or 
sale of vehicles. The report must also specify the first full model year 
to which the transaction will apply.
    (b) Each report shall--
    (1) Identify each manufacturer;
    (2) State the full name, title, and address of the official 
responsible for preparing the report;
    (3) Identify the production year being reported on;
    (4) Be written in the English language; and
    (5) Be submitted to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE., Washington, DC 20590.
    (c) The manufacturers may seek confidential treatment for 
information provided in the certified report in accordance with 49 CFR 
part 512.


<R05>
Sec. 534.7  Situations not directly addressed by this part.

    To the extent that this part does not directly address an issue 
concerning the rights and responsibilities of manufacturers in the 
context of a change in corporate relationships, the agency will make 
determinations based on interpretation of the statute and the principles 
reflected in the part.

[[Page 119]]


<R03>
PART 535_MEDIUM- AND HEAVY-DUTY VEHICLE FUEL EFFICIENCY PROGRAM (Eff. 11-14-

11)--Table of Contents



Sec.
535.1 Scope.
535.2 Purpose.
535.3 Applicability.
535.4 Definitions.
535.5 Standards.
535.6 Measurement and calculation procedures.
535.7 Averaging, banking, and trading (ABT) program.
535.8 Reporting requirements.
535.9 Enforcement approach.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 32902; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 76 FR 57493, Sept. 15, 2011, unless otherwise noted.

    Effective Date Note: At 76 FR 57493, Sept. 15, 2011, part 535 was 
added, effective November 14, 2011.


<R05>
Sec. 535.1  Scope.

    This part establishes fuel consumption standards pursuant to 49 
U.S.C. 32902(k) for work trucks and commercial medium-duty and heavy-
duty on-highway vehicles (hereafter referenced as heavy-duty vehicles) 
and engines manufactured for sale in the United States and establishes a 
credit program manufacturers may use to comply with standards and 
requirements for manufacturers to provide reports to the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration regarding their efforts to reduce 
the fuel consumption of these vehicles.


<R05>
Sec. 535.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to reduce the fuel consumption of new 
heavy-duty vehicles by establishing maximum levels for fuel consumption 
standards while providing a flexible credit program to assist 
manufacturers in complying with standards.


<R05>
Sec. 535.3  Applicability.

    (a) This part applies to complete vehicle and chassis manufacturers 
of all new heavy-duty vehicles, as defined in 49 CFR part 523, and to 
the manufacturers of all heavy-duty engines manufactured for use in the 
applicable vehicles for each given model year.
    (b) Complete vehicle manufacturers, for the purpose of this part, 
include manufacturers that produce heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans or 
truck tractors as complete vehicles and that hold the EPA certificate of 
conformity.
    (c) Chassis manufacturers, for the purpose of this part, include 
manufacturers that produce incomplete vehicles constructed for use as 
heavy-duty pickup trucks or vans or heavy-duty vocational vehicles and 
that hold the EPA certificate of conformity. Some vocational vehicle 
manufacturers are both chassis and complete vehicle manufacturers. These 
manufacturers will be regulated as chassis manufacturers under this 
program.
    (d) Engine manufacturer, for the purpose of this part, means a 
manufacturer that manufactures engines for heavy-duty vehicles and holds 
the EPA certificate of conformity.
    (e) The heavy-duty vehicles, chassis and engines excluded from the 
requirements of this part include:
    (1) Recreational vehicles, including motor homes.
    (2) Vehicles and engines exempted by EPA in accordance with 40 CFR 
parts 1036 and 1037.
    (f) Vehicles and engines produced by small business manufacturers as 
defined by the Small Business Administration at 13 CFR 121.201 are 
exempted as specified in Sec. 535.8(h).
    (g) Heavy-duty off-road vehicles meeting the criteria in 49 CFR part 
523 are exempt without request from vehicle standards of Sec. 535.5(b). 
Manufacturers of vehicles not meeting the criteria for the heavy-duty 
off-road vehicle exclusion may submit a petition as specified in Sec. 
535.8(h) to EPA and NHTSA for an exclusion from the vehicle standards of 
Sec. 535.5(b).
    (h) A vehicle manufacturer that completes assembly of a vehicle at 
two or more facilities may ask to use as the date of manufacture for 
that vehicle the date on which manufacturing is completed at the place 
of main assembly, consistent with provisions of 49 CFR 567.4, as the 
model year. Note that such staged assembly is subject to the provisions 
of 40 CFR 1068.260(c). NHTSA's allowance of this provision is

[[Page 120]]

effective when EPA approves the manufacturer's certificates of 
conformity for these vehicles.


<R05>
Sec. 535.4  Definitions.

    The terms manufacture and manufacturer are used as defined in 
section 501 of the Act and the terms commercial medium-duty and heavy-
duty on highway vehicle, fuel and work truck are used as defined in 49 
U.S.C. 32901.
    A to B testing means testing performed in pairs to allow comparison 
of vehicle A to vehicle B.
    Act means the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, as 
amended by Pub. L. 94-163 and 96-425.
    Administrator means the Administrator of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) or the Administrator's delegate.
    Advanced technology means vehicle technology certified under 40 CFR 
1036.615 and 1037.615.
    Averaging set means, a set of engines or vehicles in which fuel 
consumption credits may be exchanged. Credits generated by one engine or 
vehicle family may only be used by other respective engine or vehicle 
families in the same averaging set. Note that an averaging set may 
comprise more than one regulatory subcategory. The averaging sets for 
this HD program are defined as follows:
    (1) Heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans.
    (2) Vocational light-heavy vehicles at or below 19,500 pounds GVWR.
    (3) Vocational and tractor medium-heavy vehicles above 19,500 pounds 
GVWR but at or below 33,000 pounds GVWR.
    (4) Vocational and tractor heavy-heavy vehicles above 33,000 pounds 
GVWR.
    (5) Compression-ignition light heavy-duty engines for Class 2b to 5 
vehicles with a GVWR above 8,500 pounds but at or below 19,500 pounds.
    (6) Compression-ignition medium heavy-duty engines for Class 6 and 7 
vehicles with a GVWR above 19,500 but at or below 33,000 pounds.
    (7) Compression-ignition heavy heavy-duty engines for Class 8 
vehicles with a GVWR above 33,000 pounds.
    (8) Spark-ignition engines in Class 2b to 8 vehicles with a GVWR 
above 8,500 pounds.
    Cab-complete vehicle has the meaning given in 49 CFR part 523.
    Carryover means relating to certification based on emission data 
generated from an earlier model year.
    Certificate holder means the manufacturer who holds the certificate 
of conformity for the vehicle or engine and that assigns the model year 
based on the date when its manufacturing operations are completed 
relative to its annual model year period.
    Certificate of Conformity means an approval document granted by the 
EPA to a manufacturer that submits an application for a vehicle or 
engine emissions family in 40 CFR 1036.205 and 1037.205. A certificate 
of conformity is valid from the indicated effective date until December 
31 of the model year for which it is issued. The certificate must be 
renewed annually for any vehicle a manufacturer continues to produce.
    Certification means process of obtaining a certificate of conformity 
for a vehicle family that complies with the emission standards and 
requirements in this part.
    Certified emission level means the highest deteriorated emission 
level in an engine family for a given pollutant from the applicable 
transient and/or steady-state testing rounded to the same number of 
decimal places as the applicable standard. Note that you may have two 
certified emission levels for CO<INF>2</INF> if you certify a family for 
both vocational and tractor use.
    Chassis-cab means the incomplete part of a vehicle that includes a 
frame, a completed occupant compartment and that requires only the 
addition of cargo-carrying, work-performing, or load-bearing components 
to perform its intended functions.
    Chief Counsel means the NHTSA Chief Counsel, or his or her designee.
    Complete sister vehicle is a complete vehicle of the same 
configuration as a cab-complete vehicle.
    Complete vehicle has the meaning given in 49 CFR part 523.
    Compression-ignition means relating to a type of reciprocating, 
internal-

[[Page 121]]

combustion engine, such as a diesel engine, that is not a spark-ignition 
engine.
    Configuration means a subclassification within a test group which is 
based on engine code, transmission type and gear ratios, final drive 
ratio, and other parameters which the EPA designates.
    Credits (or fuel consumption credits) in this part means an earned 
allowance recognizing the fuel consumption of a particular 
manufacturer's vehicles or engines within a particular averaging set 
exceeds (credit surplus or positive credits) or falls below (credit 
shortfall, deficit or negative credits) that manufacturer's fuel 
consumption standard(s) for the regulatory subcategory(s) that make-up 
the averaging set for a given model year, or purchased allowance. The 
value of an earned credit is calculated according to Sec. 535.7.
    Curb weight has the meaning given in 40 CFR 86.1803.
    Date of manufacture means the date on which the certifying vehicle 
manufacturer completes its manufacturing operations, except as follows:
    (1) Where the certificate holder is an engine manufacturer that does 
not manufacture the chassis, the date of manufacture of the vehicle is 
based on the date assembly of the vehicle is completed.
    (2) EPA and NHTSA may approve an alternate date of manufacture based 
on the date on which the certifying (or primary) vehicle manufacturer 
completes assembly at the place of main assembly, consistent with the 
provisions of 40 CFR 1037.601 and 49 CFR 567.4.
    Day cab means a type of truck tractor cab that is not a ``sleeper 
cab'', as defined in this section.
    Dedicated vehicle has the same meaning as dedicated automobile as 
defined in 49 U.S.C. 32901(a)(8). A dedicated automobile means an 
automobile that operates only on alternative fuels like E85 or natural 
gas, etc.
    Dual fueled (multi-fuel or flexible-fuel vehicle) has the same 
meaning as dual fueled automobile as defined in 49 U.S.C. 32901(a)(9). 
For example, a vehicle that operates on gasoline and E85 or a plug-in 
hybrid electric vehicle is considered a dual fueled vehicle.
    Electric vehicle means a vehicle that does not include an engine, 
and is powered solely by an external source of electricity and/or solar 
power. Note that this does not include electric hybrid or fuel-cell 
vehicles that use a chemical fuel such as gasoline, diesel fuel, or 
hydrogen. Electric vehicles may also be referred to as all-electric 
vehicles to distinguish them from hybrid vehicles.
    Engine family has the meaning given in 40 CFR 1036.230.
    Family certification level (FCL) means the family certification 
limit for an engine family as defined in 40 CFR 1036.801.
    Family emission limit (FEL) means the family emission limit for a 
vehicle family as defined in 40 CFR 1037.801.
    Final-stage manufacturer has the meaning given in 49 CFR 567.3.
    Fleet in this part means all the heavy-duty vehicles or engines 
within each of the regulatory sub-categories that are manufactured by a 
manufacturer in a particular model year and that are subject to fuel 
consumption standards under Sec. 535.5.
    Fleet average fuel consumption is the calculated average fuel 
consumption performance value for a manufacturer's fleet derived from 
the production weighted fuel consumption values of the unique vehicle 
configurations within each vehicle model type that makes up that 
manufacturer's vehicle fleet in a given model year. In this part, the 
fleet average fuel consumption value is determined for each 
manufacturer's fleet of heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans.
    Fleet average fuel consumption standard is the actual average fuel 
consumption standard for a manufacturer's fleet derived from the 
production weighted fuel consumption standards of each unique vehicle 
configuration, based on payload, tow capacity and drive configuration 
(2, 4 or all-wheel drive), of the model types that makes up that 
manufacturer's vehicle fleet in a given model year. In this part, the 
fleet average fuel consumption standard is determined for each 
manufacturer's fleet of heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans.
    Fuel cell means an electrochemical cell that produces electricity 
via the

[[Page 122]]

non-combustion reaction of a consumable fuel, typically hydrogen.
    Fuel cell electric vehicle means a motor vehicle propelled solely by 
an electric motor where energy for the motor is supplied by a fuel cell.
    Fuel efficiency means the amount of work performed for each gallon 
of fuel consumed.
    Good engineering judgment has the meaning given in 40 CFR 1068.30. 
See 40 CFR 1068.5 for the administrative process used to evaluate good 
engineering judgment.
    Gross combination weight rating (GCWR) has the meaning given in 49 
CFR part 523.
    Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) has the meaning given in 49 CFR 
part 523.
    Heavy-duty vehicle has the meaning given in 49 CFR part 523.
    Hybrid engine or hybrid powertrain means an engine or powertrain 
that includes energy storage features other than a conventional battery 
system or conventional flywheel. Supplemental electrical batteries and 
hydraulic accumulators are examples of hybrid energy storage systems. 
Note that certain provisions in this part treat hybrid engines and 
powertrains intended for vehicles that include regenerative braking 
different than those intended for vehicles that do not include 
regenerative braking.
    Hybrid vehicle means a vehicle that includes energy storage features 
(other than a conventional battery system or conventional flywheel) in 
addition to an internal combustion engine or other engine using 
consumable chemical fuel. Supplemental electrical batteries and 
hydraulic accumulators are examples of hybrid energy storage systems. 
Note that certain provisions in this part treat hybrid vehicles that 
include regenerative braking different than those that do not include 
regenerative braking.
    Incomplete vehicle has the meaning given in 49 CFR part 523. For the 
purpose of this regulation, a manufacturer may request EPA and NHTSA to 
allow the certification of a vehicle as an incomplete vehicle if it 
manufactures the engine and sells the unassembled chassis components, 
provided it does not produce and sell the body components necessary to 
complete the vehicle.
    Innovative technology means technology certified under 40 CFR 
1037.610.
    Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) has the meaning given in 40 CFR 
1036.801.
    Low rolling resistance tire means a tire on a vocational vehicle 
with a tire rolling resistance level (TRRL) of 7.7 kg/metric ton or 
lower, a steer tire on a tractor with a TRRL of 7.7 kg/metric ton or 
lower, or a drive tire on a tractor with a TRRL of 8.1 kg/metric ton or 
lower.
    Model type has the meaning given in 40 CFR 600.002.
    Model year as it applies to engines means the manufacturer's annual 
new model production period, except as restricted under this definition. 
It must include January 1 of the calendar year for which the model year 
is named, may not begin before January 2 of the previous calendar year, 
and it must end by December 31 of the named calendar year. Manufacturers 
may not adjust model years to circumvent or delay compliance with 
standards.
    Model year as it applies to vehicles means the manufacturer's annual 
new model production period, except as restricted under this definition 
and 40 CFR part 85, subpart X. It must include January 1 of the calendar 
year for which the model year is named, may not begin before January 2 
of the previous calendar year, and it must end by December 31 of the 
named calendar year.
    (1) The manufacturer who holds the certificate of conformity for the 
vehicle must assign the model year based on the date when its 
manufacturing operations are completed relative to its annual model year 
period.
    (2) Unless a vehicle is being shipped to a secondary manufacturer 
that will hold the certificate of conformity, the model year must be 
assigned prior to introduction of the vehicle into U.S. commerce. The 
certifying manufacturer must redesignate the model year if it does not 
complete its manufacturing operations within the originally identified 
model year. A vehicle introduced into U.S. commerce without a model year 
is deemed to have a model year equal to the calendar year of its 
introduction into U.S. commerce unless the certifying manufacturer 
assigns a later date.

[[Page 123]]

    Natural gas has the meaning given in 40 CFR 1036.801. Vehicles that 
use a pilot-ignited natural gas engine (which uses a small diesel fuel 
ignition system), are still considered natural gas vehicles.
    NHTSA Enforcement means the NHTSA Associate Administrator for 
Enforcement, or his or her designee.
    Party means the person alleged to have committed a violation of 
Sec. 535.9, and includes manufacturers of vehicles and manufacturers of 
engines.
    Payload means in this part the resultant of subtracting the curb 
weight from the gross vehicle weight rating.
    Petroleum has the meaning given in 40 CFR 1036.801.
    Pickup truck has the meaning given in 49 CFR part 523.
    Plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV) means a hybrid electric 
vehicle that has the capability to charge the battery or batteries used 
for vehicle propulsion from an off-vehicle electric source, such that 
the off-vehicle source cannot be connected to the vehicle while the 
vehicle is in motion.
    Power take-off (PTO) means a secondary engine shaft or other system 
on a vehicle that provides substantial auxiliary power for purposes 
unrelated to vehicle propulsion or normal vehicle accessories such as 
air conditioning, power steering, and basic electrical accessories. A 
typical PTO uses a secondary shaft on the engine to transmit power to a 
hydraulic pump that powers auxiliary equipment such as a boom on a 
bucket truck.
    Primary intended service class has the meaning for engines as 
specified in 40 CFR 1036.140.
    Rechargeable Energy Storage System (RESS) means the component(s) of 
a hybrid engine or vehicle that store recovered energy for later use, 
such as the battery system in a electric hybrid vehicle.
    Regulatory category means each of the three types of heavy-duty 
vehicles defined in 49 CFR 523.6 and the heavy-duty engines used in 
these heavy-duty vehicles.
    Regulatory subcategory means the sub-groups in each regulatory 
category to which fuel consumption requirements apply, and are defined 
as follows:
    (1) Heavy-duty pick-up trucks and vans.
    (2) Vocational light-heavy vehicles at or below 19,500 pounds GVWR.
    (3) Vocational medium-heavy vehicles above 19,500 pounds GVWR but at 
or below 33,000 pounds GVWR.
    (4) Vocational heavy-heavy vehicles above 33,000 pounds GVWR.
    (5) Low roof day cab tractors with a GVWR above 26,000 pounds but at 
or below 33,000 pounds.
    (6) Mid roof day cab tractors with a GVWR above 26,000 pounds but at 
or below 33,000 pounds.
    (7) High roof day cab tractors with a GVWR above 26,000 pounds but 
at or below 33,000 pounds.
    (8) Low roof day cab tractors above 33,000 pounds GVWR.
    (9) Mid roof day cab tractors above 33,000 pounds GVWR.
    (10) High roof day cab tractors above 33,000 pounds GVWR.
    (11) Low roof sleeper cab tractors above 33,000 pounds GVWR.
    (12) Mid roof sleeper cab tractors above 33,000 pounds GVWR.
    (13) High roof sleeper cab tractors above 33,000 pounds GVWR.
    (14) Compression-ignition light heavy-duty engines in Class 2b to 5 
vehicles with a GVWR above 8,500 pounds but at or below 19,500 pounds.
    (15) Compression-ignition medium heavy-duty engines in Class 6 and 7 
vocational vehicles with a GVWR above 19,500 but at or below 33,000 
pounds.
    (16) Compression-ignition heavy heavy-duty engines in Class 8 
vocational vehicles with a GVWR above 33,000 pounds.
    (17) Compression-ignition medium heavy-duty engines in Class 7 
tractors with a GVWR above 26,000 pounds but at or below 33,000 pounds.
    (18) Compression-ignition heavy heavy-duty engines in Class 8 
tractors with a GVWR above 33,000 pounds.
    (19) Spark-ignition engines in Class 2b to 8 vehicles with a GVWR 
above 8,500 pounds.
    Roof height means the maximum height of a vehicle (rounded to the 
nearest inch), excluding narrow accessories such as exhaust pipes and 
antennas, but including any wide accessories such as roof fairings. 
Measure roof height of the vehicle configured to

[[Page 124]]

have its maximum height that will occur during actual use, with properly 
inflated tires and no driver, passengers, or cargo onboard. Determine 
the base roof height on fully inflated tires having a static loaded 
radius equal to the arithmetic mean of the largest and smallest static 
loaded radius of tires a manufacturer offers or a standard tire EPA 
approves. If a vehicle is equipped with an adjustable roof fairing, 
measure the roof height with the fairing in its lowest setting. Once the 
maximum height is determined, roof heights are divided into the 
following categories:
    (1) Low-roof means a vehicle with a roof height of 120 inches or 
less.
    (2) Mid-roof means a vehicle with a roof height between 121 and 147 
inches.
    (3) High-roof means a vehicle with a roof height of 148 inches or 
more.
    Service class group means a group of engine and vehicle averaging 
sets defined as follows:
    (1) Spark-ignition engines, light heavy-duty compression-ignition 
engines, light heavy-duty vocational vehicles and heavy-duty pickup 
trucks and vans.
    (2) Medium heavy-duty compression-ignition engines and medium heavy-
duty vocational vehicles and tractors.
    (3) Heavy heavy-duty compression-ignition engines and heavy heavy-
duty vocational vehicles and tractors.
    Sleeper cab means a type of truck cab that has a compartment behind 
the driver's seat intended to be used by the driver for sleeping. This 
includes both cabs accessible from the driver's compartment and those 
accessible from outside the vehicle.
    Spark-ignition engines means relating to a gasoline-fueled engine or 
any other type of engine with a spark plug (or other sparking device) 
and with operating characteristics significantly similar to the 
theoretical Otto combustion cycle. Spark-ignition engines usually use a 
throttle to regulate intake air flow to control power during normal 
operation.
    Subconfiguration means a unique combination within a vehicle 
configuration of equivalent test weight, road-load horsepower, and any 
other operational characteristics or parameters that EPA determines may 
significantly affect CO<INF>2</INF> emissions within a vehicle 
configuration.
    Test group means the multiple vehicle lines and model types that 
share critical emissions and fuel consumption related features and that 
are certified as a group by a common certificate of conformity issued by 
EPA and is used collectively with other test groups within an averaging 
set or regulatory subcategory and is used by NHTSA for determining the 
fleet average fuel consumption.
    Tire rolling resistance level (TRRL) means a value with units of kg/
metric ton that represents that rolling resistance of a tire 
configuration. TRRLs are used as inputs to the GEM model under 40 CFR 
1037.520. Note that a manufacturer may assign a value higher than a 
measured rolling resistance of a tire configuration.
    Towing capacity in this part is equal to the resultant of 
subtracting the gross vehicle weight rating from the gross combined 
weight rating.
    Trade means to exchange fuel consumption credits, either as a buyer 
or a seller.
    Truck tractor has the meaning given in 49 CFR 571.3. This includes 
most heavy-duty vehicles specifically designed for the primary purpose 
of pulling trailers, but does not include vehicles designed to carry 
other loads. For purposes of this definition ``other loads'' would not 
include loads carried in the cab, sleeper compartment, or toolboxes. 
Examples of vehicles that are similar to tractors but that are not 
tractors under this part include dromedary tractors, automobile haulers, 
straight trucks with trailers hitches, and tow trucks.
    U.S.-directed production volume means the number of vehicle units, 
subject to the requirements of this part, produced by a manufacturer for 
which the manufacturer has a reasonable assurance that sale was or will 
be made to ultimate purchasers in the United States.
    Useful life has the meaning given in 40 CFR 1037.801.
    Vehicle configuration means a unique combination of vehicle hardware 
and calibration (related to measured or modeled emissions) within a 
vehicle family. Vehicles with hardware or software differences, but that 
have no

[[Page 125]]

hardware or software differences related to measured or modeled 
emissions or fuel consumption can be included in the same vehicle 
configuration. Note that vehicles with hardware or software differences 
related to measured or modeled emissions or fuel consumption are 
considered to be different configurations even if they have the same GEM 
inputs and FEL. Vehicles within a vehicle configuration differ only with 
respect to normal production variability or factors unrelated to 
measured or modeled emissions and fuel consumption for EPA and NHTSA.
    Vehicle family has the meaning given in 40 CFR 1037.230.
    Vehicle service class has the meaning for vehicles as specified in 
the 40 CFR 1037.801.
    Vocational tractor has the meaning given in 40 CFR 1037.630.
    Zero emissions vehicle means an electric vehicle or a fuel cell 
vehicle.


<R05>
Sec. 535.5  Standards.

    (a) Heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans. Each manufacturer of a fleet 
of heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans shall comply with the fuel 
consumption standards in this paragraph (a) expressed in gallons per 100 
miles. If the manufacturer's fleet includes conventional vehicles 
(gasoline, diesel and alternative fueled vehicles) and advanced 
technology vehicles (hybrids with regenerative braking, vehicles 
equipped with Rankine-cycle engines, electric and fuel cell vehicles), 
it should divide its fleet into two separate fleets each with its own 
separate fleet average fuel consumption standard which a manufacturer 
must comply with the requirements of this paragraph (a).
    (1) Mandatory standards. For model years 2016 and later, each 
manufacturer must comply with the fleet average standard derived from 
the unique subconfiguration target standards (or groups of 
subconfigurations approved by EPA in accordance with 40 CFR 1037.104) of 
the model types that make up the manufacturer's fleet in a given model 
year. Each subconfiguration has a unique attribute-based target 
standard, defined by each group of vehicles having the same payload, 
towing capacity and whether the vehicles are equipped with a 2-wheel or 
4-wheel drive configuration.
    (2) Subconfiguration target standards. (i) Two alternatives exist 
for determining the subconfiguration target standards for model years 
2016 and later. For each alternative, separate standards exist for 
compression-ignition and spark-ignition vehicles:
    (A) The first alternative allows manufacturers to determine a fixed 
fuel consumption standard that is constant over the model years; and
    (B) The second alternative allows manufacturers to determine 
standards that are phased-in gradually each year.
    (ii) Calculate the subconfiguration target standards as specified in 
this paragraph (a)(2)(ii), using the appropriate coefficients from Table 
1 choosing between the alternatives in paragraphs (a)(2)(i)(A) and (B) 
of this section. For electric or fuel cell heavy-duty vehicles, use 
compression-ignition vehicle coefficients ``c'' and ``d'' and for hybrid 
(including plug-in hybrid), dedicated and dual-fueled vehicles, use 
coefficients ``c'' and ``d'' appropriate for the engine type used. Round 
each standard to the nearest 0.01 gallons per 100 miles and specify all 
weights in pounds rounded to the nearest pound. Calculate the 
subconfiguration target standards using the following equation:

    Subconfiguration Target Standard (gallons per 100 miles) = [c x 
(WF)] + d

Where:

WF = Work Factor = [0.75 x (Payload Capacity + Xwd)] + [0.25 x Towing 
          Capacity]
Xwd = 4wd Adjustment = 500 lbs if the vehicle group is equipped with 4wd 
          and all-wheel drive, otherwise equals 0 lbs for 2wd.
Payload Capacity = GVWR (lbs)-Curb Weight (lbs) (for each vehicle group)
Towing Capacity = GCWR (lbs)-GVWR (lbs) (for each vehicle group)


  Table 1--Equation Coefficients for Subconfiguration Target Standards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Model year                         c            d
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Alternative 1--Fixed Target Standards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Compression-ignition Vehicle Coefficients for Model Years 2016 and later
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2016-2018.....................................     0.000432         3.33
2019 and later................................     0.000409         3.14
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 126]]

 
   Spark-ignition Vehicle Coefficients for Model Years 2016 and later
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2016-2018.....................................     0.000513         3.96
2019 and later................................     0.000495         3.81
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                Alternative 2--Phased-in Target Standards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Compression-ignition Vehicle Coefficients for Model Years 2016 and later
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2016..........................................     0.000452         3.48
2017..........................................     0.000437         3.37
2018 and later................................     0.000409         3.14
------------------------------------------------------------------------
   -Spark-ignition Vehicle Coefficients for Model Years 2016 and later
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2016..........................................     0.000528         4.07
2017..........................................     0.000518         3.98
2018 and later................................     0.000495         3.81
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (3) Fleet average fuel consumption standard. (i) Calculate each 
manufacturer's fleet average fuel consumption standard for conventional 
and advanced technology fleets separately based on the subconfiguration 
target standards specified in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, weighted 
to production volumes and averaged using the following equation 
combining all the applicable vehicles in a manufacturer's U.S. directed 
fleet (compression-ignition, spark-ignition and advanced technology 
vehicles) for a given model year, rounded to the nearest 0.01 gallons 
per 100 miles:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15SE11.106


Where:

Subconfiguration Target Standard<INF>i</INF> = fuel consumption standard 
          for each group of vehicles with same payload, towing capacity 
          and drive configuration (gallons per 100 miles).
Volume<INF>i</INF> = production volume of each unique subconfiguration 
          of a model type based upon payload, towing capacity and drive 
          configuration.

    (A) A manufacturer may group together subconfigurations that have 
the same test weight (ETW), GVWR, and GCWR. Calculate work factor and 
target value assuming a curb weight equal to two times ETW minus GVWR.
    (B) A manufacturer may group together other subconfigurations if it 
uses the lowest target value calculated for any of the 
subconfigurations.
    (C) The fleet average shall also be derived in accordance with 40 
CFR 86.1865 and 40 CFR 1037.104(d).
    (ii) A manufacturer complies with the requirements of this part if 
it provides reports, as specified in Sec. 535.8, by the required 
deadlines and meets one of the following conditions:
    (A) The manufacturer's fleet average performance, as determined in 
Sec. 535.6, is less than the fleet average standard; or
    (B) The manufacturer uses one or more of the credit flexibilities 
provided under NHTSA's Averaging, Banking and Trading Program, as 
specified in Sec. 535.7, to comply with standards.
    (iii) Manufacturers must select an alternative for subconfiguration 
target standards at the same time they submit the model year 2016 Pre-
Model year Report, specified in Sec. 535.8. Once selected, the decision 
cannot be reversed and the manufacturer must continue to comply with the 
same alternative for subsequent model years.
    (iv) A manufacturer failing to comply with the provisions specified 
in paragraph (a)(3)(ii) of this section is liable to pay civil penalties 
in accordance with Sec. 535.9.
    (4) Voluntary standards. (i) Manufacturers may choose voluntarily to 
comply early with fuel consumption standards for model years 2013 
through 2015, as determined in paragraphs (a)(4)(iii) and (iv) of this 
section, for example, in order to begin accumulating credits

[[Page 127]]

through over-compliance with the applicable standard. A manufacturer 
choosing early compliance must comply with all the vehicles and engines 
it manufactures in each regulatory category for a given model year.
    (ii) A manufacturer must declare its intent to voluntarily comply 
with fuel consumption standards at the same time it submits a Pre-Model 
Report, prior to the compliance model year beginning as specified in 
Sec. 535.8; and, once selected, the decision cannot be reversed and the 
manufacturer must continue to comply for each subsequent model year for 
all the vehicles and engines it manufactures in each regulatory category 
for a given model year.
    (iii) Calculate separate subconfiguration target standards for 
compression-ignition and spark-ignition vehicles for model years 2013 
through 2015 using the equation in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section, 
substituting the appropriate values for the coefficients in Table 2 of 
this section as appropriate.

  Table 2--Voluntary Compliance Equation Coefficients for Vehicle Fuel
                          Consumption Standards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Model Year                         c            d
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Compression-ignition Vehicle Coefficients for Voluntary Compliance in
                      Model Years 2013 through 2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2013 and 14...................................     0.000470         3.61
2015..........................................     0.000466         3.60
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Spark-ignition Vehicle Coefficients for Voluntary Compliance in Model
                         Years 2013 through 2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2013 and 14...................................     0.000542         4.17
2015..........................................     0.000539         4.15
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iv) Calculate the fleet average fuel consumption standards for 
model years 2013 through 2015 using the equation in paragraph (a)(3) of 
this section.
    (5) Exclusion of vehicles not certified as complete vehicles. The 
vehicle standards Sec. 535.5(a) do not apply for vehicles that are 
chassis-certified with respect to EPA's criteria pollutant test 
procedure in 40 CFR part 86, subpart S. Any chassis-certified vehicles 
must comply with the vehicle standards and requirements of Sec. 
535.5(b) and the engine standards of Sec. 535.5(d) for engines used in 
these vehicles. A vehicle manufacturer choosing to comply with this 
paragraph and that is not the engine manufacturer is required to notify 
the engine manufacturers that their engines are subject to Sec. 
535.5(d) and that it intends to use their engines in excluded vehicles.
    (6) Optional certification under this section. Manufacturers may 
certify any complete or cab-complete Class 2b through 5 vehicles 
weighing at or below 19,500 pounds GVWR and any incomplete vehicles 
approved by EPA for inclusion under this paragraph to the same testing 
and standard that applies to a comparable complete sister vehicles as 
determined in accordance in 40 CFR 1037.150(l). Calculate the target 
standard value under paragraph (a)(2) of this section based on the same 
work factor value that applies for the complete sister vehicle.
    (7) Loose engines. This paragraph applies for spark-ignition engines 
identical to engines used in vehicles certified to the standards of this 
section Sec. 535.5(a), where manufacturers sell such engines as loose 
engines or installed in incomplete vehicles that are not cab-complete 
vehicles in accordance with 40 CFR 1037.150(m). A manufacturer's engines 
are deemed to have fuel consumption target values and test results based 
upon the complete vehicle in the applicable test group with the highest 
equivalent test weight in accordance with 40 CFR 1037.150(m). The fuel 
consumption subconfiguration standard for a loose engines equals the 
test group result of the complete vehicle as specified in 40 CFR 
1037.150(m)(6) multiplied by 1.10 and rounded to the nearest 0.01 gallon 
per 100 miles. The U.S.-directed production volume of engines 
manufactured for sale as loose engines or installed in incomplete heavy-
duty vehicles that are not cab-complete vehicles in any given model year 
may not exceed ten percent of the total U.S-directed production volume 
of engines of that design that the manufacturer produces for heavy-duty 
applications for that model year, including engines the manufacturer 
produces for complete vehicles, cab-complete vehicles, and other 
incomplete vehicles. The total number of engines a manufacturer may 
certify under this paragraph (a)(7), of all engine designs, may not 
exceed 15,000 in any model year as specified in 40 CFR 1037.150(m). 
Engines

[[Page 128]]

produced in excess of the number cannot be certified to the standard in 
this paragraph (a)(7).
    (b) Heavy-duty vocational vehicles. Each chassis manufacturer of 
heavy-duty vocational vehicles shall comply with the fuel consumption 
standards in this paragraph (b) expressed in gallons per 1,000 ton-
miles. Manufacturers of engines used in heavy-duty vocational vehicles 
shall comply with the standards in paragraph (d) of this section.
    (1) Mandatory standards. For model years 2016 and later, each 
chassis manufacturer of heavy-duty vocational vehicles must comply with 
the fuel consumption standards in paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
    (i) The heavy-duty vocational vehicle chassis category is subdivided 
by GVWR into three regulatory subcategories as defined in Sec. 535.4, 
each with its own assigned standard.
    (ii) For purposes of certifying vehicles to fuel consumption 
standards, manufacturers must divide their product lines into vehicle 
families that have similar emissions and fuel consumption features, as 
specified by EPA in 40 CFR part 1037, subpart C, and these families will 
be subject to the applicable standards. Each vehicle family is limited 
to a single model year.
    (iii) A manufacturer complies with the requirements of this part, if 
it provides information as specified in Sec. 535.8, by the required 
deadlines and meets one of the following conditions:
    (A) The manufacturer's fuel consumption performance for each vehicle 
family, as determined in Sec. 535.6, is lower than the applicable 
standard; or
    (B) The manufacturer uses one or more of the credit flexibilities 
provided under NHTSA's Averaging, Banking and Trading Program, specified 
in Sec. 535.7, to comply with standards.
    (iv) A manufacturer failing to comply with the provisions specified 
in paragraph (b)(1)(iii) of this section is liable to pay civil 
penalties in accordance with Sec. 535.9.
    (2) Voluntary compliance. (i) For model years 2013 through 2015, a 
manufacturer may choose voluntarily to comply early with the fuel 
consumption standards provided in paragraph (b)(3) of this section. For 
example, a manufacturer may choose to comply early in order to begin 
accumulating credits through over-compliance with the applicable 
standards. A manufacturer choosing early compliance must comply with all 
the vehicles and engines it manufacturers in each regulatory category 
for a given model year.
    (ii) A manufacturer must declare its intent to voluntarily comply 
with fuel consumption standards and identify its plans to comply before 
it submits its first application for a certificate of conformity for the 
respective model year as specified in Sec. 535.8; and, once selected, 
the decision cannot be reversed and the manufacturer must continue to 
comply for each subsequent model year for all the vehicles and engines 
it manufacturers in each regulatory category for a given model year.
    (3) Regulatory subcategory standards. The fuel consumption standards 
for heavy-duty vocational vehicles are given in the following table:

                        Table 3--Heavy-Duty Vocational Vehicle Fuel Consumption Standards
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Light Heavy vehicles    Medium heavy vehicles     Heavy heavy vehicles
       Regulatory subcategories               Class 2b-5               Class 6--7                Class 8
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Fuel Consumption Mandatory Standards (gallons per 1,000 ton-miles) Effective for Model Years 2017 and later
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fuel Consumption Standard............                     36.7                     22.1                     21.8
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Effective for Model Years 2016
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fuel Consumption Standard............                     38.1                     23.0                     22.2
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Fuel Consumption Voluntary Standards (gallons per 1,000 ton-miles) Effective for Model Years 2013 to 2015
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fuel Consumption Standard............                     38.1                     23.0                     22.2
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (4) Certifying across service classes. A manufacturer may optionally 
certify a vocational vehicle to the standards and

[[Page 129]]

useful life applicable to a higher vehicle service class (or regulatory 
subcategory changes such as complying with the heavy heavy-duty standard 
instead of medium heavy-duty standard), provided the manufacturer does 
not generate credits with the vehicle. If a manufacturer includes 
smaller vehicles in a credit-generating subfamily (with an FEL below the 
standard), exclude their production volume from the credit calculation.
    (5) Off-road operation. Heavy-duty vocational vehicles including 
vocational tractors meeting the off-road criteria in 49 CFR 523.2 are 
exempted from the requirements in this paragraph (b), but the engines in 
these vehicles must meet the requirements of paragraph (d) of this 
section.
    (c) Truck tractors. Each manufacturer of truck tractors, except 
vocational tractors, with a GVWR above 26,000 pounds shall comply with 
the fuel consumption standards in this paragraph (c) expressed in 
gallons per 1,000 ton-miles.
    (1) Mandatory standards. For model years 2016 and later, each 
manufacturer of truck tractors must comply with the fuel consumption 
standards in paragraph (c)(3) of this section.
    (i) The truck tractor category is subdivided by roof height and cab 
design into nine regulatory subcategories as shown in Table 4 of this 
section, each with its own assigned standard.
    (ii) For purposes of certifying vehicles to fuel consumption 
standards, manufacturers must divide their product lines into vehicles 
families that have similar emissions and fuel consumption features, as 
specified by EPA in 40 CFR part 1037, subpart C, and these families will 
be subject to the applicable standards. Each vehicle family is limited 
to a single model year.
    (iii) Standards for truck tractor engines are given in paragraph (d) 
of this section.
    (iv) A manufacturer complies with the requirements of this part, if 
at the end of the model year, it provides reports, as specified in Sec. 
535.8, by the required deadlines and meets one of the following 
conditions:
    (A) The manufacturer's fuel consumption performance for each vehicle 
family, as determined in Sec. 535.6, is lower than the applicable 
standard; or
    (B) The manufacturer uses one or more of the credit flexibilities 
provided under NHTSA's Averaging, Banking and Trading Program, specified 
in Sec. 535.7, to comply with standards.
    (v) A manufacturer failing to comply with the provisions specified 
in paragraph (c)(1)(iv) of this section is liable to pay civil penalties 
in accordance with Sec. 535.9.
    (2) Voluntary compliance. (i) For model years 2013 through 2015, a 
manufacturer may choose voluntarily to comply early with the fuel 
consumption standards provided in paragraph (c)(3) of this section. For 
example, a manufacturer may choose to comply early in order to begin 
accumulating credits through over-compliance with the applicable 
standards. A manufacturer choosing early compliance must comply with all 
the vehicles and engines it manufacturers in each regulatory category 
for a given model year.
    (ii) A manufacturer must declare its intent to voluntarily comply 
with fuel consumption standards and identify its plans to comply before 
it submits its first application for a certificate of conformity for the 
respective model year as specified in Sec. 535.8; and, once selected, 
the decision cannot be reversed and the manufacturer must continue to 
comply for each subsequent model year for all the vehicles and engines 
it manufacturers in each regulatory category for a given model year.
    (3) Regulatory subcategory standards. The fuel consumption standards 
for truck tractors, except for vocational tractors, are given in the 
following table:

                                Table 4--Truck Tractor Fuel Consumption Standards
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                            Day cab                            Sleeper cab
       Regulatory subcategories       --------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               Class 7                  Class 8                  Class 8
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Fuel Consumption Mandatory Standards (gallons per 1,000 ton-miles) Effective for Model Years 2017 and later
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Low Roof.............................                     10.2                      7.8                      6.5

[[Page 130]]

 
Mid Roof.............................                     11.3                      8.4                      7.2
High Roof............................                     11.8                      8.7                      7.1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Effective for Model Years 2016
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Low Roof.............................                     10.5                      8.0                      6.7
Mid Roof.............................                     11.7                      8.7                      7.4
High Roof............................                     12.2                      9.0                      7.3
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Fuel Consumption Voluntary Standards (gallons per 1,000 ton-miles) Effective for Model Years 2013 to 2015
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Low Roof.............................                     10.5                      8.0                      6.7
Mid Roof.............................                     11.7                      8.7                      7.4
High Roof............................                     12.2                      9.0                      7.3
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (4) Certifying across service classes. A manufacturer may optionally 
certify a tractor to the standards and useful life applicable to a 
higher vehicle service class (or regulatory subcategory changes such as 
complying with the Class 8 day-cab tractor standard instead of Class 7 
day-cab tractor), provided the manufacturer does not generate credits 
with the vehicle. If a manufacturer includes smaller vehicles in a 
credit-generating subfamily (with an FEL below the standard), exclude 
their production volume from the credit calculation.
    (5) Vocational tractors. Tractors meeting the definition of 
vocational tractors in 49 CFR 523.2 must comply with requirements for 
heavy-duty vocational vehicles specified in paragraphs (b) and (d) of 
this section. Class 7 and Class 8 tractors certified or exempted as 
vocational tractors are limited in production to no more than 21,000 
vehicles in any three consecutive model years. If a manufacturer is 
determined as not applying this allowance in good faith by the EPA in 
its applications for certification in accordance with 40 CFR 1037.205 
and 1037.610, a manufacturer must comply with the tractor fuel 
consumption standards in paragraph (c)(3) of this section.
    (d) Heavy-duty engines. Each manufacturer of heavy-duty engines 
shall comply with the fuel consumption standards in this paragraph (d) 
expressed in gallons per 100 brake-horsepower-hours. Each engine must be 
certified to the primary intended service class that it is designed for 
in accordance with 40 CFR 1036.108;
    (1) Mandatory standards. Each manufacturer must comply with the fuel 
consumption standard in paragraph (d)(3) of this section for model years 
2017 and later compression-ignition engines and for model years 2016 and 
later spark-ignition engines.
    (i) The heavy-duty engine regulatory category is divided into six 
regulatory subcategories, five compression-ignition subcategories and 
one spark-ignition subcategory, as shown in Table 5 of this section.
    (ii) Separate standards exist for engines manufactured for use in 
heavy-duty vocational vehicles and in truck tractors.
    (iii) For purposes of certifying engines to fuel consumption 
standards, manufacturers must divide their product lines into engine 
families that have similar fuel consumption features, as specified by 
EPA in 40 CFR part 1036, subpart C, and these families will be subject 
to the same standards. Each engine family is limited to a single model 
year.
    (iv) A manufacturer complies with the requirements of this part, if 
at the end of the model year, it provides reports, as specified in Sec. 
535.8, by the required deadlines and meets one of the following 
conditions:
    (A) The manufacturer's fuel consumption performance of each engine 
family as determined in Sec. 535.6 is less than the applicable 
standard; or
    (B) The manufacturer uses one or more of the flexibilities provided 
under

[[Page 131]]

NHTSA's Averaging, Banking and Trading Program, specified in Sec. 
535.7, to comply with standards.
    (v) A manufacturer failing to comply with the provisions specified 
in paragraph (d)(1)(iv) of this section is liable to pay civil penalties 
in accordance with Sec. 535.9.
    (2) Voluntary compliance. (i) For model years 2013 through 2016 for 
compression-ignition engines, and for model year 2015 for spark-ignition 
engines, a manufacturer may choose voluntarily to comply with the fuel 
consumption standards provided in paragraph (d)(3) through (5) of this 
section. For example, a manufacturer may choose to comply early in order 
to begin accumulating credits through over-compliance with the 
applicable standards. A manufacturer choosing early compliance must 
comply with all the vehicles and engines it manufacturers in each 
regulatory category for a given model year except in model year 2013 the 
manufacturer may comply with individual engine families as specified in 
40 CFR 1036.150(a)(2).
    (ii) A manufacturer must declare its intent to voluntarily comply 
with fuel consumption standards and identify its plans to comply before 
it submits its first application for a certificate of conformity for the 
respective model year as specified in Sec. 535.8; and, once selected, 
the decision cannot be reversed and the manufacturer must continue to 
comply for each subsequent model year for all the vehicles and engines 
it manufacturers in each regulatory category for a given model year.
    (3) Regulatory subcategory standards. The fuel consumption standards 
for heavy-duty engines are given in the following:

[[Page 132]]



                                                                          Table 5--Primary Heavy-Duty Engine Standards
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  Fuel Consumption Mandatory Standards (gallons per 100 bhp-hr)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Regulatory Subcategory       Light Heavy-Duty Compression-        Medium Heavy-Duty Compression-Ignition Engine
                                   Ignition Engine.
                                         Heavy Heavy-Duty Compression-Ignition Engine         Spark-Ignition Engines.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Truck Application...............  Vocational.......................  Vocational.............  Tractor................  Vocational.............  Tractor................  All
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Effective Model Years...........                                                              2017 and later                                                             2016 and later
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fuel Consumption Standard.......  5.66.............................  5.66...................  4.78...................  5.45...................  4.52...................  7.06
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                           Fuel Consumption Standards for Voluntary Compliance (gallons per100 bhp-hr)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regulatory Subcategory..........  Light Heavy-Duty Compression-        Medium Heavy-Duty Compression-Ignition Engine
                                   Ignition Engine.
                                         Heavy Heavy-Duty Compression-Ignition Engine         Spark-ignition Engine..
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Truck Application...............  Vocational.......................  Vocational.............  Tractor................  Vocational.............  Tractor................  All
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Effective Model Years...........                                                            2013 through 2016                                                            2015
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Voluntary Fuel Consumption        5.89.............................  5.89...................  4.93...................  5.57...................  4.67...................  7.06
 Standard.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 133]]

    (4) Alternate subcategory standards. The alternative fuel 
consumption standards for heavy-duty compression-ignition engines are as 
follows:
    (i) Manufacturers entering the voluntary program in model years 2014 
through 2016, may choose to certify compression-ignition engine families 
unable to meet standards provided in paragraph (d)(3) of this section to 
the alternative fuel consumption standards of this paragraph (d)(4).
    (ii) Manufacturers may not certify engines to these alternate 
standards if they are part of an averaging set in which they carry a 
balance of banked credits. For purposes of this section, manufacturers 
are deemed to carry credits in an averaging set if they carry credits 
from advance technology that are allowed to be used in that averaging 
set in accordance with Sec. 535.7(d)(12).
    (iii) The emission standards of this section are determined as 
specified in EPA 40 CFR 1036.620(a) through (c) and should be converted 
to equivalent fuel consumption values.
    (5) Alternate Phase-In Standards. Manufacturers have the option to 
comply with EPA emissions standards for compression-ignition engines 
using an alternative phase-in schedule that correlates with the EPA OBD 
standards. If a manufacturer chooses to use the alternative phase-in 
schedule for meeting EPA standards and optionally chooses to comply 
early with the NHTSA fuel consumption program, it must use the same 
phase-in schedule beginning in model year 2013 for fuel consumption 
standards and must remain in the program for each model year thereafter. 
The fuel consumption standard for each model year of the alternative 
phase-in schedule is provided in Table 6 of this section. Note that 
engines certified to these standards are not eligible for early credits 
under Sec. 535.7.

                       Table 6--Alternative Phase-in Compression Ignition Engine Standards
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Tractors                      LHD Engines              MHD Engines              HHD Engines
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Model Years 2013-2015................  NA.....................  5.03 gals/100 hp-hr....  4.76 gals./100 hp-hr
Model Years 2016 and later[dagger]...  NA.....................  4.78 gals./100 hp-hr...  4.52 gals/100 hp-hr
Vocational...........................  LHD Engines............  MHD Engines............  HHD Engines
Model Years 2013-2015................  6.07 gals/100 hp-hr....  6.07 gals/100 hp-hr....  5.67 gals/100 hp-hr
Model Years 2016 and later[dagger]...  5.66 gals/100 hp-hr....  5.66 gals/100 hp-hr....  5.45 gals/100 hp-hr
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[dagger]Note: these alternate standards for 2016 and later are the same as the otherwise applicable standards
  for 2017 and later.


<R05>
Sec. 535.6  Measurement and calculation procedures.

    (a) Heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans. This section describes the 
testing a manufacturer must perform for each model year and the method 
for determining the fleet fuel consumption performance to show 
compliance with the fleet average fuel consumption standard for heavy-
duty pickup trucks and vans in Sec. 535.5(a).
    (1) For each model year, the heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans 
selected by a manufacturer to comply with fuel consumption standards in 
Sec. 535.5(a) must be used to determine the manufacturer's fleet 
average fuel consumption performance. If the manufacturer's fleet 
includes conventional and advanced technology heavy-duty pickup trucks 
and vans, the fleet should be sub-divided into two separate vehicle 
fleets, with all of the conventional vehicles in one fleet and all of 
the advanced technology vehicles in the other fleet.
    (2) Vehicles in each fleet should be divided into test groups or 
subconfigurations according to EPA in 40 CFR part 86, subpart S, and 40 
CFR 1037.104.
    (3) Test and measure the CO<INF>2</INF> emissions test results for 
the selected vehicles and determine the CO<INF>2</INF> emissions test 
group result, in grams per mile in accordance with 40 CFR part 86, 
subpart S.
    (i) Perform exhaust testing on vehicles fueled by conventional and 
alternative fuels, including dedicated and dual fueled (multi-fueled and 
flexible fueled) vehicles and measure the CO<INF>2</INF> emissions test 
result.
    (ii) Adjust the CO<INF>2</INF> emissions test result of dual fueled 
vehicles using a

[[Page 134]]

weighted average of your emission results as specified in 40 CFR 
600.510-12(k) for light-duty trucks.
    (iii) All electric vehicles are deemed to have zero emissions of 
CO<INF>2</INF>, CH4, and N<INF>2</INF>O. No emission testing is required 
for such electric vehicles. Assign the fuel consumption test group 
result to a value of zero gallons per 100 miles in paragraph (a)(4) of 
this section.
    (iv) Test cab-complete and incomplete vehicles using the applicable 
complete sister vehicles as determined in 40 CFR 1037.104(g).
    (v) Test loose engines using applicable complete vehicles as 
determined in 40 CFR 1037.104(h).
    (vi) Manufacturers can choose to analytically derive CO<INF>2</INF> 
emission rates (ADCs) for test groups or subconfigurations. Calculate 
the ADCs for test groups or subconfigurations in accordance with 40 CFR 
1037.104(g).
    (4) Calculate equivalent fuel consumption test group results, in 
gallons per 100 miles, from CO<INF>2</INF> emissions test group results, 
in grams per miles, and round to the nearest 0.01 gallon per 100 miles.
    (i) Calculate the equivalent fuel consumption test group results as 
follows for compression-ignition vehicles and alternative fuel 
compression-ignition vehicles. CO<INF>2</INF> emissions test group 
result (grams per mile)/10,180 grams per gallon of diesel fuel) x 
(10\2\) = Fuel consumption test group result (gallons per 100 mile).
    (ii) Calculate the equivalent fuel consumption test group results as 
follows for spark-ignition vehicles and alternative fuel spark-ignition 
vehicles. CO<INF>2</INF> emissions test group result (grams per mile)/
8,887 grams per gallon of gasoline fuel) x (10\2\) = Fuel consumption 
test group result (gallons per 100 mile).
    (5) Calculate the fleet average fuel consumption result, in gallons 
per 100 miles, from the equivalent fuel consumption test group results 
and round the fuel consumption result to the nearest 0.01 gallon per 100 
miles. Calculate the fleet average fuel consumption result using the 
following equation.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15SE11.107

Where:

Fuel Consumption Test Group Resulti = fuel consumption performance for 
          each test group as defined in 49 CFR 523.4.
Volumei = production volume of each test group.

    (6) Compare the fleet average fuel consumption standard to the fleet 
average fuel consumption performance. The fleet average fuel consumption 
performance must be less than or equal to the fleet fuel consumption 
standard to comply with standards in Sec. 535.5(a).
    (b) Heavy-duty vocational vehicles and tractors. This section 
describes the testing a manufacturer must perform and the method for 
determining fuel consumption performance to show compliance with the 
fuel consumption standards for vocational vehicles and tractors in Sec. 
535.5(b) and (c).
    (1) Select vehicles and vehicle family configurations to test as 
specified in 40 CFR 1037.230 for vehicles that make up each of the 
manufacture's regulatory subcategories of vocational vehicles and 
tractors.
    (2) Determine the CO<INF>2</INF> emissions and fuel consumption 
results for all vehicle chassis (conventional, alternative fueled and 
advanced technology vehicles) using the Greenhouse Emissions Model (GEM) 
in accordance with 40 CFR part 1037, subpart F. Vocational vehicles and 
tractor chassis are modeled using the following inputs in the GEM model. 
All seven of the following inputs apply for sleeper cab tractors, while 
some do not apply for vocational vehicles and other tractor regulatory 
subcategories:
    (i) Identification of vehicles using regulatory subcategories (such 
as ``Class 8 Combination--Sleeper Cab--High Roof'').

[[Page 135]]

    (ii) Coefficient of aerodynamic drag in accordance with 40 CFR 
1037.520 and 1037.521. Do not use for vocational vehicles.
    (iii) Steer tire rolling resistance for low rolling resistance tires 
in accordance with 40 CFR 1037.520 and 1037.650.
    (iv) Drive tire rolling resistance for low rolling resistance tires 
in accordance with 40 CFR 1037.520 and 1037.650.
    (v) Vehicle speed limit as governed by vehicles speed limiters in 
accordance with 40 CFR 1037.520 and 1037.640. Do not use for vocational 
vehicles.
    (vi) Vehicle weight reduction as provided in accordance with 40 CFR 
1037.520. Do not use for vocational vehicles.
    (vii) Extended idle reduction credit using automatic engine shutdown 
systems in accordance with 40 CFR 1037.520 and 1037.660. Do not use for 
vehicles other than Class 8 sleeper cabs.
    (3) From the GEM results, select the CO<INF>2</INF> family emissions 
level (FEL) and equivalent fuel consumption values for vocational 
vehicle and tractor families in each regulatory subcategories for each 
model year. Equivalent fuel consumption FELs are derived in GEM and 
expressed to the nearest 0.1 gallons per 1000 ton-mile. For families 
containing multiple subfamilies, identify the FELs for each subfamily.
    (4) Paragraphs (b)(1) through (3) of this section address vocational 
vehicle and tractor chassis testing only. Engine performance and the 
advanced technologies equipped on vocational vehicles and tractors are 
tested separately as follows:
    (i) Vocational vehicle and tractor engine test results for 
conventional and alternative fueled vehicles are determined in 
accordance with Sec. 535.6(c).
    (ii) Improvements for advanced technologies are determined as 
follows:
    (A) Test hybrid vehicles with power take-off in accordance with 40 
CFR 1037.525 and vehicles with post-transmission hybrid systems in 
accordance with 40 CFR 1037.550.
    (B) All electric vehicles are deemed to have zero CO<INF>2</INF> 
emissions and fuel consumption. No emission testing is required for such 
electric vehicles. Assign the vehicle family with a fuel consumption FEL 
result to a value of zero gallons per 1000-ton miles in paragraph (3) of 
this section.
    (c) Heavy-duty engines. This section describes the testing a 
manufacturer must perform and the method for determining fuel 
consumption performance to show compliance with the fuel consumption 
standards for engines in Sec. 535.5(d). Each engine must be tested to 
the primary intended service class that it is designed for in accordance 
with 40 CFR 1036.108
    (1) Select emission-data engines and engine family configurations to 
test as specified in 40 CFR part 86 and part 1036, subpart C for engines 
installed in vehicles that make up each of the manufacture's regulatory 
subcategory.
    (2) Test the CO<INF>2</INF> emissions for each emissions-data engine 
subject to the standards in Sec. 535.5(d) using the procedures and 
equipment specified in 40 CFR part 1036, subpart F. Measure the 
CO<INF>2</INF> emissions in grams per bhp-hr as specified in 40 CFR part 
86, subpart N, and part 1036, subpart C.
    (i) Perform exhaust testing on each fuel type for conventional, 
dedicated, dual fuel (multi-fuel, and flexible fuel) vehicles and 
measure the CO<INF>2</INF> emissions level.
    (ii) Adjust the CO<INF>2</INF> emissions result of dual fueled 
vehicles using a weighted average of the demonstrated emission results 
as specified in 40 CFR 1036.225. If EPA disapproves a manufacturer's 
dual fuel vehicle demonstrated use submission, NHTSA will require the 
manufacturer to only use the test results with 100 percent conventional 
fuel to determine the fuel consumption of the engine.
    (iii) All electric vehicles are deemed to have zero emissions of 
CO<INF>2</INF> and zero fuel consumption. No emission or fuel 
consumption testing is required for such electric vehicles.
    (3) Determine the CO<INF>2</INF> emissions for the family 
certification level (FCL) from the emissions test results in paragraph 
(c)(2) of this section for engine families within the heavy-duty engine 
regulatory subcategories for each model year.
    (i) If a manufacturer certifies an engine family for use both as a 
vocational engine and as a tractor engine, the manufacturer must split 
the family

[[Page 136]]

into two separate subfamilies in accordance with 40 CFR 1036.230. The 
manufacturer may assign the numbers and configurations of engines within 
the respective subfamilies at any time prior to the submission of the 
end-of-year report required by 40 CFR 1036.730 and Sec. 535.8. The 
manufacturer must track into which type of vehicle each engine is 
installed, although EPA may allow the manufacturer to use statistical 
methods to determine this for a fraction of its engines.
    (ii) The following engines are excluded from the engine families 
used to determined FCL values and the benefit for these engines is 
determined as an advanced technology credits under the ABT provisions 
provided in Sec. 535.7(e):
    (A) Engines certified as hybrid engines or power packs.
    (B) Engines certified as hybrid engines designed with PTO capability 
and that are sold with the engine coupled to a transmission.
    (C) Engines with Rankine cycle waste heat recovery.
    (4) Calculate equivalent fuel consumption values for emissions FCLs 
and the CO<INF>2</INF> levels for certified engines, in gallons per 100 
bhp-hr and round each fuel consumption value to the nearest 0.01 gallon 
per 100 bhp-hr.
    (i) Calculate equivalent fuel consumption FCL values for 
compression-ignition engines and alternative fuel compression-ignition 
engines. CO<INF>2</INF> FCL value (grams per bhp-hr)/10,180 grams per 
gallon of diesel fuel) x (10 \2\) = Fuel consumption FCL value (gallons 
per 100 bhp-hr).
    (ii) Calculate equivalent fuel consumption FCL values for spark-
ignition engines and alternative fuel spark-ignition engines. 
CO<INF>2</INF> FCL value (grams per bhp-hr)/8,887 grams per gallon of 
gasoline fuel) x (10 \2\) = Fuel consumption FCL value (gallons per 100 
bhp-hr).
    (iii) Manufacturers may carryover fuel consumption data from a 
previous model year if allowed to carry over emissions data for EPA in 
accordance with 40 CFR 1036.235.
    (iv) If a manufacturer uses an alternate test procedure under 40 CFR 
1065.10 and subsequently the data is rejected by the EPA, NHTSA will 
also reject the data.

[76 FR 57493, Sept. 15, 2011; 76 FR 59922, Sept. 28, 2011]


<R05>
Sec. 535.7  Averaging, banking, and trading (ABT) program.

    (a) Fuel consumption credits (FCC). At the end of each model year, 
manufacturers may earn credits for heavy-duty vehicles and engines 
exceeding the fuel consumption standards in Sec. 535.5 or by using one 
or more of the flexibilities in this paragraph (a) to gain credits. 
Manufacturers may average, bank, and trade fuel consumption credits for 
purposes of complying with fuel consumption standards. The following 
criteria and restrictions apply to averaging, banking and trading FCC 
(hereafter reference as the NHTSA ABT program).
    (1) Averaging. Averaging is the exchange of FCC among a 
manufacturer's engines or vehicle families or test groups within an 
averaging set. With the exception of FCC earned for advance technologies 
as further clarified below, a manufacturer may average FCC only within 
the same averaging set. The principle averaging sets are defined in 
Sec. 535.4.
    (2) Banking. Banking is the retention of surplus FCC by the 
manufacturer generating the credits for use in future model years for 
averaging or trading. Banked FCC retain the designation from the 
averaging set and model year in which they were generated and expire 
after five model years.
    (3) Trading. Trading is a transaction that transfers FCC between 
manufacturers or other entities. A manufacturer may use traded FCC for 
averaging, banking, or further trading transactions. Traded FCC, other 
than advanced technology credits, may be used only within the averaging 
set in which they were generated.
    (b) ABT provisions for heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans. (1) This 
regulatory category consists of one regulatory subcategory, heavy-duty 
pickup trucks and vans. This one regulatory subcategory makes up one 
averaging set.
    (2) Manufacturers that manufacture vehicles within this regulatory 
subcategory shall calculate credits at the end of each model year based 
upon the final average fleet fuel consumption

[[Page 137]]

standard and final average fleet fuel consumption performance value 
within this one regulatory subcategory as identified in paragraph (b)(8) 
of this section. If the manufacturer's fleet includes conventional 
vehicles (gasoline, diesel and alternative fuel) and advanced technology 
vehicles (hybrids with regenerative braking, vehicles equipped with 
Rankine-cycle engines, electric and fuel cell vehicles) it should be 
divided into two separate fleets each with its own final average fleet 
fuel consumption standard and final average fleet fuel consumption 
performance value. Credits shall be calculated for each of the two 
fleets.
    (3) Fuel consumption levels below the standard create a ``credit 
surplus,'' while fuel consumption levels above the standard create a 
``credit shortfall.''
    (4) Surplus credits, other than advanced technology credits, 
generated and calculated within this averaging set may only be used to 
offset a credit shortfall in this same averaging set.
    (5) Advanced technology credits can be used to offset a credit 
shortfall in this same averaging set or other averaging sets. However, a 
manufacturer must first apply advanced technology credits to any 
deficits in the same averaging set before applying them to other 
averaging sets.
    (6) Surplus credits, other than advanced technology credits, may be 
traded among credit holders but must stay within the same averaging set. 
Advanced technology credits can be traded across averaging sets.
    (7) Surplus credits, if not used to offset a credit shortfall may be 
banked by the manufacturer for use in future model years, or traded, 
given the restriction that the credits have an expiration date of five 
model years after the year in which the credits are earned. For example, 
credits earned in model year 2014 may be utilized through model year 
2019.
    (8) Credit shortfalls must be offset by an available credit surplus 
within three model years after the shortfall was incurred. If the 
shortfall cannot be offset, the manufacturer is liable for civil 
penalties as discussed in Sec. 535.9.
    (9) Calculate the value of credits generated in a model year for 
this regulatory subcategory or averaging set using the following 
equation:

Total MY Fleet FCC (gallons) = (Std - Act) x (Volume) x (UL) x (10 \2\)

Where:

Std = Fleet average fuel consumption standard (gal/100 mile).
Act = Fleet average actual fuel consumption value (gal/100 mile).
Volume = the total U.S.-directed production of vehicles in the 
          regulatory subcategory.
UL = the useful life for the regulatory subcategory (120,000 miles).

    (10) If a manufacturer generates credits from its fleet of advanced 
technology vehicles in accordance with 535.7(e)(1) a multiplier of 1.5 
can be used. Advanced technology credits can be used in other averaging 
sets different from the one they are generated within with the following 
restrictions.
    (i) The maximum amount of credits a manufacturer may bring into the 
service class group that contains the heavy-duty pickup and van 
averaging set is 5.89 Mgallons (for advanced technology credits based 
upon compression ignition engines) or 6.76 Mgallons (for advanced 
technology credits based upon spark-ignition engines) per model year as 
specified in 40 CFR 1037.104.
    (ii) The limit specified in paragraph (b)(10)(i) of this section 
does not limit the amount of advanced technology credits that can be 
used across averaging sets within the same service class group.
    (11) If a manufacturer chooses to generate CO<INF>2</INF> emission 
credits under EPA provisions of 40 CFR 1037.150(a), it may also 
voluntarily generate early credits under the NHTSA fuel consumption 
program. Fuel consumption credits may be generated for vehicles 
certified in model year 2013 to the model year 2014 standards in Sec. 
535.5(a). To do so a manufacturer must certify its entire U.S. directed 
production volume of vehicles in its fleet. The same production volume 
restrictions specified in 40 CFR 1037.150(a)(2) relating to when test 
groups are certified apply to the NHTSA early credit provisions. Credits 
are calculated as specified in paragraph (b)(9) of this section relative 
to the fleet standard that would apply for model year 2014 using the 
model year

[[Page 138]]

2013 production volumes. Surplus credits generated under this paragraph 
are available credits for banking or trading. Credit deficits for an 
averaging set prior to model year 2014 do not carry over to model year 
2014. These credits may be used to show compliance with the standards of 
this part for 2014 and later model years. Once a manufacturer opts into 
the NHTSA program they must stay in the program for all of the optional 
model years and remain standardized with the same implementation 
approach being followed to meet the EPA CO<INF>2</INF> emission program.
    (c) ABT provisions for vocational vehicles and tractors. (1) The two 
regulatory categories for vocational vehicles and tractors consist of 12 
regulatory subcategory as follows:
    (i) Vocational vehicles with a GVWR up to and including 19,500 
pounds (Light Heavy-Duty (LHD));
    (ii) Vocational vehicles with a GVWR above 19,500 pounds and no 
greater than 33,000 pounds (Medium Heavy-Duty (MHD));
    (iii) Vocational vehicles with a GVWR over 33,000 pounds (Heavy 
Heavy-Duty (HHD));
    (iv) Low roof day cab tractors with a GVWR above 26,000 pounds and 
no greater than 33,000 pounds;
    (v) Mid roof day cab tractors with a GVWR above 26,000 pounds and no 
greater than 33,000 pounds;
    (vi) High roof day cab tractors with a GVWR above 26,000 pounds and 
no greater than 33,000 pounds;
    (vii) Low roof day cab tractors with a GVWR above 33,000 pounds;
    (viii) Mid roof day cab tractors with a GVWR above 33,000 pounds;
    (ix) High roof day cab tractors with a GVWR above 33,000 pounds;
    (x) Low roof sleeper cab tractors with a GVWR above 33,000 pounds;
    (xi) Mid roof sleeper cab tractors with a GVWR above 33,000 pounds; 
and
    (xii) High roof sleeper cab tractors with a GVWR above 33,000 
pounds.
    (2) The 12 regulatory subcategories consist of three averaging sets 
as follows:
    (i) Vocational light-heavy vehicles at or below 19,500 pounds GVWR.
    (ii) Vocational and tractor medium-heavy vehicles above 19,500 
pounds GVWR but at or below 33,000 pounds GVWR.
    (iii) Vocational and tractor heavy-heavy vehicles above 33,000 
pounds GVWR.
    (3) Manufacturers that manufacture vehicles within either of these 
two vehicle categories, in one or more of the regulatory subcategories, 
shall calculate a total credit balance within each applicable averaging 
set at the end of each model year based upon final production volumes 
and the sum of the credit balances derived for each of the vehicle 
family groups within each averaging set.
    (4) Each designated vehicle family group has a ``family emissions 
limit'' (FEL) which is compared to the associated regulatory subcategory 
standard. A FEL that falls below the regulatory subcategory standard 
creates ``positive credits,'' while fuel consumption level of a family 
group above the standard creates a ``credit shortfall.''
    (5) Manufacturers shall sum all shortfalls and surplus credits for 
each vehicle family within each applicable averaging set to obtain the 
total credit balance for the model year before rounding. The sum of fuel 
consumptions credits must be rounded to the nearest gallon.
    (6) Surplus credits, other than advanced technology credits, 
generated and calculated within this averaging set may only be used to 
offset a credit shortfall in this same averaging set.
    (7) Advanced technology credits can be used to offset a credit 
shortfall in this same averaging set or other averaging sets. However, a 
manufacturer must first apply advanced technology credits to any 
deficits in the same averaging set before applying them to other 
averaging sets.
    (8) Surplus credits, other than advanced technology credits, may be 
traded among credit holders but must stay within the same averaging set. 
Advanced technology credits can be traded across averaging sets.
    (9) Surplus credits, if not used to offset a credit shortfall may be 
banked by the manufacturer for use in future model years, or traded, 
given the restriction that the credits have an expiration date of five 
model years after the year in which the credits are

[[Page 139]]

earned. For example, credits earned in model year 2014 may be utilized 
through model year 2019.
    (10) Credit shortfalls must be offset by an available credit surplus 
within three model years after the shortfall was incurred. If the 
shortfall cannot be offset, the manufacturer is liable for civil 
penalties as discussed in Sec. 535.9.
    (11) The value of credits generated in a model year is calculated as 
follows:
    (i) Calculate the value of credits generated in a model year for 
each vehicle family within an averaging set using the following 
equation:

Vehicle Family FCC (gallons) = (Std - FEL) x (Payload) x (Volume) x (UL) 
x (10 \3\)

Where:

Std = the standard for the respective vehicle family regulatory 
          subcategory (gal/1000 ton-mile).
FEL = family emissions limit for the vehicle family (gal/1000 ton-mile).
Payload = the prescribed payload in tons for each regulatory subcategory 
          as shown in the following table:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Payload
                   Regulatory subcategory                       (Tons)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LHD Vocational Vehicles.....................................        2.85
MHD Vocational Vehicles.....................................        5.60
HHD Vocational Vehicles.....................................        7.5
Class 7 Tractor.............................................       12.50
Class 8 Tractor.............................................       19.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Volume = the number of U.S.-directed production volume of vehicles in 
          the corresponding vehicle family.
UL = the useful life for the regulatory subcategory (miles) as shown in 
          the following table:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                   UL
                    Regulatory subcategory                      (miles)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
LHD Vocational Vehicles......................................    110,000
MHD Vocational Vehicles......................................    185,000
HHD Vocational Vehicles......................................    435,000
Class 7 Tractor..............................................    185,000
Class 8 Tractor..............................................    435,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Calculate the value of credits generated in a model year for 
each vehicle family for advanced technology vehicles within an averaging 
set using the equation above, the guidelines provided in paragraph 
(e)(1)(i) of this section, and the 1.5 credit multiplier.
    (iii) Calculate the total credits generated in a model year for each 
averaging set using the following equation:

Total averaging set MY credits = [Sigma] Vehicle family credits within 
each average set

    (12) If a manufacturer chooses to generate CO<INF>2</INF> emission 
credits under EPA provisions of 40 CFR 1037.150(a), it may also 
voluntarily generate early credits under the NHTSA fuel consumption 
program as follows:
    (i) Fuel consumption credits may be generated for vehicles certified 
in model year 2013 to the model year 2014 standards in Sec. 535.5(b) 
and (c). To do so a manufacturer must certify its entire U.S. directed 
production volume of vehicles. The same production volume restrictions 
specified in 40 CFR 1037.150(a)(1) relating to when test groups are 
certified apply to the NHTSA early credit provisions. Credits are 
calculated as specified in paragraph (c)(11) of this section relative to 
the standards that would apply for model year 2014. Surplus credits 
generated under this paragraph (c)(12) may be increased by a factor of 
1.5 for determining total available credits for banking or trading. For 
example, if you have 10 gallons of surplus credits for model year 2013, 
you may bank 15 gallons of credits. Credit deficits for an averaging set 
prior to model year 2014 do not carry over to model year 2014. These 
credits may be used to show compliance with the standards of this part 
for 2014 and later model years. Once a manufacturer opts into the NHTSA 
program they must stay in the program for all of the optional model 
years and remain standardized with the same implementation approach 
being followed to meet the EPA CO<INF>2</INF> emission program.
    (ii) A tractor manufacturer may generate fuel consumption credits 
for the number of additional SmartWay designated tractors (relative to 
its MY 2012 production), provided that credits are not generated for 
those vehicles under paragraph (c)(12)(i) of this section. Calculate 
credits for each regulatory sub-category relative to the standard that 
would apply in model year 2014 using the equations in paragraph (c)(11) 
of this section. Use a production volume equal to the number of verified 
model year 2013 SmartWay tractors minus the number of verified model 
year 2012 SmartWay tractors. A

[[Page 140]]

manufacturer may bank credits equal to the surplus credits generated 
under this paragraph multiplied by 1.50. A manufacturer's 2012 and 2013 
model years must be equivalent in length. Once a manufacturer opts into 
the NHTSA program they must stay in the program for all of the optional 
model years and remain standardized with the same implementation 
approach being followed to meet the EPA CO<INF>2</INF> emission program.
    (13) If a manufacturer generates credits from vehicles certified for 
advanced technology in accordance with Sec. 535.7(e)(1), a multiplier 
of 1.5 can be used, but this multiplier cannot be used on the same 
credits for which the early credit multiplier is used. Advanced 
technology credits can be used in other averaging sets different from 
the one they are generated, but the maximum amount of credits a 
manufacturer may bring into a service class group that contains the 
vocational vehicle and tractor averaging sets is 5.89 Mgallons (for 
advanced technology credits based upon compression ignition engines) or 
6.76 Mgallons (for advanced technology credits based upon spark-ignition 
engines) per model year as specified in 40 CFR 1037.740. However, this 
does not limit the amount of advanced technology credits that can be 
used across averaging sets within the same service class group.
    (d) ABT provisions for heavy-duty engines. (1) Heavy-duty engines 
consist of six regulatory subcategories as follows:
    (i) Spark-ignition engines.
    (ii) Light heavy-duty compression-ignition engines.
    (iii) Medium heavy-duty vocational compression-ignition engines.
    (iv) Medium heavy-duty tractor compression-ignition engines.
    (v) Heavy heavy-duty vocational compression-ignition engines.
    (vi) Heavy heavy-duty tractor compression-ignition engines.
    (2) The six regulatory subcategories consist of four averaging sets 
as follows:
    (i) Compression-ignition light heavy-duty engines.
    (ii) Compression-ignition medium heavy-duty engines.
    (iii) Compression-ignition heavy heavy-duty engines.
    (iv) Spark-ignition engines.
    (3) Manufacturers that manufacture engines within one or more of the 
regulatory subcategories, shall calculate a total credit balance within 
each applicable averaging set at the end of each model year based upon 
final production volumes and the sum of the credit balances derived for 
each of the engine families within each averaging set.
    (4) Each designated engine family has a ``family certification 
level'' (FCL) which is compared to the associated regulatory subcategory 
standard. A FCL that falls below the regulatory subcategory standard 
creates ``positive credits,'' while fuel consumption level of a family 
group above the standard creates a ``credit shortfall.''
    (5) Manufacturers shall sum all surplus and shortfall credits for 
each engine family within the applicable averaging set to obtain the 
total credit balance for the model year before rounding. Round the sum 
of fuel consumptions credits to the nearest gallon.
    (6) Surplus credits, other than advanced technology credits, 
generated and calculated within this averaging set may only be used to 
offset a credit shortfall in this same averaging set.
    (7) Advanced technology credits can be used to offset a credit 
shortfall in this same averaging set or other averaging sets. However, a 
manufacturer must first apply advanced technology credits to any 
deficits in the same averaging set before applying them to other 
averaging sets.
    (8) Surplus credits, other than advanced technology credits, may be 
traded among credit holders but must stay within the same averaging set. 
Advanced technology credits can be traded across averaging sets.
    (9) Surplus credits, if not used to offset a credit shortfall may be 
banked by the manufacturer for use in future model years, or traded, 
given the restriction that the credits have an expiration date of five 
model years after the year in which the credits are earned. For example, 
credits earned in model year 2014 may be utilized through model year 
2019.
    (10) Credit shortfalls must be offset by available surplus credits 
within three model years after shortfall was

[[Page 141]]

incurred. If the shortfall cannot be offset, the manufacturer is liable 
for civil penalties as discussed in Sec. 535.9.
    (11) The value of credits generated in a model year is calculated as 
follows:
    (i) The value of credits generated in a model year for each engine 
family within a regulatory subcategory equals

Engine Family FCC (gallons) = (Std - FCL) x (CF) x (Volume) x (UL) x (10 
\2\)

Where:

Std = the standard for the respective engine regulatory subcategory 
          (gal/100 bhp-hr).
FCL = family certification level for the engine family (gal/100 bhp-hr).
CF = a transient cycle conversion factor in bhp-hr/mile which is the 
          integrated total cycle brake horsepower-hour divided by the 
          equivalent mileage of the applicable test cycle. For spark-
          ignition heavy-duty engines, the equivalent mileage is 6.3 
          miles. For compression-ignition heavy-duty engines, the 
          equivalent mileage is 6.5 miles.
Volume = the number of engines in the corresponding engine family.
UL = the useful life of the given engine family (miles) as shown in the 
          following table:


------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                   UL
                    Regulatory subcategory                      (miles)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Class 2b-5 Vocational Vehicles, Spark Ignited (SI), and Light    110,000
 Heavy-Duty Diesel Engines...................................
Class 6-7 Vocational Vehicles and Medium Heavy-Duty Diesel       185,000
 Engines.....................................................
Class 8 Vocational Vehicles and Heavy Heavy-Duty Diesel          435,000
 Engines.....................................................
Class 7 Tractors and Medium Heavy-Duty Diesel Engines........    185,000
Class 8 Tractors and Heavy Heavy-Duty Diesel Engines.........    435,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------


    (ii) Calculate the total credits generated in a model year for each 
averaging set using the following equation:

Total averaging set MY credits = [Sigma] Engine family credits within 
each averaging set

    (12) The provisions of this section apply to manufacturers utilizing 
the compression-ignition engine voluntary alternate standard provisions 
specified in Sec. 535.5(d)(4) as follows.
    (i) Manufacturers may not certify engines to the alternate standards 
if they are part of an averaging set in which they carry a balance of 
banked credits. For purposes of this section, manufacturers are deemed 
to carry credits in an averaging set if they carry credits from advance 
technology that are allowed to be used in that averaging set.
    (ii) Manufacturers may not bank fuel consumption credits for any 
engine family in the same averaging set and model year in which it 
certifies engines to the alternate standards. This means a manufacturer 
may not bank advanced technology credits in a model year it certifies 
any engines to the alternate standards.
    (iii) Note that the provisions of paragraph (d)(10) of this section 
apply with respect to credit deficits generated while utilizing 
alternate standards.
    (13) Where a manufacturer has chosen to comply with the EPA 
alternative compression ignition engine phase-in standard provisions in 
40 CFR 1036.150(e), and has optionally decided to follow the same path 
under the NHTSA fuel consumption program, it must certify all of its 
model year 2013 compression-ignition engines within a given averaging 
set to the applicable alternative standards in Sec. 535.5(d)(5). 
Engines certified to these standards are not eligible for early credits 
under paragraph (d)(14) of this section. Credits are calculated using 
the same equation provided in paragraph (d)(11) of this section.
    (14) If a manufacturer chooses to generate early CO<INF>2</INF> 
emission credits under EPA provisions of 40 CFR 1036.150, it may also 
voluntarily generate early credits under the NHTSA fuel consumption 
program. Fuel consumption credits may be generated for engines certified 
in model year 2013 (2015 for spark-ignition engines) to the standards in 
Sec. 535.5(d). To do so a manufacturer must certify its entire U. S.-
directed production volume of engines except as specified in 40 CFR 
1036.150(a)(2). Credits are calculated as specified in paragraph (d)(11) 
of this section relative to the standards that would apply for model 
year 2014 (2016 for spark-ignition engines). Surplus credits generated 
under this paragraph may be increased by a factor of 1.5 for determining 
total available credits for banking or trading. For example, if you have 
10 gallons of surplus credits for model year 2013, you may bank 15 
gallons of credits. Credit deficits for an averaging set prior to model 
year 2014

[[Page 142]]

(2016 for spark-ignition engines) do not carry over to model year 2014 
(2016 for spark-ignition engines). These credits may be used to show 
compliance with the standards of this part for 2014 and later model 
years. Once a manufacturer opts into the NHTSA program they must stay in 
the program for all of the optional model years and remain standardized 
with the same implementation approach being followed to meet the EPA 
CO<INF>2</INF> emission program.
    (15) If a manufacturer generates credits from engines certified for 
advanced technology in accordance with Sec. 535.7(e)(1), a multiplier 
of 1.5 can be used, but this multiplier cannot be used on the same 
credits for which the early credit multiplier is used. Advanced 
technology credits can be used in other averaging sets different from 
the one they are generated, but the maximum amount of credits a 
manufacturer may bring into a service class group that contains the 
heavy-duty engine averaging sets is 5.89 Mgallons (for advanced 
technology credits based upon compression ignition engines) or 6.76 
Mgallons (for advanced technology credits based upon spark-ignition 
engines) per model year as specified in 40 CFR 1036.740. However, this 
does not limit the amount of advanced technology credits that can be 
used across averaging sets within the same service class group.
    (e) Additional credit provisions. (1) Advanced technology credits. 
Manufacturers of heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans, vocational vehicles, 
tractors and associated engines showing improvements in CO<INF>2</INF> 
emissions and fuel consumption using hybrid vehicles with regenerative 
braking, vehicles equipped with Rankine-cycle engines, electric vehicles 
and fuel cell vehicles are eligible for advanced technology credits. 
Advanced technology credits may be increased by a 1.5 multiplier and 
applied to any heavy-duty vehicle or engine subcategory consistent with 
sound engineering judgment.
    (i) Heavy-duty vehicles. (A) For advanced technology system (hybrid 
vehicles with regenerative braking, vehicles equipped with Rankine-cycle 
engines and fuel cell vehicles), calculate the advanced technology 
credits as follows:
    (1) Measure the effectiveness of the advanced system by chassis 
testing a vehicle equipped with the advanced system and an equivalent 
conventional system in accordance with 40 CFR 1037.615.
    (2) For purposes of this paragraph (e), a conventional vehicle is 
considered to be equivalent if it has the same footprint, intended 
vehicle service class, aerodynamic drag, and other relevant factors not 
directly related to the advanced system powertrain. If there is no 
equivalent vehicle, the manufacturer may create and test a prototype 
equivalent vehicle. The conventional vehicle is considered Vehicle A, 
and the advanced technology vehicle is considered Vehicle B.
    (3) The benefit associated with the advanced system for fuel 
consumption is determined from the weighted fuel consumption results 
from the chassis tests of each vehicle using the following equation:

Benefit (gallon/1,000 ton mile) = Improvement Factor x GEM Fuel 
Consumption Result--B

Where:

Improvement Factor = (Fuel Consumption--A--Fuel Consumption--B)/(Fuel 
          Consumption--A)
Fuel Consumption Rates A and B are the gallons per 1,000 ton-mile of the 
          conventional and advanced vehicles, respectively, as measured 
          under the test procedures specified by EPA.
GEM Fuel Consumption Result B is the estimated gallons per 1,000 ton-
          mile rate resulting from emission modeling of the advanced 
          vehicle as specified in 40 CFR 1037.520 and Sec. 535.6(b).

    (4) Calculate the benefit in credits using the equation in paragraph 
(c)(11) of this section and replacing the term (Std-FEL) with the 
benefit.
    (B) For electric vehicles calculate the fuel consumption credits 
using an FEL of 0 g/1000ton-mile.
    (ii) Heavy-duty engines. (A) This section specifies how to generate 
advanced technology-specific fuel consumption credits for hybrid 
powertrains that include energy storage systems and regenerative braking 
(including regenerative engine braking) and for engines that include 
Rankine-cycle (or other bottoming cycle) exhaust energy recovery 
systems.

[[Page 143]]

    (1) Pre-transmission hybrid powertrains are those engine systems 
that include features that recover and store energy during engine 
motoring operation but not from the vehicle wheels. These powertrains 
are tested using the hybrid engine test procedures of 40 CFR part 1065 
or using the post-transmission test procedures.
    (2) Post-transmission hybrid powertrains are those powertrains that 
include features that recover and store energy from braking at the 
vehicle wheels. These powertrains are tested by simulating the chassis 
test procedure applicable for hybrid vehicles under 40 CFR 1037.550.
    (3) Test engines that include Rankine-cycle exhaust energy recovery 
systems according to the test procedures specified in 40 CFR part 1036, 
subpart F, unless EPA approves the manufacturer's alternate procedures.
    (B) Calculate credits as specified in paragraph (c) of this section. 
Credits generated from engines and powertrains certified under this 
section may be used in other averaging sets as described in 40 CFR 
1036.740(d).
    (2) Innovative technology credits. This provision allows engine and 
vehicle manufacturers to generate CO<INF>2</INF> emission credits 
consistent with the provisions of 40 CFR 1036.610 (for engines), 40 CFR 
1037.104(d)(13) (for heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans) and 40 CFR 
1037.610 (for vocational vehicles and tractors) for introducing 
innovative technology in heavy-duty engines and vehicles for reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions and fuel consumption. Upon identification and 
approval from EPA of a manufacturer seeking to obtain innovative 
technology credits in a given model year, NHTSA may adopt an equivalent 
amount of fuel consumption credits into its program. Such credits must 
remain within the same regulatory subcategory in which the credits were 
generated. NHTSA will adopt these fuel consumption credits depending 
upon whether:
    (i) The technology has a direct impact upon reducing fuel 
consumption performance;
    (ii) The manufacturer has provided sufficient information to make 
sound engineering judgments on the impact of the technology in reducing 
fuel consumption performance; and
    (iii) Credits will be accepted on a one-for-one basis expressed in 
terms of gallons.


<R05>
Sec. 535.8  Reporting requirements.

    (a) General requirements. Manufacturers producing heavy-duty 
vehicles and engines applicable to fuel consumption standards in Sec. 
535.5, for each given model year, must submit the required information 
as specified in paragraphs (b) through (h) of this section.
    (1) The information required by this part must be submitted by the 
deadlines specified in this section and must be based upon all the 
information and data available to the manufacturer 30 days before 
submitting information.
    (2) Manufacturers must submit information electronically through the 
EPA database system as the single point of entry for all information 
required for this national program and both agencies will have access to 
the information. The format for the required information is specified by 
EPA.
    (3) If by model year 2012 the agencies are not prepared to receive 
information through the EPA database system, manufacturers are required 
to submit information to EPA using an approved information format. A 
manufacturer can use a different format, if it sends EPA a written 
request with justification for a waiver.
    (b) Pre-model year reports. Manufacturers producing heavy-duty 
pickup trucks and vans must submit reports in advance of the model year 
providing early estimates demonstrating how their fleet(s) would comply 
with GHG emissions and fuel consumption standards. Note, the agencies 
understand that early model year reports contain estimates that may 
change over the course of a model year and that compliance information 
manufactures submit prior to the beginning of a new model year may not 
represent the final compliance outcome. The agencies view the necessity 
for requiring early model reports as a manufacturer's good faith 
projection for demonstrating compliance with emission and fuel 
consumption standards.
    (1) Report deadlines. For model years 2013 and later, manufacturer 
of heavy-

[[Page 144]]

duty pickup trucks and vans complying with voluntary and mandatory 
standards must submit a pre-model year report for the given model year 
as early as the date of the manufacturer's annual certification preview 
meeting with EPA and NHTSA, or prior to submitting its first application 
for a certificate of conformity to EPA in accordance with 40 CFR 
1037.104(d). For example, a manufacturer choosing to comply in model 
year 2014 could submit its pre-model year report during its 
precertification meeting which could occur before January 2, 2013, or 
could provide its pre-model year report any time prior to submitting its 
first application for certification for the given model year.
    (2) Contents. Each pre-model year report must be submitted including 
the following information for each model year.
    (i) A list of each unique subconfiguration in the manufacturer's 
fleet describing the make and model designations, attribute based-values 
(i.e., GVWR, GCWR, Curb Weight and drive configurations) and standards;
    (ii) The emission and fuel consumption fleet average standard 
derived from the unique vehicle configurations;
    (iii) The estimated vehicle configuration, test group and fleet 
production volumes;
    (iv) The expected emissions and fuel consumption test group results 
and fleet average performance;
    (v) If complying with MY 2013 fuel consumption standards, a 
statement must be provided declaring that the manufacturer is 
voluntarily choosing to comply early with the EPA and NHTSA programs. 
The manufacturers must also acknowledge that once selected, the decision 
cannot be reversed and the manufacturer will continue to comply with the 
fuel consumption standards for subsequent model years for all the 
vehicles it manufacturers in each regulatory category for a given model 
year;
    (vi) If complying with MYs 2014, 2015 or 2016 fuel consumption 
standards, a statement must be provided declaring whether the 
manufacturer will use fixed or increasing standards in accordance with 
Sec. 535.5(a). The manufacturer must also acknowledge that once 
selected, the decision cannot be reversed and the manufacturer must 
continue to comply with the same alternative for subsequent model years 
for all the vehicles it manufacturers in each regulatory category for a 
given model year;
    (vii) If complying with MYs 2014 or 2015 fuel consumption standards, 
a statement must be provided declaring that the manufacturer is 
voluntarily choosing to comply with NHTSA's voluntary fuel consumption 
standards in accordance with Sec. 535.5(a)(4). The manufacturers must 
also acknowledge that once selected, the decision cannot be reversed and 
the manufacturer will continue to comply with the fuel consumption 
standards for subsequent model years for all the vehicles it 
manufacturers in each regulatory category for a given model year;
    (viii) The list of Class 2b and 3 incomplete vehicles (cab-complete 
or chassis complete vehicles) and the method used to certify these 
vehicles as complete pickups and vans identifying the most similar 
complete sister- or other complete vehicles used to derive the target 
standards and performance test results;
    (ix) The list of Class 4 and 5 incomplete and complete vehicles and 
the method use to certify these vehicles as complete pickups and vans 
identifying the most similar complete or sister vehicles used to derive 
the target standards and performance test results;
    (x) List of loose engines included in the heavy-duty pickup and van 
category and the list of vehicles used to derive target standards and 
performance test results;
    (xi) Copy of any notices a vehicle manufacturer sends to the engine 
manufacturer to notify the engine manufacturers that their engines are 
subject to emissions and fuel consumption standards and that it intends 
to use their engines in excluded vehicles;
    (xii) A credit plan identifying the manufacturers estimated credit 
balances, planned credit flexibilities (i.e., credit balances, planned 
credit trading, innovative, advanced and early credits and etc.) and if 
needed a credit deficit plan demonstrating how it plans to resolve any 
credit deficits that might occur for a model year within a period

[[Page 145]]

of up to three model years after that deficit has occurred; and
    (xiii) The supplemental information specified in paragraph (h) of 
this section. [Note: NHTSA may also ask a manufacturer to provide 
additional information if necessary to verify compliance with the fuel 
consumption requirements of this regulation.]
    (c) Applications for certificate of conformity. Manufacturers 
producing vocational vehicles, tractors and heavy-duty engines are 
required to submit applications for certificates of conformity to EPA in 
accordance with 40 CFR 1036.205 and 1037.205 in advance of introducing 
vehicles for commercial sale. Applications contain early model year 
information demonstrating how manufacturers plan to comply with GHG 
emissions. For model years 2013 and later, manufacturers of vocational 
vehicles, tractors and engine complying with NHTSA's voluntary and 
mandatory standards must submit applications for certificates of 
conformity in accordance through the EPA database including both GHG 
emissions and fuel consumption information for each given model year.
    (1)Submission deadlines. Applications are primarily submitted in 
advance of the given model year to EPA but cannot be submitted any later 
than December 31 of the given model year.
    (2) Contents. Each application for certificates of conformity 
submitted to EPA must include the following equivalent fuel consumption.
    (i) Equivalent fuel consumption values for emissions CO<INF>2</INF> 
FCLs values used to certify each engine family in accordance with 40 CFR 
1036.205(e). This provision applies only to manufacturers producing 
heavy-duty engines.
    (ii) Equivalent fuel consumption values for emission CO<INF>2</INF> 
data engines used to comply with emission standards in 40 CFR 1036.108. 
This provision applies only to manufacturers producing heavy-duty 
engines.
    (iii) Equivalent fuel consumption values for emissions 
CO<INF>2</INF> FELs values used to certify each vehicle families or 
subfamilies in accordance with 40 CFR 1037.205(k). This provision 
applies only to manufacturers producing vocational vehicles and 
tractors.
    (iv) Report modeling results for ten configurations in terms of 
CO<INF>2</INF> emissions and equivalent fuel consumption results in 
accordance with 40 CFR 1037.205(o). Include modeling inputs and detailed 
descriptions of how they were derived. This provision applies only to 
manufacturers producing vocational vehicles and tractors.
    (3) Additional supplemental information. Manufacturers are required 
to submit additional information as specified in paragraph (h) of this 
section for the NHTSA program before or at the same time it submits its 
first application for a certificate of conformity to EPA. Under limited 
conditions, NHTSA may also ask a manufacturer to provide additional 
information directly to the Administrator if necessary to verify the 
fuel consumption requirements of this regulation.
    (d) End-of-the-year-report. Both manufacturers participating and not 
participating in the ABT program are required to submit year end 
reports; end-of-the-year (EOY) reports in accordance with 40 CFR 
1036.730 and 1037.730. The EOY reports are used to review a 
manufacturer's preliminary final estimates and to identify manufacturers 
that might have a credit deficit for the given model year. For model 
years 2013 and later, heavy-duty vehicle and engine manufacturers 
complying with NHTSA's voluntary and mandatory standards must submit EOY 
reports through the EPA database including both GHG emissions and fuel 
consumption information for each given model year.
    (1)Report deadlines. For model year 2013 and later, heavy-duty 
vehicle and engine manufacturers complying with NHTSA voluntary and 
mandatory standards must submit EOY reports through the EPA database 
including both GHG emissions and fuel consumption information within 90 
days after the end of the given model year and no later than April 1 of 
the next calendar year. For example, the EOY report for model year 2014 
must be submitted no later than April 1, 2015.
    (i) If a manufacturer expects differences in the information 
reported between the EOY and the final year report specified in 40 CFR 
1036.730 and 1037.730, it must provide the most up-

[[Page 146]]

to-date fuel consumption projections in its EOY report and indentify the 
information as preliminary.
    (ii) If the manufacturer cannot provide any of the required fuel 
consumption information, it must state the specific reason for the 
insufficiency and identify the additional testing needed or explain what 
analytical methods are believed by the manufacturer will be necessary to 
eliminate the insufficiency and certify that the results will be 
available for the final report.
    (2) Contents. Each EOY report must be submitted including the 
following fuel consumption information for each model year.
    (i) Engine and vehicle family designations and averaging sets.
    (ii) Engine and vehicle regulatory subcategory and fuel consumption 
standards including any alternative standards used.
    (iii) Engine and vehicle family FCLs and FELs in terms of fuel 
consumption.
    (iv) Production volumes for engines and vehicles.
    (v) A credit plan (for manufacturers participating in the ABT 
program) identifying the manufacturers actual fuel consumption credit 
balances, credit flexibilities, credit trades and a credit deficit plan 
if needed demonstrating how it plans to resolve any credit deficits that 
might occur for a model year within a period of up to three model years 
after that deficit has occurred
    (vi) A plan describing the vocational vehicles and vocational 
tractors that were exempted as heavy-duty off-road vehicles.
    (vii) A final plan describing any advanced technology engines or 
vehicles including alternative fueled vehicles that were produced for 
the model year identifying the approaches used to determinate compliance 
and the production volumes.
    (viii) A final list of each unique subconfiguration included in a 
manufacturers fleet of heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans describing the 
designations, attribute based-values (GVWR, GCWR, Curb Weight and drive 
configurations) and standards. This provision applies only to 
manufacturers producing heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans.
    (ix) The final fuel consumption fleet average standard derived from 
the unique vehicle configurations. This provision applies only to 
manufacturers producing heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans.
    (x) The preliminary final subconfiguration and test group production 
volumes. This provision applies only to manufacturers producing heavy-
duty pickup trucks and vans.
    (xi) The preliminary final fuel consumption test group results and 
fleet average performance. This provision applies only to manufacturers 
producing heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans.
    (xii) Under limited conditions, NHTSA may also ask a manufacturer to 
provide additional information directly to the Administrator if 
necessary to verify the fuel consumption requirements of this part.
    (e) Final reports. Both manufacturers participating and not 
participating in the ABT program are required to submit year end final 
reports in accordance with 40 CFR 1036.730 and 1037.730. The final 
reports are used to review a manufacturer's final data and to identify 
manufacturers that might have a credit deficit for the given model year. 
For model years 2013 and later, heavy-duty vehicle and engine 
manufacturers complying with NHTSA's voluntary and mandatory standards 
must submit final reports through the EPA database including both GHG 
emissions and fuel consumption information for each given model year.
    (1)Report deadlines. For model year 2013 and later, heavy-duty 
vehicle and engine manufacturers complying with NHTSA voluntary and 
mandatory standards must submit final reports through the EPA database 
including both GHG emissions and fuel consumption information within 270 
days after the end of the given model year and no later than October 1 
of the next calendar year. For example, the final reports for model year 
2014 must be submitted no later than October 1, 2015.
    (2) Contents. Each final report must be submitted including the 
following fuel consumption information for each model year.
    (i) Final engine and vehicle family designations and averaging sets.

[[Page 147]]

    (ii) Final engine and vehicle fuel consumption standards including 
any alternative standards used.
    (iii) Final engine and vehicle family FCLs and FELs in terms of fuel 
consumption.
    (iv) Final production volumes for engines and vehicles.
    (v) A final credit plan identifying the manufacturers actual fuel 
consumption credit balances, credit flexibilities, credit trades and a 
credit deficit plan if needed demonstrating how it plans to resolve any 
credit deficits that might occur for a model year within a period of up 
to three model years after that deficit has occurred
    (vi) A final plan describing the vocational vehicles and vocational 
tractors that were exempted as heavy-duty off-road vehicles.
    (vii) A final plan describing any advanced technology engines or 
vehicles including alternative fueled vehicles that were produced for 
the model year identifying the approaches used to determinate compliance 
and the production volumes.
    (viii) A final list of each unique subconfiguration included in a 
manufacturers fleet of heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans describing the 
designations, attribute based-values (GVWR, GCWR, Curb Weight and drive 
configurations) and standards. This provision applies only to 
manufacturers producing heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans.
    (ix) The final fuel consumption fleet average standard derived from 
the unique vehicle configurations. This provision applies only to 
manufacturers producing heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans.
    (x) The final subconfiguration and test group production volumes. 
This provision applies only to manufacturers producing heavy-duty pickup 
trucks and vans.
    (xi) The final fuel consumption test group results and fleet average 
performance. This provision applies only to manufacturers producing 
heavy-duty pickup trucks and vans.
    (xii) Under limited conditions, NHTSA may also ask a manufacturer to 
provide additional information directly to the Administrator if 
necessary to verify the fuel consumption requirements of this 
regulation.
    (f) Amendments to applications for certification. At any time, a 
manufacturer modifies an application for certification in accordance 
with 40 CFR 1036.225 and 1037.225, it must submit GHG emissions changes 
with equivalent fuel consumption values for the information required in 
paragraphs (b) through (e) and (h) of this section.
    (g) Confidential information. Manufacturers must submit a request 
for confidentiality with each electronic submission specifying any part 
of the for information or data in a report that it believes should be 
withheld from public disclosure as trade secret or other confidential 
business information. Information submitted to EPA should follow EPA 
guidelines for treatment of confidentiality. Confidential information 
submitted to NHTSA shall be treated according to paragraph (g)(1) of 
this section. For any information or data requested by the manufacturer 
to be withheld under 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(4) and 15 U.S.C. 2005(d)(1), the 
manufacturer shall provide evidence in its request for confidentiality 
to justify that:
    (1) The item is within the scope of 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(4) and 15 U.S.C. 
2005(d)(1);
    (2) The disclosure of such an item would result in significant 
competitive damage;
    (3) The period during which the item must be withheld to avoid that 
damage; and
    (4) How earlier disclosure would result in that damage.
    (h) Additional required information. The following additional 
information is required to be submitted through the EPA database. NHTSA 
reserves the right to ask a manufacturer to provide additional 
information if necessary to verify the fuel consumption requirements of 
this regulation.
    (1) Small business exemptions. Vehicles and engines produced by 
small business manufacturers meeting the criteria in 13 CFR 121.201 are 
exempted from the requirements of this part. Qualifying small business 
manufacturers must notify the EPA and NHTSA Administrators before 
importing or introducing into U.S. commerce exempted vehicles

[[Page 148]]

or engines. This notification must include a description of the 
manufacturer's qualification as a small business under 13 CFR 121.201 
and must be submitted to EPA. The agencies may review a manufacturer's 
qualification as a small business manufacturer under 13 CFR 121.201.
    (2) Early introduction. The provision applies to manufacturers 
seeking to comply early with the NHTSA's fuel consumption program prior 
to model year 2014. The manufacturer must send the request to EPA before 
submitting its first application for a certificate of conformity.
    (3) NHTSA voluntary compliance model years. Manufacturers must 
submit a statement declaring whether the manufacturer chooses to comply 
voluntarily with NHTSA's fuel consumption standards for model years 2014 
through 2015. The manufacturers must acknowledge that once selected, the 
decision cannot be reversed and the manufacturer will continue to comply 
with the fuel consumption standards for subsequent model years. The 
manufacturer must send the statement to EPA before submitting its first 
application for a certificate of conformity.
    (4) Alternative engine standards. Manufacturers choosing to comply 
with the alternative engine standards must notify EPA and NHTSA of their 
choice and include in that notification a demonstration that it has 
exhausted all available credits and credit opportunities. The 
manufacturer must send the statement to EPA before submitting its EOY 
report.
    (5) Alternate phase-in. Manufacturers choosing to comply with the 
alternative engine phase-in must notify EPA and NHTSA of their choice. 
The manufacturer must send the statement to EPA before submitting its 
first application for a certificate of conformity.
    (6) Off-road exclusion (tractors and vocational vehicles only). (i) 
Vehicles intended to be used extensively in off-road environments such 
as forests, oil fields, and construction sites may be exempted without 
request from the requirements of this regulation as specified in 49 CFR 
523.2 and Sec. 535.5(b). Within 90 days after the end of each model 
year, manufacturers must send EPA and NHTSA through the EPA database a 
report with the following information:
    (A) A description of each excluded vehicle configuration, including 
an explanation of why it qualifies for this exclusion.
    (B) The number of vehicles excluded for each vehicle configuration.
    (ii) A manufacturer having an off-road vehicle failing to meet the 
criteria under the agencies' off-road exclusions will be allowed to 
submit a petition describing how and why their vehicles should qualify 
for exclusion. The process of petitioning for an exclusion is explained 
below. For each request, the manufacturer will be required to describe 
why it believes an exclusion is warranted and address the following 
factors which the agencies will consider in granting its petition:
    (A) The agencies will provide an exclusion based on off road 
capability of the vehicle or if the vehicle is fitted with speed 
restricted tires. A manufacturer should explain which exclusion does its 
vehicle qualify under; and
    (B) A manufacturer should verify if there are any comparable tires 
that exist in the market to carry out the desired application both on 
and off road for the subject vehicle(s) of the petition which have LLR 
values that would enable compliance with the standard.
    (7) Vocational tractor. Tractors intended to be used as vocational 
tractors may comply with vocational vehicle standards in Sec. 535.5(b) 
of this regulation. Manufacturers classifying tractor as vocational 
tractors must provide a description of how they meet the qualifications 
in their applications for certificates of conformity as specified in 40 
CFR 1037.205.
    (8) Approval of alternate methods to determine drag coefficients 
(tractors only). Manufacturers seeking to use alternative methods to 
determine aerodynamic drag coefficients must provide a request and gain 
approval by EPA. The manufacturer must send the request to EPA before 
submitting its first application for a certificate of conformity.
    (9) Innovative technology credits. Manufacturers pursuing innovative 
technology credits must submit information to the agencies and may be 
subject

[[Page 149]]

to a public evaluation process in which the public would have 
opportunity for comment if not using a test procedure in accordance with 
40 CFR 1037.610(c). Whether the approach involves on-road testing, 
modeling, or some other analytical approach, the manufacturer would be 
required to present a final methodology to EPA and NHTSA. EPA and NHTSA 
would approve the methodology and credits only if certain criteria were 
met. Baseline emissions and fuel consumption and control emissions and 
fuel consumption would need to be clearly demonstrated over a wide range 
of real world driving conditions and over a sufficient number of 
vehicles to address issues of uncertainty with the data. Data would need 
to be on a vehicle model-specific basis unless a manufacturer 
demonstrated model-specific data was not necessary. The agencies may 
publish a notice of availability in the Federal Register notifying the 
public of a manufacturer's proposed alternative off-cycle credit 
calculation methodology and provide opportunity for comment. Any notice 
will include details regarding the methodology, but not include any 
Confidential Business Information.
    (10) Credit trades. If a manufacturer trades fuel consumption 
credits, it must send EPA a report within 90 days after the transaction, 
as follows:
    (i) As the seller, the manufacturer must include the following 
information in its report:
    (A) The corporate names of the buyer and any brokers.
    (B) A copy of any contracts related to the trade.
    (C) The fleet, vehicle or engine families that generated fuel 
consumption credits for the trade, including the number of fuel 
consumption credits from each family.
    (ii) As the buyer, the manufacturer or entity must include the 
following information in its report:
    (A) The corporate names of the seller and any brokers.
    (B) A copy of any contracts related to the trade.
    (C) How the manufacturer or entity intends to use the fuel 
consumption credits, including the number of fuel consumption credits it 
intends to apply to each vehicle family (if known).
    (i) Public information. Based upon information submitted by 
manufacturers and EPA, NHTSA will publish fuel consumption standards and 
performance results.
    (j) Information received from EPA. NHTSA will receive information 
from EPA as specified in 40 CFR 1036.755 and 1037.755.


<R05>
Sec. 535.9  Enforcement approach.

    (a) Compliance. (1) NHTSA will assess compliance with fuel 
consumption standards each year, based upon EPA final verified data 
submitted to NHTSA for its heavy-duty vehicle fuel efficiency program 
established pursuant to 49 U.S.C. 32902(k). NHTSA may conduct 
verification testing throughout a given model year in order to validate 
data received from manufacturers and will discuss any potential issues 
with EPA and the manufacturer.
    (2) Credit values in gallons are calculated based on the final 
CO<INF>2</INF> emissions and fuel consumption data submitted by 
manufacturers and verified/validated by EPA.
    (3) NHTSA will verify a manufacturer's credit balance in each 
averaging set for each given model year. The average set balance is 
based upon the engines or vehicles performance above or below the 
applicable regulatory subcategory standards in each respective averaging 
set and any credits that are traded into or out of an averaging set 
during the model year.
    (i) If the balance is positive, the manufacturer is designated as 
having a credit surplus.
    (ii) If the balance is negative, the manufacturer is designated as 
having a credit deficit.
    (4) NHTSA will provide written notification to the manufacturer that 
has a negative balance for any averaging set for each model year. The 
manufacturer will be required to confirm the negative balance and submit 
a plan indicating how it will allocate existing credits or earn, and/or 
acquire by trade credits, or else be liable for a civil penalty as 
determined in paragraph (b) of this section. The manufacturer must 
submit a plan within 60 days of receiving agency notification.
    (5) Credit shortfall within an averaging set may be carried forward 
only

[[Page 150]]

three years, and if not offset by earned or traded credits, the 
manufacturer may be liable for a civil penalty as described in paragraph 
(b) of this section.
    (6) Credit allocation plans received from a manufacturer will be 
reviewed and approved by NHTSA. NHTSA will approve a credit allocation 
plan unless it determines that the proposed credits are unavailable or 
that it is unlikely that the plan will result in the manufacturer 
earning sufficient credits to offset the subject credit shortfall. If a 
plan is approved, NHTSA will revise the respective manufacturer's credit 
account accordingly by identifying which existing or traded credits are 
being used to address the credit shortfall, or by identifying the 
manufacturer's plan to earn future credits for addressing the respective 
credit shortfall. If a plan is rejected, NHTSA will notify the 
respective manufacturer and request a revised plan. The manufacturer 
must submit a revised plan within 14 days of receiving agency 
notification. The agency will provide a manufacturer one opportunity to 
submit a revised credit allocation plan before it initiates civil 
penalty proceedings.
    (7) For purposes of this regulation, NHTSA will treat the use of 
future credits for compliance, as through a credit allocation plan, as a 
deferral of civil penalties for non-compliance with an applicable fuel 
consumption standard.
    (8) If NHTSA receives and approves a manufacturer's credit 
allocation plan to earn future credits within the following three model 
years in order to comply with regulatory obligations, NHTSA will defer 
levying civil penalties for non-compliance until the date(s) when the 
manufacturer's approved plan indicates that credits will be earned or 
acquired to achieve compliance, and upon receiving confirmed 
CO<INF>2</INF> emissions and fuel consumption data from EPA. If the 
manufacturer fails to acquire or earn sufficient credits by the plan 
dates, NHTSA will initiate civil penalty proceedings.
    (9) In the event that NHTSA fails to receive or is unable to approve 
a plan for a non-compliant manufacturer due to insufficiency or 
untimeliness, NHTSA may initiate civil penalty proceedings.
    (10) In the event that a manufacturer fails to report accurate fuel 
consumption data for vehicles or engines covered under this rule, 
noncompliance will be assumed until corrected by submission of the 
required data, and NHTSA may initiate civil penalty proceedings.
    (b) Civil penalties--(1) Generally. NHTSA may assess a civil penalty 
for any violation of this part under 49 U.S.C. 32902(k). This section 
states the procedures for assessing civil penalties for violations of 
Sec. 535.5. The provisions of 5 U.S.C. 554, 556, and 557 do not apply 
to any proceedings conducted pursuant to this section.
    (2) Initial determination of noncompliance. An action for civil 
penalties is commenced by the execution of a Notice of Violation. A 
determination by NHTSA's Office of Enforcement of noncompliance with 
applicable fuel consumption standards utilizing the certified and 
reported CO<INF>2</INF> emissions and fuel consumption data provided by 
the Environmental Protection Agency as described in this part, and after 
considering all the flexibilities available under Sec. 535.7, underlies 
a Notice of Violation. If NHTSA Enforcement determines that a 
manufacturer's averaging set of vehicles or engines fails to comply with 
the applicable fuel consumption standard(s) by generating a credit 
shortfall, the chassis, vehicle or engine manufacturer, as relevant, 
shall be subject to a civil penalty.
    (3) Numbers of violations and maximum civil penalties. Any violation 
shall constitute a separate violation with respect to each vehicle or 
engine within the applicable regulatory averaging set. The maximum civil 
penalty is not more than $37,500.00 per vehicle or engine. The maximum 
civil penalty under this section for a related series of violations 
shall be determined by multiplying $37,500.00 times the vehicle or 
engine production volume for the model year in question within the 
regulatory averaging set. NHTSA may adjust this civil penalty amount to 
account for inflation.
    (4) Factors for determining penalty amount. In determining the 
amount of any civil penalty proposed to be assessed or assessed under 
this section, NHTSA shall take into account the

[[Page 151]]

gravity of the violation, the size of the violator's business, the 
violator's history of compliance with applicable fuel consumption 
standards, the actual fuel consumption performance related to the 
applicable standards, the estimated cost to comply with the regulation 
and applicable standards, the quantity of vehicles or engines not 
complying, and the effect of the penalty on the violator's ability to 
continue in business. The ``estimated cost to comply with the regulation 
and applicable standards,'' will be used to ensure that penalties for 
non-compliance will not be less than the cost of compliance.
    (5) NHTSA enforcement report of determination of non-compliance. (i) 
If NHTSA Enforcement determines that a violation has occurred, NHTSA 
Enforcement may prepare a report and send the report to the NHTSA Chief 
Counsel.
    (ii) The NHTSA Chief Counsel will review the report prepared by 
NHTSA Enforcement to determine if there is sufficient information to 
establish a likely violation.
    (iii) If the Chief Counsel determines that a violation has likely 
occurred, the Chief Counsel may issue a Notice of Violation to the 
party.
    (iv) If the Chief Counsel issues a Notice of Violation, he or she 
will prepare a case file with recommended actions. A record of any prior 
violations by the same party shall be forwarded with the case file.
    (6) Notice of violation. (i) The Notice of Violation will contain 
the following information:
    (A) The name and address of the party;
    (B) The alleged violation(s) and the applicable fuel consumption 
standard(s) violated;
    (C) The amount of the proposed penalty and basis for that amount;
    (D) The place to which, and the manner in which, payment is to be 
made;
    (E) A statement that the party may decline the Notice of Violation 
and that if the Notice of Violation is declined within 30 days of the 
date shown on the Notice of Violation, the party has the right to a 
hearing, if requested within 30 days of the date shown on the Notice of 
Violation, prior to a final assessment of a penalty by a Hearing 
Officer; and
    (F) A statement that failure to either pay the proposed penalty or 
to decline the Notice of Violation and request a hearing within 30 days 
of the date shown on the Notice of Violation will result in a finding of 
violation by default and that NHTSA will proceed with the civil penalty 
in the amount proposed on the Notice of Violation without processing the 
violation under the hearing procedures set forth in this subpart.
    (ii) The Notice of Violation may be delivered to the party by:
    (A) Mailing to the party (certified mail is not required);
    (B) Use of an overnight or express courier service; or
    (C) Facsimile transmission or electronic mail (with or without 
attachments) to the party or an employee of the party.
    (iii) At any time after the Notice of Violation is issued, NHTSA and 
the party may agree to reach a compromise on the payment amount.
    (iv) Once a penalty amount is paid in full, a finding of ``resolved 
with payment'' will be entered into the case file.
    (v) If the party agrees to pay the proposed penalty, but has not 
made payment within 30 days of the date shown on the Notice of 
Violation, NHTSA will enter a finding of violation by default in the 
matter and NHTSA will proceed with the civil penalty in the amount 
proposed on the Notice of Violation without processing the violation 
under the hearing procedures set forth in this subpart.
    (vi) If within 30 days of the date shown on the Notice of Violation 
a party fails to pay the proposed penalty on the Notice of Violation, 
and fails to request a hearing, then NHTSA will enter a finding of 
violation by default in the case file, and will assess the civil penalty 
in the amount set forth on the Notice of Violation without processing 
the violation under the hearing procedures set forth in this subpart.
    (vii) NHTSA's order assessing the civil penalty following a party's 
default is a final agency action.
    (7) Hearing Officer. (i) If a party timely requests a hearing after 
receiving a

[[Page 152]]

Notice of Violation, a Hearing Officer shall hear the case.
    (ii) The Hearing Officer will be appointed by the NHTSA 
Administrator, and is solely responsible for the case referred to him or 
her. The Hearing Officer shall have no other responsibility, direct or 
supervisory, for the investigation of cases referred for the assessment 
of civil penalties. The Hearing Officer shall have no duties related to 
the light-duty fuel economy or medium- and heavy-duty fuel efficiency 
programs.
    (iii) The Hearing Officer decides each case on the basis of the 
information before him or her.
    (8) Initiation of action before the Hearing Officer. (i) After the 
Hearing Officer receives the case file from the Chief Counsel, the 
Hearing Officer notifies the party in writing of:
    (A) The date, time, and location of the hearing and whether the 
hearing will be conducted telephonically or at the DOT Headquarters 
building in Washington, DC;
    (B) The right to be represented at all stages of the proceeding by 
counsel as set forth in paragraph (b)(9) of this section;
    (C) The right to a free copy of all written evidence in the case 
file.
    (ii) On the request of a party, or at the Hearing Officer's 
direction, multiple proceedings may be consolidated if at any time it 
appears that such consolidation is necessary or desirable.
    (9) Counsel. A party has the right to be represented at all stages 
of the proceeding by counsel. A party electing to be represented by 
counsel must notify the Hearing Officer of this election in writing, 
after which point the Hearing Officer will direct all further 
communications to that counsel. A party represented by counsel bears all 
of its own attorneys' fees and costs.
    (10) Hearing location and costs. (i) Unless the party requests a 
hearing at which the party appears before the Hearing Officer in 
Washington, DC, the hearing may be held telephonically. In Washington, 
DC, the hearing is held at the headquarters of the U.S. Department of 
Transportation.
    (ii) The Hearing Officer may transfer a case to another Hearing 
Officer at a party's request or at the Hearing Officer's direction.
    (iii) A party is responsible for all fees and costs (including 
attorneys' fees and costs, and costs that may be associated with travel 
or accommodations) associated with attending a hearing.
    (11) Hearing procedures. (i) There is no right to discovery in any 
proceedings conducted pursuant to this subpart.
    (ii) The material in the case file pertinent to the issues to be 
determined by the Hearing Officer is presented by the Chief Counsel or 
his or her designee.
    (iii) The Chief Counsel may supplement the case file with 
information prior to the hearing. A copy of such information will be 
provided to the party no later than 3 business days before the hearing.
    (iv) At the close of the Chief Counsel's presentation of evidence, 
the party has the right to examine respond to and rebut material in the 
case file and other information presented by the Chief Counsel. In the 
case of witness testimony, both parties have the right of cross-
examination.
    (v) In receiving evidence, the Hearing Officer is not bound by 
strict rules of evidence. In evaluating the evidence presented, the 
Hearing Officer must give due consideration to the reliability and 
relevance of each item of evidence.
    (vi) At the close of the party's presentation of evidence, the 
Hearing Officer may allow the introduction of rebuttal evidence that may 
be presented by the Chief Counsel.
    (vii) The Hearing Officer may allow the party to respond to any 
rebuttal evidence submitted.
    (viii) After the evidence in the case has been presented, the Chief 
Counsel and the party may present arguments on the issues in the case. 
The party may also request an opportunity to submit a written statement 
for consideration by the Hearing Officer and for further review. If 
granted, the Hearing Officer shall allow a reasonable time for 
submission of the statement and shall specify the date by which it must 
be received. If the statement is not received within the time 
prescribed, or within the limits of any extension of time granted by the 
Hearing Officer, it

[[Page 153]]

need not be considered by the Hearing Officer.
    (ix) A verbatim transcript of the hearing will not normally be 
prepared. A party may, solely at its own expense, cause a verbatim 
transcript to be made. If a verbatim transcript is made, the party shall 
submit two copies to the Hearing Officer not later than 15 days after 
the hearing. The Hearing Officer shall include such transcript in the 
record.
    (12) Determination of violations and assessment of civil penalties. 
(i) Not later than 30 days following the close of the hearing, the 
Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision on the Notice of 
Violation, based on the hearing record. This may be extended by the 
Hearing officer if the submissions by the Chief Counsel or the party are 
voluminous. The decision shall address each alleged violation, and may 
do so collectively. For each alleged violation, the decision shall find 
a violation or no violation and provide a basis for the finding. The 
decision shall set forth the basis for the Hearing Officer's assessment 
of a civil penalty, or decision not to assess a civil penalty. In 
determining the amount of the civil penalty, the gravity of the 
violation, the size of the violator's business, the violator's history 
of compliance with applicable fuel consumption standards, the actual 
fuel consumption performance related to the applicable standard, the 
estimated cost to comply with the regulation and applicable standard, 
the quantity of vehicles or engines not complying, and the effect of the 
penalty on the violator's ability to continue in business. The 
assessment of a civil penalty by the Hearing Officer shall be set forth 
in an accompanying final order. The Hearing Officer's written final 
order is a final agency action.
    (ii) If the Hearing Officer assesses civil penalties in excess of 
$1,000,000, the Hearing Officer's decision shall contain a statement 
advising the party of the right to an administrative appeal to the 
Administrator within a specified period of time. The party is advised 
that failure to submit an appeal within the prescribed time will bar its 
consideration and that failure to appeal on the basis of a particular 
issue will constitute a waiver of that issue in its appeal before the 
Administrator.
    (iii) The filing of a timely and complete appeal to the 
Administrator of a Hearing Officer's order assessing a civil penalty 
shall suspend the operation of the Hearing Officer's penalty, which 
shall no longer be a final agency action.
    (iv) There shall be no administrative appeals of civil penalties 
assessed by a Hearing Officer of less than $1,000,000.
    (13) Appeals of civil penalties in excess of $1,000,000. (i) A party 
may appeal the Hearing Officer's order assessing civil penalties over 
$1,000,000 to the Administrator within 21 days of the date of the 
issuance of the Hearing Officer's order.
    (ii) The Administrator will review the decision of the Hearing 
Officer de novo, and may affirm the decision of the hearing officer and 
assess a civil penalty, or
    (iii) The Administrator may:
    (A) Modify a civil penalty;
    (B) Rescind the Notice of Violation; or
    (C) Remand the case back to the Hearing Officer for new or 
additional proceedings.
    (iv) In the absence of a remand, the decision of the Administrator 
in an appeal is a final agency action.
    (14) Collection of assessed or compromised civil penalties. (i) 
Payment of a civil penalty, whether assessed or compromised, shall be 
made by check, postal money order, or electronic transfer of funds, as 
provided in instructions by the agency. A payment of civil penalties 
shall not be considered a request for a hearing.
    (ii) The party must remit payment of any assessed civil penalty to 
NHTSA within 30 days after receipt of the Hearing Officer's order 
assessing civil penalties, or, in the case of an appeal to the 
Administrator, within 30 days after receipt of the Administrator's 
decision on the appeal.
    (iii) The party must remit payment of any compromised civil penalty 
to NHTSA on the date and under such terms and conditions as agreed to by 
the party and NHTSA. Failure to pay

[[Page 154]]

may result in NHTSA entering a finding of violation by default and 
assessing a civil penalty in the amount proposed in the Notice of 
Violation without processing the violation under the hearing procedures 
set forth in this part.
    (c) Changes in corporate ownership and control. Manufacturers must 
inform NHTSA of corporate relationship changes to ensure that credit 
accounts are identified correctly and credits are assigned and allocated 
properly.
    (1) In general, if two manufacturers merge in any way, they must 
inform NHTSA how they plan to merge their credit accounts. NHTSA will 
subsequently assess corporate fuel consumption and compliance status of 
the merged fleet instead of the original separate fleets.
    (2) If a manufacturer divides or divests itself of a portion of its 
automobile manufacturing business, it must inform NHTSA how it plans to 
divide the manufacturer's credit holdings into two or more accounts. 
NHTSA will subsequently distribute holdings as directed by the 
manufacturer, subject to provision for reasonably anticipated compliance 
obligations.
    (3) If a manufacturer is a successor to another manufacturer's 
business, it must inform NHTSA how it plans to allocate credits and 
resolve liabilities per 49 CFR part 534.


<R03>
PART 536_TRANSFER AND TRADING OF FUEL ECONOMY CREDITS--Table of Contents



Sec.
536.1 Scope.
536.2 Application.
536.3 Definitions.
536.4 Credits.
536.5 Trading infrastructure.
536.6 Treatment of credits earned prior to model year 2011.
536.7 Treatment of carryback credits.
536.8 Conditions for trading of credits.
536.9 Use of credits with regard to the domestically manufactured 
          passenger automobile minimum standard.
536.10 Treatment of dual-fuel and alternative fuel vehicles--consistency 
          with 49 CFR part 538.

    Authority: Sec. 104, Pub. L. 110-140 (49 U.S.C. 32903); delegation 
of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 74 FR 14452, Mar. 30, 2009, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 536.1  Scope.

    This part establishes regulations governing the use and application 
of CAFE credits up to three model years before and five model years 
after the model year in which the credit was earned. It also specifies 
requirements for manufacturers wishing to transfer fuel economy credits 
between their fleets and for manufacturers and other persons wishing to 
trade fuel economy credits to achieve compliance with prescribed fuel 
economy standards.


<R05>
Sec. 536.2  Application.

    This part applies to all credits earned (and transferable and 
tradable) for exceeding applicable average fuel economy standards in a 
given model year for domestically manufactured passenger cars, imported 
passenger cars, and light trucks.


<R05>
Sec. 536.3  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory terms. All terms defined in 49 U.S.C. Sec. 32901(a) 
are used pursuant to their statutory meaning.
    (b) Other terms.
    Above standard fuel economy means, with respect to a compliance 
category, that the automobiles manufactured by a manufacturer in that 
compliance category in a particular model year have greater average fuel 
economy (calculated in a manner that reflects the incentives for 
alternative fuel automobiles per 49 U.S.C. 32905) than that 
manufacturer's fuel economy standard for that compliance category and 
model year.
    Adjustment factor means a factor used to adjust the value of a 
traded or transferred credit for compliance purposes to ensure that the 
compliance value of the credit when used reflects the total volume of 
oil saved when the credit was earned.
    Below standard fuel economy means, with respect to a compliance 
category, that the automobiles manufactured by a manufacturer in that 
compliance category in a particular model year have lower average fuel 
economy (calculated in a manner that reflects the incentives for 
alternative fuel automobiles

[[Page 155]]

per 49 U.S.C. 32905) than that manufacturer's fuel economy standard for 
that compliance category and model year.
    Compliance means a manufacturer achieves compliance in a particular 
compliance category when
    (1) The average fuel economy of the vehicles in that category exceed 
or meet the fuel economy standard for that category, or
    (2) The average fuel economy of the vehicles in that category do not 
meet the fuel economy standard for that category, but the manufacturer 
proffers a sufficient number of valid credits, adjusted for total oil 
savings, to cover the gap between the average fuel economy of the 
vehicles in that category and the required average fuel economy. A 
manufacturer achieves compliance for its fleet if the above conditions 
(1) or (2) are simultaneously met for all compliance categories.
    Compliance category means any of three categories of automobiles 
subject to Federal fuel economy regulations. The three compliance 
categories recognized by 49 U.S.C. 32903(g)(6) are domestically 
manufactured passenger automobiles, imported passenger automobiles, and 
non-passenger automobiles (``light trucks'').
    Credit holder (or holder) means a legal person that has valid 
possession of credits, either because they are a manufacturer who has 
earned credits by exceeding an applicable fuel economy standard, or 
because they are a designated recipient who has received credits from 
another holder. Credit holders need not be manufacturers, although all 
manufacturers may be credit holders.
    Credits (or fuel economy credits) means an earned or purchased 
allowance recognizing that the average fuel economy of a particular 
manufacturer's vehicles within a particular compliance category and 
model year exceeds that manufacturer's fuel economy standard for that 
compliance category and model year. One credit is equal to \1/10\ of a 
mile per gallon above the fuel economy standard per one vehicle within a 
compliance category. Credits are denominated according to model year in 
which they are earned (vintage), originating manufacturer, and 
compliance category.
    Expiry date means the model year after which fuel economy credits 
may no longer be used to achieve compliance with fuel economy 
regulations. Expiry Dates are calculated in terms of model years: for 
example, if a manufacturer earns credits for model year 2011, these 
credits may be used for compliance in model years 2008-2016.
    Fleet means all automobiles that are manufactured by a manufacturer 
in a particular model year and are subject to fuel economy standards 
under 49 CFR parts 531 and 533. For the purposes of this regulation, a 
manufacturer's fleet means all domestically manufactured and imported 
passenger automobiles and non-passenger automobiles (``light trucks''). 
``Work trucks'' and medium and heavy trucks are not included in this 
definition for purposes of this regulation.
    Light truck means the same as ``non-passenger automobile,'' as that 
term is defined in 49 U.S.C. 32901(a)(17), and as ``light truck,'' as 
that term is defined at 49 CFR 523.5.
    Originating manufacturer means the manufacturer that originally 
earned a particular credit. Each credit earned will be identified with 
the name of the originating manufacturer.
    Trade means the receipt by NHTSA of an instruction from a credit 
holder to place one of its credits in the account of another credit 
holder. A credit that has been traded can be identified because the 
originating manufacturer will be a different party than the current 
credit holder. Traded credits are moved from one credit holder to the 
recipient credit holder within the same compliance category for which 
the credits were originally earned. If a credit has been traded to 
another credit holder and is subsequently traded back to the originating 
manufacturer, it will be deemed not to have been traded for compliance 
purposes.
    Transfer means the application by a manufacturer of credits earned 
by that manufacturer in one compliance category or credits acquired be 
trade (and originally earned by another manufacturer in that category) 
to achieve compliance with fuel economy standards with respect to a 
different compliance category. For example, a manufacturer may purchase 
light truck credits from

[[Page 156]]

another manufacturer, and transfer them to achieve compliance in the 
manufacturer's domestically manufactured passenger car fleet. Subject to 
the credit transfer limitations of 49 U.S.C. 32903(g)(3), credits can 
also be transferred across compliance categories and banked or saved in 
that category to be carried forward or backwards later to address a 
credit shortfall.
    Vintage means, with respect to a credit, the model year in which the 
credit was earned.

[74 FR 14452, Mar. 30, 2009, as amended at 75 FR 25727, May 7, 2010]


<R05>
Sec. 536.4  Credits.

    (a) Type and vintage. All credits are identified and distinguished 
in the accounts by originating manufacturer, compliance category, and 
model year of origin (vintage).
    (b) Application of credits. All credits earned and applied are 
calculated, per 49 U.S.C. 32903(c), in tenths of a mile per gallon by 
which the average fuel economy of vehicles in a particular compliance 
category manufactured by a manufacturer in the model year in which the 
credits are earned exceeds the applicable average fuel economy standard, 
multiplied by the number of vehicles sold in that compliance category. 
However, credits that have been traded between credit holders or 
transferred between compliance categories are valued for compliance 
purposes using the adjustment factor specified in paragraph (c) of this 
section, pursuant to the ``total oil savings'' requirement of 49 U.S.C. 
32903(f)(1).
    (c) Adjustment factor. When traded or transferred and used, fuel 
economy credits are adjusted to ensure fuel oil savings is preserved. 
For traded credits, the user (or buyer) of credits must multiply the 
calculated adjustment factor by the number of its shortfall credits it 
plans to offset in order to determine the number of equivalent credits 
to acquire from the earner (or seller). For transferred credits, the 
user of credits must multiply the calculated adjustment factor by the 
number of its shortfall credits it plans to offset in order to determine 
the number of equivalent credits to transfer from the compliance 
category holding the available credits. The adjustment factor is 
calculated by the following formula:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30MR09.107

Where A = Adjustment Factor applied to traded or transferred credits;
    VMTe = Lifetime vehicle miles traveled as provided in the following 
table for the model year and compliance category in which the credit was 
earned.
    VMTu = Lifetime vehicle miles traveled as provided in the following 
table for the model year and compliance category in which the credit is 
used for compliance.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       Lifetime Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT)
           Model year            -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       2012            2013            2014            2015            2016
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Passenger Cars..................         177,238         177,366         178,652         180,497         182,134
Light Trucks....................         208,471         208,537         209,974         212,040         213,954
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

MPGse = Required fuel economy standard for the originating (earning) 
          manufacturer, compliance category, and model year in which the 
          credit was earned;
MPGae = Actual fuel economy for the originating manufacturer, compliance 
          category, and model year in which the credit was earned;
MPGsu = Required fuel economy standard for the user (buying) 
          manufacturer, compliance category, and model year in which the 
          credit is used for compliance;
MPGau = Actual fuel economy for the user manufacturer, compliance 
          category, and

[[Page 157]]

          model year in which the credit is used for compliance.

[74 FR 14452, Mar. 30, 2009, as amended at 75 FR 25727, May 7, 2010]


<R05>
Sec. 536.5  Trading infrastructure.

    (a) Accounts. NHTSA maintains ``accounts'' for each credit holder. 
The account consists of a balance of credits in each compliance category 
and vintage held by the holder.
    (b) Who may hold credits. Every manufacturer subject to fuel economy 
standards under 49 CFR parts 531 or 533 is automatically an account 
holder. If the manufacturer earns credits pursuant to this regulation, 
or receives credits from another party, so that the manufacturer's 
account has a non-zero balance, then the manufacturer is also a credit 
holder. Any party designated as a recipient of credits by a current 
credit holder will receive an account from NHTSA and become a credit 
holder, subject to the following conditions:
    (1) A designated recipient must provide name, address, contacting 
information, and a valid taxpayer identification number or social 
security number;
    (2) NHTSA does not grant a request to open a new account by any 
party other than a party designated as a recipient of credits by a 
credit holder;
    (3) NHTSA maintains accounts with zero balances for a period of 
time, but reserves the right to close accounts that have had zero 
balances for more than one year.
    (c) Automatic debits and credits of accounts. (1) Upon receipt of a 
verified instruction to trade credits from an existing credit holder, 
NHTSA verifies the presence of sufficient credits in the account of the 
trader, then debits the account of the trader and credits the account of 
the recipient with credits of the vintage, origin, and compliance 
category designated. Traded credits identified by a specific compliance 
category are deposited into the recipient's account in that same 
compliance category. If the recipient is not a current account holder, 
NHTSA establishes the account subject to the conditions described in 
Sec. 536.5(b), and adds the credits to the newly-opened account.
    (2) NHTSA automatically deletes unused credits from holders' 
accounts as they reach their expiry date.
    (d) Compliance. (1) NHTSA assesses compliance with fuel economy 
standards each year, utilizing the certified and reported CAFE data 
provided by the Environmental Protection Agency for enforcement of the 
CAFE program pursuant to 49 U.S.C. 32904(e). Credit values are 
calculated based on the CAFE data from the EPA. If a particular 
compliance category within a manufacturer's fleet has above standard 
fuel economy, NHTSA adds credits to the manufacturer's account for that 
compliance category and vintage in the appropriate amount by which the 
manufacturer has exceeded the applicable standard.
    (2) If a manufacturer's vehicles in a particular compliance category 
have below standard fuel economy, NHTSA will provide written 
notification to the manufacturer that it has failed to meet a particular 
fleet target standard. The manufacturer will be required to confirm the 
shortfall and must either: submit a plan indicating how it will allocate 
existing credits or earn, transfer and/or acquire credits; or pay the 
appropriate civil penalty. The manufacturer must submit a plan or 
payment within 60 days of receiving agency notification.
    (3) Credits used to offset shortfalls are subject to the three and 
five year limitations as described in Sec. 536.6.
    (4) Transferred credits are subject to the limitations specified by 
49 U.S.C. 32903(g)(3) and this regulation.
    (5) The value, when used for compliance, of any credits received via 
trade or transfer is adjusted, using the adjustment factor described in 
Sec. 536.4(c), pursuant to 49 U.S.C. 32903(f)(1).
    (6) Credit allocation plans received from a manufacturer will be 
reviewed and approved by NHTSA. NHTSA will approve a credit allocation 
plan unless it finds that the proposed credits are unavailable or that 
it is unlikely that the plan will result in the manufacturer earning 
sufficient credits to offset the subject credit shortfall. If a plan is 
approved, NHTSA will revise the respective manufacturer's credit

[[Page 158]]

account accordingly. If a plan is rejected, NHTSA will notify the 
respective manufacturer and request a revised plan or payment of the 
appropriate fine.
    (e) Reporting. (1) NHTSA periodically publishes the names and credit 
holdings of all credit holders. NHTSA does not publish individual 
transactions, nor respond to individual requests for updated balances 
from any party other than the account holder.
    (2) NHTSA issues an annual credit status letter to each party that 
is a credit holder at that time. The letter to a credit holder includes 
a credit accounting record that identifies the credit status of the 
credit holder including any activity (earned, expired, transferred, 
traded, carry-forward and carry-back credit transactions/allocations) 
that took place during the identified activity period.


<R05>
Sec. 536.6  Treatment of credits earned prior to model year 2011.

    (a) Credits earned in a compliance category before model year 2008 
may be applied by the manufacturer that earned them to carryback plans 
for that compliance category approved up to three model years prior to 
the year in which the credits were earned, or may be applied to 
compliance in that compliance category for up to three model years after 
the year in which the credits were earned.
    (b) Credits earned in a compliance category during and after model 
year 2008 may be applied by the manufacturer that earned them to 
carryback plans for that compliance category approved up to three years 
prior to the year in which the credits were earned, or may be held or 
applied for up to five model years after the year in which the credits 
were earned.
    (c) Credits earned in a compliance category prior to model year 2011 
may not be transferred or traded.


<R05>
Sec. 536.7  Treatment of carryback credits.

    (a) Carryback credits earned in a compliance category in any model 
year may be used in carryback plans approved by NHTSA, pursuant to 49 
U.S.C. 32903(b), for up to three model years prior to the year in which 
the credit was earned.
    (b) For purposes of this regulation, NHTSA will treat the use of 
future credits for compliance, as through a carryback plan, as a 
deferral of penalties for non-compliance with an applicable fuel economy 
standard.
    (c) If NHTSA receives and approves a manufacturer's carryback plan 
to earn future credits within the following three model years in order 
to comply with current regulatory obligations, NHTSA will defer levying 
fines for non-compliance until the date(s) when the manufacturer's 
approved plan indicates that credits will be earned or acquired to 
achieve compliance, and upon receiving confirmed CAFE data from EPA. If 
the manufacturer fails to acquire or earn sufficient credits by the plan 
dates, NHTSA will initiate compliance proceedings.
    (d) In the event that NHTSA fails to receive or approve a plan for a 
non-compliant manufacturer, NHTSA will levy fines pursuant to statute. 
If within three years, the non-compliant manufacturer earns or acquires 
additional credits to reduce or eliminate the non-compliance, NHTSA will 
reduce any fines owed, or repay fines to the extent that credits 
received reduce the non-compliance.
    (e) No credits from any source (earned, transferred and/or traded) 
will be accepted in lieu of compliance if those credits are not 
identified as originating within one of the three model years after the 
model year of the confirmed shortfall.


<R05>
Sec. 536.8  Conditions for trading of credits.

    (a) Trading of credits. If a credit holder wishes to trade credits 
to another party, the current credit holder and the receiving party must 
jointly issue an instruction to NHTSA, identifying the quantity, 
vintage, compliance category, and originator of the credits to be 
traded. If the recipient is not a current account holder, the recipient 
must provide sufficient information for NHTSA to establish an account 
for the recipient. Once an account has been established or identified 
for the recipient, NHTSA completes the trade by debiting the 
transferor's account and crediting the recipient's account.

[[Page 159]]

NHTSA will track the quantity, vintage, compliance category, and 
originator of all credits held or traded by all account-holders.
    (b) Trading between and within compliance categories. For credits 
earned in model year 2011 or thereafter, and used to satisfy compliance 
obligations for model year 2011 or thereafter:
    (1) Manufacturers may use credits originally earned by another 
manufacturer in a particular compliance category to satisfy compliance 
obligations within the same compliance category.
    (2) Once a manufacturer acquires by trade credits originally earned 
by another manufacturer in a particular compliance category, the 
manufacturer may transfer the credits to satisfy its compliance 
obligations in a different compliance category, but only to the extent 
that the CAFE increase attributable to the transferred credits does not 
exceed the limits in 49 U.S.C. 32903(g)(3). For any compliance category, 
the sum of a manufacturer's transferred credits earned by that 
manufacturer and transferred credits obtained by that manufacturer 
through trade must not exceed that limit.
    (c) Changes in corporate ownership and control. Manufacturers must 
inform NHTSA of corporate relationship changes to ensure that credit 
accounts are identified correctly and credits are assigned and allocated 
properly.
    (1) In general, if two manufacturers merge in any way, they must 
inform NHTSA how they plan to merge their credit accounts. NHTSA will 
subsequently assess corporate fuel economy and compliance status of the 
merged fleet instead of the original separate fleets.
    (2) If a manufacturer divides or divests itself of a portion of its 
automobile manufacturing business, it must inform NHTSA how it plans to 
divide the manufacturer's credit holdings into two or more accounts. 
NHTSA will subsequently distribute holdings as directed by the 
manufacturer, subject to provision for reasonably anticipated compliance 
obligations.
    (3) If a manufacturer is a successor to another manufacturer's 
business, it must inform NHTSA how it plans to allocate credits and 
resolve liabilities per 49 CFR Part 534, Rights and Responsibilities of 
Manufacturers in the Context of Corporate Relationships.
    (d) No short or forward sales. NHTSA will not honor any instructions 
to trade or transfer more credits than are currently held in any 
account. NHTSA will not honor instructions to trade or transfer credits 
from any future vintage (i.e., credits not yet earned). NHTSA will not 
participate in or facilitate contingent trades.
    (e) Cancellation of credits. A credit holder may instruct NHTSA to 
cancel its currently held credits, specifying the originating 
manufacturer, vintage, and compliance category of the credits to be 
cancelled. These credits will be permanently null and void; NHTSA will 
remove the specific credits from the credit holder's account, and will 
not reissue them to any other party.
    (f) Errors or fraud in earning credits. If NHTSA determines that a 
manufacturer has been credited, through error or fraud, with earning 
credits, NHTSA will cancel those credits if possible. If the 
manufacturer credited with having earned those credits has already 
traded them when the error or fraud is discovered, NHTSA will hold the 
receiving manufacturer responsible for returning the same or equivalent 
credits to NHTSA for cancellation.
    (g) Error or fraud in trading. In general, all trades are final and 
irrevocable once executed, and may only be reversed by a new, mutually-
agreed transaction. If NHTSA executes an erroneous instruction to trade 
credits from one holder to another through error or fraud, NHTSA will 
reverse the transaction if possible. If those credits have been traded 
away, the recipient holder is responsible for obtaining the same or 
equivalent credits for return to the previous holder.


<R05>
Sec. 536.9  Use of credits with regard to the domestically manufactured 

passenger automobile minimum standard.

    (a) Each manufacturer is responsible for compliance with both the 
minimum standard and the attribute-based standard.
    (b) In any particular model year, the domestically manufactured 
passenger automobile compliance category credit excess or shortfall is 
determined by

[[Page 160]]

comparing the actual CAFE value against either the required standard 
value or the minimum standard value, whichever is larger.
    (c) Transferred or traded credits may not be used, pursuant to 49 
U.S.C. 32903(g)(4) and (f)(2), to meet the domestically manufactured 
passenger automobile minimum standard specified in 49 U.S.C. 
32902(b)(4).
    (d) If a manufacturer's average fuel economy level for domestically 
manufactured passenger automobiles is lower than the attribute-based 
standard, but higher than the minimum standard, then the manufacturer 
may achieve compliance with the attribute-based standard by applying 
credits.
    (e) If a manufacturer's average fuel economy level for domestically 
manufactured passenger automobiles is lower than the minimum standard, 
then the difference between the minimum standard and the manufacturer's 
actual fuel economy level may only be relieved by the use of credits 
earned by that manufacturer within the domestic passenger car compliance 
category which have not been transferred or traded. If the manufacturer 
does not have available earned credits to offset a credit shortage below 
the minimum standard then the manufacturer can submit a carry-back plan 
that indicates sufficient future credits will be earned in its domestic 
passenger car compliance category or will be subject to penalties.


<R05>
Sec. 536.10  Treatment of dual-fuel and alternative fuel vehicles--consistency 

with 49 CFR part 538.

    (a) Statutory alternative fuel and dual-fuel vehicle fuel economy 
calculations are treated as a change in the underlying fuel economy of 
the vehicle for purposes of this regulation, not as a credit that may be 
transferred or traded. Improvements in alternative fuel or dual fuel 
vehicle fuel economy as calculated pursuant to 49 U.S.C. 32905 and 
limited by 49 U.S.C. 32906 are therefore attributable only to the 
particular compliance category and model year to which the alternative 
or dual-fuel vehicle belongs.
    (b) If a manufacturer's calculated fuel economy for a particular 
compliance category, including any required calculations for alternative 
fuel and dual fuel vehicles, is higher or lower than the applicable fuel 
economy standard, manufacturers will earn credits or must apply credits 
or pay fines equal to the difference between the calculated fuel economy 
level in that compliance category and the applicable standard. Credits 
earned are the same as any other credits, and may be held, transferred, 
or traded by the manufacturer subject to the limitations of the statute 
and this regulation.
    (c) If a manufacturer builds enough alternative fuel or dual fuel 
vehicles to improve the calculated fuel economy in a particular 
compliance category by more than the limits set forth in 49 U.S.C. 
32906(a), the improvement in fuel economy for compliance purposes is 
restricted to the statutory limit. Manufacturers may not earn credits 
nor reduce the application of credits or fines for calculated 
improvements in fuel economy based on alternative or dual fuel vehicles 
beyond the statutory limit.


<R03>
PART 537_AUTOMOTIVE FUEL ECONOMY REPORTS--Table of Contents



Sec.
537.1 Scope.
537.2 Purpose.
537.3 Applicability.
537.4 Definitions.
537.5 General requirements for reports.
537.6 General content of reports.
537.7 Pre-model year and mid-model year reports.
537.8 Supplementary reports.
537.9 Determination of fuel economy values and average fuel economy.
537.10 Incorporation by reference.
537.11 Public inspection of information.
537.12 Confidential information.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 32907, delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 47 FR 34986, Aug. 12, 1982, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 537.1  Scope.

    This part establishes requirements for automobile manufacturers to 
submit reports to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
regarding their efforts to improve automotive fuel economy.

[[Page 161]]


<R05>
Sec. 537.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to obtain information to aid the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in valuating automobile 
manufacturers' plans for complying with average fuel economy standards 
and in preparing an annual review of the average fuel economy standards.


<R05>
Sec. 537.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to automobile manufacturers, except for 
manufacturers subject to an alternate fuel economy standard under 
section 502(c) of the Act.


<R05>
Sec. 537.4  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory terms. (1) The terms average fuel economy standard, 
fuel, manufacture, and model year are used as defined in section 501 of 
the Act.
    (2) The term manufacturer is used as defined in section 501 of the 
Act and in accordance with part 529 of this chapter.
    (3) The terms average fuel economy, fuel economy, and model type are 
used as defined in subpart A of 40 CFR part 600.
    (4) The terms automobile, automobile capable of off-highway 
operation, and passenger automobile are used as defined in section 501 
of the Act and in accordance with the determinations in part 523 of this 
chapter.
    (b) Other terms. (1) The term loaded vehicle weight is used as 
defined in subpart A of 40 CFR part 86.
    (2) The terms axle ratio, base level, body style, car line, combined 
fuel economy, engine code, equivalent test weight, gross vehicle weight, 
inertia weight, transmission class, and vehicle configuration are used 
as defined in subpart A of 40 CFR part 600.
    (3) The term light truck is used as defined in part 523 of this 
chapter and in accordance with determinations in that part.
    (4) The terms approach angle, axle clearance, brakeover angle, cargo 
carrying volume, departure angle, passenger carrying volume, running 
clearance, and temporary living quarters are used as defined in part 523 
of this chapter.
    (5) The term incomplete automobile manufacturer is used as defined 
in part 529 of this chapter.
    (6) As used in this part, unless otherwise required by the context:
    (i) Act means the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act 
(Pub. L. 92-513), as amended by the Energy Policy and Conservation Act 
(Pub. L. 94-163).
    (ii) Administrator means the Administrator of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration or the Administrator's delegate.
    (iii) Current model year means:
    (A) In the case of a pre-model year report, the full model year 
immediately following the period during which that report is required by 
Sec. 537.5(b) to be submitted.
    (B) In the case of a mid-model year report, the model year during 
which that report is required by Sec. 537.5(b) to be submitted.
    (iv) Average means a production-weighted harmonic average.
    (v) Total drive ratio means the ratio of an automobile's engine 
rotational speed (in revolutions per minute) to the automobile's forward 
speed (in miles per hour).


<R05>
Sec. 537.5  General requirements for reports.

    (a) For each current model year, each manufacturer shall submit a 
pre-model year report, a mid-model year report, and, as required by 
Sec. 537.8, supplementary reports.
    (b)(1) The pre-model year report required by this part for each 
current model year must be submitted during the month of December (e.g., 
the pre-model year report for the 1983 model year must be submitted 
during December, 1982).
    (2) The mid-model year report required by this part for each current 
model year must be submitted during the month of July (e.g., the mid-
model year report for the 1983 model year must be submitted during July 
1983).
    (3) Each supplementary report must be submitted in accordance with 
Sec. 537.8(c).
    (c) Each report required by this part must:
    (1) Identify the report as a pre-model year report, mid-model year 
report, or supplementary report as appropriate;
    (2) Identify the manufacturer submitting the report;

[[Page 162]]

    (3) State the full name, title, and address of the official 
responsible for preparing the report;
    (4) Be submitted in 5 copies to: Administrator, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE., Washington, 
DC 20590, or submitted electronically to the following secure e-mail 
address: cafe@dot.gov. Electronic submissions should be provided in a 
pdf format.
    (5) Identify the current model year;
    (6) Be written in the English language; and
    (7)(i) Specify any part of the information or data in the report 
that the manufacturer believes should be withheld from public disclosure 
as trade secret or other confidential business information.
    (ii) With respect to each item of information or data requested by 
the manufacturer to be withheld under 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(4) and 15 U.S.C. 
2005(d)(1), the manufacturer shall:
    (A) Show that the item is within the scope of sections 552(b)(4) and 
2005(d)(1);
    (B) Show that disclosure of the item would result in significant 
competitive damage;
    (C) Specify the period during which the item must be withheld to 
avoid that damage; and
    (D) Show that earlier disclosure would result in that damage.
    (d) Each report required by this part must be based upon all 
information and data available to the manufacturer 30 days before the 
report is submitted to the Administrator.

[47 FR 34986, Aug. 12, 1982, as amended at 75 FR 25728, May 7, 2010]


<R05>
Sec. 537.6  General content of reports.

    (a) Pre-model year and mid-model year reports. Except as provided in 
paragraph (c) of this section, each pre-model year report and the mid-
model year report for each model year must contain the information 
required by Sec. 537.7(a).
    (b) Supplementary report. Each supplementary report must contain the 
information required by Sec. 537.8(b) (1), (2), or (3), as appropriate.
    (c) Exceptions. The pre-model year report and the mid-model year 
report submitted by an incomplete automobile manufacturer for any model 
year are not required to contain the information specified in Sec. 
537.7 (c)(4) (xv) through (xviii) and (c)(5). The information provided 
by the incomplete automobile manufacturer under Sec. 537.7(c) shall be 
according to base level instead of model type or carline.

[47 FR 34986, Aug. 12, 1982, as amended at 75 FR 25728, May 7, 2010]


<R05>
Sec. 537.7  Pre-model year and mid-model year reports.

    (a)(1) Provide the information required by paragraphs (b) and (c) of 
this section for the manufacturer's passenger automobiles for the 
current model year.
    (2) After providing the information required by paragraph (a)(1) of 
this section provide the information required by paragraphs (b) and (c) 
for this section of each class, as specified in part 533 of this 
chapter, of the manufacturer's light trucks for the current model year.
    (b) Projected average and required fuel economy. (1) State the 
projected average fuel economy for the manufacturer's automobiles 
determined in accordance with Sec. 537.9 and based upon the fuel 
economy values and projected sales figures provided under paragraph 
(c)(2) of this section.
    (2) State the projected final average fuel economy that the 
manufacturer anticipates having if changes implemented during the model 
year will cause that average to be different from the average fuel 
economy projected under paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
    (3) State the projected required fuel economy for the manufacturer's 
passenger automobiles and light trucks determined in accordance with 49 
CFR 531.5(c) and 49 CFR 533.5(h) and based upon the projected sales 
figures provided under paragraph (c)(2) of this section.
    (4) State the projected final required fuel economy that the 
manufacturer anticipates having if changes implemented during the model 
year will cause the targets to be different from the target fuel economy 
projected under paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
    (5) State whether the manufacturer believes that the projections it 
provides under paragraphs (b)(2) and (b)(4) of this section, or if it 
does not provide

[[Page 163]]

an average or target under those paragraphs, the projections it provides 
under paragraphs (b)(1) and (b)(3) of this section, sufficiently 
represent the manufacturer's average and target fuel economy for the 
current model year for purposes of the Act. In the case of a 
manufacturer that believes that the projections are not sufficiently 
representative for those purposes, state the specific nature of any 
reason for the insufficiency and the specific additional testing or 
derivation of fuel economy values by analytical methods believed by the 
manufacturer necessary to eliminate the insufficiency and any plans of 
the manufacturer to undertake that testing or derivation voluntarily and 
submit the resulting data to the Environmental Protection Agency under 
40 CFR 600.509.
    (c) Model type and configuration fuel economy and technical 
information. (1) For each model type of the manufacturer's automobiles, 
provide the information specified in paragraph (c)(2) of this section in 
tabular form. List the model types in order of increasing average 
inertia weight from top to bottom down the left side of the table and 
list the information categories in the order specified in paragraph 
(c)(2) of this section from left to right across the top of the table.
    (2)(i) Combined fuel economy; and
    (ii) Projected sales for the current model year and total sales of 
all model types.
    (3) (Pre-model year report only.) For each vehicle configuration 
whose fuel economy was used to calculate the fuel economy values for a 
model type under paragraph (c)(2) of this section, provide the 
information specified in paragraph (c)(4) of this section either in 
tabular form or as a fixed format computer tape. If a tabular form is 
used then list the vehicle configurations, by model type in the order 
listed under paragraph (c)(2) of this section, from top to bottom down 
the left of the table and list the information categories across the top 
of the table from left to right in the order specified in paragraph 
(c)(4) of this section. Other formats (such as copies of EPA reports) 
which contain all the required information in a readily identifiable 
form are also acceptable. If a computer tape is used, any NHTSA approved 
fixed format structure may be used, but each vehicle configuration 
record should identify the manufacturer, model type, and for light 
trucks the drive wheel code, e.g., 2 or 4 wheel drive. At least the 
information categories specified here and in paragraph (c)(4) of this 
section must be provided, but if preferred the tape may contain any 
additional categories. Each computer tape record must contain all the 
required categories of information to enable direct reading and 
interpretation in the fixed format that was approved. There should be no 
titles, column headings, page numbers, or attachment numbers on the 
tape. It must be possible to directly calculate and produce the tables 
specified in paragraph (c)(1) of this section from the records on this 
tape.
    (4)(i) Loaded vehicle weight;
    (ii) Equivalent test weight;
    (iii) Engine displacement, liters;
    (iv) SAE net rated power, kilowatts;
    (v) SAE net horsepower;
    (vi) Engine code;
    (vii) Fuel system (number of carburetor barrels or, if fuel 
injection is used, so indicate);
    (viii) Emission control system;
    (ix) Transmission class;
    (x) Number of forward speeds;
    (xi) Existence of overdrive (indicate yes or no);
    (xii) Total drive ratio (N/V);
    (xiii) Axle ratio;
    (xiv) Combined fuel economy;
    (xv) Projected sales for the current model year;
    (xvi)(A) In the case of passenger automobiles:
    (1) Interior volume index, determined in accordance with subpart D 
of 40 CFR part 600,
    (2) Body style,
    (3) Beginning model year 2010, base tire as defined in 49 CFR 523.2,
    (4) Beginning model year 2010, front axle, rear axle and average 
track width as defined in 49 CFR 523.2,
    (5) Beginning model year 2010, wheelbase as defined in 49 CFR 523.2, 
and
    (6) Beginning model year 2010, footprint as defined in 49 CFR 523.2.
    (B) In the case of light trucks:
    (1) Passenger-carrying volume,
    (2) Cargo-carrying volume,

[[Page 164]]

    (3) Beginning model year 2008, base tire as defined in 49 CFR 523.2,
    (4) Beginning model year 2010, front axle, rear axle and average 
track width as defined in 49 CFR 523.2,
    (5) Beginning model year 2008, wheelbase as defined in 49 CFR 523.2, 
and
    (6) Beginning model year 2008, footprint as defined in 49 CFR 523.2.
    (xvii) Performance of the function described in Sec. 523.5(a)(5) of 
this chapter (indicate yes or no);
    (xviii) Existence of temporary living quarters (indicate yes or no);
    (xix) Frontal area;
    (xx) Road load power at 50 miles per hour, if determined by the 
manufacturer for purposes other than compliance with this part to differ 
from the road load setting prescribed in 40 CFR 86.177-11(d);
    (xxi) Optional equipment that the manufacturer is required under 40 
CFR parts 86 and 600 to have actually installed on the vehicle 
configuration, or the weight of which must be included in the curb 
weight computation for the vehicle configuration, for fuel economy 
testing purposes.
    (5) For each model type of automobile which is classified as an 
automobile capable of off-highway operation under part 523 of this 
chapter, provide the following data:
    (i) Approach angle;
    (ii) Departure angle;
    (iii) Breakover angle;
    (iv) Axle clearance;
    (v) Minimum running clearance; and
    (vi) Existence of 4-wheel drive (indicate yes or no).
    (6) The fuel economy values provided under paragraphs (c) (2) and 
(4) of this section shall be determined in accordance with Sec. 537.9.

[47 FR 34986, Aug. 12, 1982, as amended at 58 FR 18029, Apr. 7, 1993; 71 
FR 17678, Apr. 6, 2006; 74 FR 14456, Mar. 30, 2009; 75 FR 25728, May 7, 
2010]


<R05>
Sec. 537.8  Supplementary reports.

    (a)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, each 
manufacturer whose most recently submitted semiannual report contained 
an average fuel economy projection under Sec. 537.7(b)(2) or, if no 
average fuel economy was projected under that section, under Sec. 
537.7(b)(1), that was not less than the applicable average fuel economy 
standard and who now projects an average fuel economy which is less than 
the applicable standard shall file a supplementary report containing the 
information specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
    (2) Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, each 
manufacturer that determines that its average fuel economy for the 
current model year as projected under Sec. 537.7(b)(2) or, if no 
average fuel economy was projected under that section, as projected 
under Sec. 537.7(b)(1), is less representative than the manufacturer 
previously reported it to be under Sec. 537.7(b)(3), this section, or 
both, shall file a supplementary report containing the information 
specified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section.
    (3) Each manufacturer whose pre-model year report omits any of the 
information specified in Sec. 537.7 (b), (c) (1) and (2), or (c)(4) 
(xvi) and (xxiv) shall file supplementary report containing the 
information specified in paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
    (b)(1) The supplementary report required by paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section must contain:
    (i) Such revisions of and additions to the information previously 
submitted by the manufacturer under this part regarding the automobiles 
whose projected average fuel economy has decreased as specified in 
paragraph (a)(1) of this section as are necessary--
    (A) To reflect the decrease and its cause;
    (B) To indicate a new projected average fuel economy based upon 
these additional measures.
    (ii) An explanation of the cause of the decrease in average fuel 
economy that led to the manufacturer's having to submit the 
supplementary report required by paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
    (2) The supplementary report required by paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section must contain:
    (i) A statement of the specific nature of and reason for the 
insufficiency in the representativeness of the projected average fuel 
economy;
    (ii) A statement of specific additional testing or derivation of 
fuel economy values by analytical methods believed

[[Page 165]]

by the manufacturer necessary to eliminate the insufficiency; and
    (iii) A description of any plans of the manufacturer to undertake 
that testing or derivation voluntarily and submit the resulting data to 
the Environmental Protection Agency under 40 CFR 600.509.
    (3) The supplementary report required by paragraph (a)(3) of this 
section must contain:
    (i) All of the information omitted from the pre-model year report 
under Sec. 537.6(c)(2); and
    (ii) Such revisions of and additions to the information submitted by 
the manufacturer in its pre-model year report regarding the automobiles 
produced during the current model year as are necessary to reflect the 
information provided under paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section.
    (c)(1) Each report required by paragraph (a)(1), (2), or (3) of this 
section must be submitted in accordance with Sec. 537.5(c) not more 
than 45 days after the date on which the manufacturer determined, or 
could have determined with reasonable diligence, that a report is 
required under paragraph (a)(1), (2), or (3) of this section.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (d) A supplementary report is not required to be submitted by the 
manufacturer under paragraph (a) (1) or (2) of this section:
    (1) With respect to information submitted under this part before the 
most recent semiannual report submitted by the manufacturer under this 
part, or
    (2) When the date specified in paragraph (c) of this section occurs:
    (i) During the 60-day period immediately preceding the day by which 
the mid-model year report for the current model year must be submitted 
by the manufacturer under this part, or
    (ii) After the day by which the pre-model year report for the model 
year immediately following the current model year must be submitted by 
the manufacturer under this part.
    (e) Reporting compliance option in model years 2008-2010. For model 
years 2008, 2009, and 2010, each manufacturer of light trucks, as that 
term is defined in 49 CFR 523.5, shall submit a report, not later than 
45 days following the end of the model year, indicating whether the 
manufacturer is opting to comply with 49 CFR 533.5(f) or 49 CFR 
533.5(g).

[47 FR 34986, Aug. 12, 1982, as amended at 71 FR 17678, Apr. 6, 2006; 75 
FR 25728, May 7, 2010]


<R05>
Sec. 537.9  Determination of fuel economy values and average fuel economy.

    (a) Vehicle configuration fuel economy values. (1) For each vehicle 
configuration for which a fuel economy value is required under paragraph 
(c) of this section and has been determined and approved under 40 CFR 
part 600, the manufacturer shall submit that fuel economy value.
    (2) For each vehicle configuration specified in paragraph (a)(1) of 
this section for which a fuel economy value approved under 40 CFR part 
600, does not exist, but for which a fuel economy value determined under 
that part exists, the manufacturer shall submit that fuel economy value.
    (3) For each vehicle configuration specified in paragraph (a)(1) of 
this section for which a fuel economy value has been neither determined 
nor approved under 40 CFR part 600, the manufacturer shall submit a fuel 
economy value based on tests or analyses comparable to those prescribed 
or permitted under 40 CFR part 600 and a description of the test 
procedures or analytical methods used.
    (b) Base level and model type fuel economy values. For each base 
level and model type, the manufacturer shall submit a fuel economy value 
based on the values submitted under paragraph (a) of this section and 
calculated in the same manner as base level and model type fuel economy 
values are calculated for use under subpart F of 40 CFR part 600.
    (c) Average fuel economy. Average fuel economy must be based upon 
fuel economy values calculated under paragraph (b) of this section for 
each model type and must be calculated in accordance with subpart F of 
40 CFR part 600, except that fuel economy values for running changes and 
for new base levels are required only for those changes made or base 
levels added before the

[[Page 166]]

average fuel economy is required to be submitted under this part.

[47 FR 34986, Aug. 12, 1982, as amended at 75 FR 25728, May 7, 2010]


<R05>
Sec. 537.10  Incorporation by reference.

    (a) A manufacturer may incorporate by reference in a report required 
by this part any document other than a report, petition, or application, 
or portion thereof submitted to any Federal department or agency more 
than two model years before the current model year.
    (b) A manufacturer that incorporates by references a document not 
previously submitted to the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration shall append that document to the report.
    (c) A manufacturer that incorporates by reference a document shall 
clearly identify the document and, in the case of a document previously 
submitted to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
indicate the date on which and the person by whom the document was 
submitted to this agency.


<R05>
Sec. 537.11  Public inspection of information.

    Except as provided in Sec. 537.12, any person may inspect the 
information and data submitted by a manufacturer under this part in the 
docket section of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. 
Any person may obtain copies of the information available for inspection 
under this section in accordance with the regulations of the Secretary 
of Transportation in part 7 of this title.


<R05>
Sec. 537.12  Confidential information.

    (a) Information made available under Sec. 537.11 for public 
inspection does not include information for which confidentiality is 
requested under Sec. 537.5(c)(7), is granted in accordance with section 
505 of the Act and section 552(b) of Title 5 of the United States Code 
and is not subsequently released under paragraph (c) of this section in 
accordance with section 505 of the Act.
    (b) Denial of confidential treatment. When the Administrator denies 
a manufacturer's request under Sec. 537.5(c)(7) for confidential 
treatment of information, the Administrator gives the manufacturer 
written notice of the denial and reasons for it. Public disclosure of 
the information is not made until after the ten-day period immediately 
following the giving of the notice.
    (c) Release of confidential information. After giving written notice 
to a manufacturer and allowing ten days, when feasible, for the 
manufacturer to respond, the Administrator may make available for public 
inspection any information submitted under this part that is relevant to 
a proceeding under the Act, including information that was granted 
confidential treatment by the Administrator pursuant to a request by the 
manufacturer under Sec. 537.5(c)(7).


<R03>
PART 538_MANUFACTURING INCENTIVES FOR ALTERNATIVE FUEL VEHICLES--Table of 

Contents



Sec.
538.1 Scope.
538.2 Purpose.
538.3 Applicability.
538.4 Definitions.
538.5 Minimum driving range.
538.6 Measurement of driving range.
538.7 Petitions for reduction of minimum driving range.
538.8 Gallon Equivalents for Gaseous Fuels.
538.9 Dual fuel vehicle incentive.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 32901, 32905, and 32906; delegation of 
authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 61 FR 14511, Apr. 2, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 538.1  Scope.

    This part establishes minimum driving range criteria to aid in 
identifying passenger automobiles that are dual-fueled automobiles. It 
also establishes gallon equivalent measurements for gaseous fuels other 
than natural gas.

[75 FR 25728, May 7, 2010]


<R05>
Sec. 538.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to specify one of the criteria in 49 
U.S.C. chapter 329 ``Automobile Fuel Economy'' for identifying dual-
fueled passenger automobiles that are manufactured in model years 1993 
through 2019. The fuel economy of a qualifying vehicle is calculated in 
a special manner so as to encourage its production as a way of 
facilitating a manufacturer's compliance

[[Page 167]]

with the Corporate Average Fuel Economy standards set forth in part 531 
of this chapter. The purpose is also to establish gallon equivalent 
measurements for gaseous fuels other than natural gas.

[75 FR 25728, May 7, 2010]


<R05>
Sec. 538.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to manufacturers of automobiles.


<R05>
Sec. 538.4  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory terms. (1) The terms alternative fuel, alternative 
fueled automobile, and dual fueled automobile, are used as defined in 49 
U.S.C. 32901(a).
    (2) The terms automobile and passenger automobile, are used as 
defined in 49 U.S.C. 32901(a), and in accordance with the determinations 
in part 523 of this chapter.
    (3) The term manufacturer is used as defined in 49 U.S.C. 
32901(a)(13), and in accordance with part 529 of this chapter.
    (4) The term model year is used as defined in 49 U.S.C. 
32901(a)(15).
    (b)(1) Other terms. The terms average fuel economy, fuel economy, 
and model type are used as defined in subpart A of 40 CFR part 600.
    (2) The term EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.


<R05>
Sec. 538.5  Minimum driving range.

    (a) The minimum driving range that a passenger automobile must have 
in order to be treated as a dual fueled automobile pursuant to 49 U.S.C. 
32901(c) is 200 miles when operating on its nominal useable fuel tank 
capacity of the alternative fuel, except when the alternative fuel is 
electricity.
    (b) The minimum driving range that a passenger automobile using 
electricity as an alternative fuel must have in order to be treated as a 
dual fueled automobile pursuant to 49 U.S.C. 32901(c) is 7.5 miles on 
its nominal storage capacity of electricity when operated on the EPA 
urban test cycle and 10.2 miles on its nominal storage capacity of 
electricity when operated on the EPA highway test cycle.

[61 FR 14511, Apr. 2, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 66068, Dec. 1, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 538.6  Measurement of driving range.

    The driving range of a passenger automobile model type not using 
electricity as an alternative fuel is determined by multiplying the 
combined EPA urban/highway fuel economy rating when operating on the 
alternative fuel, by the nominal usable fuel tank capacity (in gallons), 
of the fuel tank containing the alternative fuel. The combined EPA 
urban/highway fuel economy rating is the value determined by the 
procedures established by the Administrator of the EPA under 49 U.S.C. 
32904 and set forth in 40 CFR part 600. The driving range of a passenger 
automobile model type using electricity as an alternative fuel is 
determined by operating the vehicle in the electric-only mode of 
operation through the EPA urban cycle on its nominal storage capacity of 
electricity and the EPA highway cycle on its nominal storage capacity of 
electricity. Passenger automobile types using electricity as an 
alternative fuel that have completed the EPA urban cycle after 
recharging and the EPA highway cycle after recharging shall be deemed to 
have met the minimum range requirement.

[63 FR 66069, Dec. 1, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 538.7  Petitions for reduction of minimum driving range.

    (a) A manufacturer of a model type of passenger automobile capable 
of operating on both electricity and either gasoline or diesel fuel may 
petition for a reduced minimum driving range for that model type in 
accordance with paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section.
    (b) Each petition shall:
    (1) Be addressed to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE., Washington, DC 20590.
    (2) Be submitted not later than the beginning of the first model 
year in which the petitioner seeks to have the model type treated as an 
electric dual fueled automobile.
    (3) Be written in the English language.
    (4) State the full name, address, and title of the official 
responsible for preparing the petition, and the name and address of the 
petitioner.

[[Page 168]]

    (5) Set forth in full data, views, and arguments of the petitioner, 
including the information and data specified in paragraph (c) of this 
section, and the calculations and analyses used to develop that 
information and data. No documents may be incorporated by reference in a 
petition unless the documents are submitted with the petition.
    (6) Specify and segregate any part of the information and data 
submitted under this section that the petitioner wishes to have withheld 
from public disclosure in accordance with part 512 of this chapter.
    (c) Each petitioner shall include the following information in its 
petition:
    (1) Identification of the model type or types for which a lower 
driving range is sought under this section.
    (2) For each model type identified in accordance with paragraph 
(c)(1) of this section:
    (i) The driving range sought for that model type.
    (ii) The number of years for which that driving range is sought.
    (iii) A description of the model type, including car line 
designation, engine displacement and type, electric storage capacity, 
transmission type, and average fuel economy when operating on:
    (A) Electricity; and
    (B) Gasoline or diesel fuel.
    (iv) An explanation of why the petitioner cannot modify the model 
type so as to meet the generally applicable minimum range, including the 
steps taken by the petitioner to improve the minimum range of the 
vehicle, as well as additional steps that are technologically feasible, 
but have not been taken. The costs to the petitioner of taking these 
additional steps shall be included.
    (3) A discussion of why granting the petition would be consistent 
with the following factors:
    (i) The purposes of 49 U.S.C. chapter 329, including encouraging the 
development and widespread use of electricity as a transportation fuel 
by consumers, and the production of passenger automobiles capable of 
being operated on both electricity and gasoline/diesel fuel;
    (ii) Consumer acceptability;
    (iii) Economic practicability;
    (iv) Technology;
    (v) Environmental impact;
    (vi) Safety;
    (vii) Driveability; and
    (viii) Performance.
    (d) If a petition is found not to contain the information required 
by this section, the petitioner is informed about the areas of 
insufficiency and advised that the petition will not receive further 
consideration until the required information is received.
    (e) The Administrator may request the petitioner to provide 
information in addition to that required by this section.
    (f) The Administrator publishes in the Federal Register a notice of 
receipt for each petition containing the information required by this 
section. Any interested person may submit written comments regarding the 
petition.
    (g) In reaching a determination on a petition submitted under this 
section, the Administrator takes into account:
    (1) The purposes of 49 U.S.C. chapter 329, including encouraging the 
development and widespread use of alternative fuels as transportation 
fuels by consumers, and the production of alternative fuel powered motor 
vehicles;
    (2) Consumer acceptability;
    (3) Economic practicability;
    (4) Technology;
    (5) Environmental impact;
    (6) Safety;
    (7) Driveability; and
    (8) Performance.
    (h) If the Administrator grants the petition, the petitioner is 
notified in writing, specifying the reduced minimum driving range, and 
specifying the model years for which the reduced driving range applies. 
The Administrator also publishes a notice of the grant of the petition 
in the Federal Register and the reasons for the grant.
    (i) If the Administrator denies the petition, the petitioner is 
notified in writing. The Administrator also publishes a notice of the 
denial of the petition in the Federal Register and the reasons for the 
denial.

[63 FR 66069, Dec. 1, 1998, as amended at 75 FR 25728, May 7, 2010]

[[Page 169]]


<R05>
Sec. 538.8  Gallon Equivalents for Gaseous Fuels.

    The gallon equivalent of gaseous fuels, for purposes of calculations 
made under 49 U.S.C. 32905, are listed in Table I:

    Table I--Gallon Equivalent Measurements for Gaseous Fuels per 100
                           Standard Cubic Feet
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Gallon
                         Fuel                              equivalent
                                                           measurement
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Compressed Natural Gas................................         0.823
Liquefied Natural Gas.................................         0.823
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grade HD-5)*.................         0.726
Hydrogen..............................................         0.259
Hythane (Hy5).........................................         0.741
------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Per gallon unit of measure.


<R05>
Sec. 538.9  Dual fuel vehicle incentive.

    The application of 49 U.S.C. 32905(b) and (d) to qualifying dual 
fuel vehicles is extended to the 2005, 2006, 2007, and 2008 model years.

[69 FR 7703, Feb. 19, 2004]


<R03>
PART 541_FEDERAL MOTOR VEHICLE THEFT PREVENTION STANDARD--Table of Contents



Sec.
541.1 Scope.
541.2 Purpose.
541.3 Application.
541.4 Definitions.
541.5 Requirements for passenger motor vehicles.
541.6 Requirements for replacement parts.

Appendix A to Part 541--Light Duty Truck Lines Subject to the 
          Requirements of This Standard
Appendix A-I to Part 541--Lines With Antitheft Devices Which are 
          Exempted From the Parts-Marking Requirements of This Standard 
          Pursuant to 49 CFR Part 543
Appendix A-II to Part 541--Lines With Antitheft Devices Which Are 
          Exempted in-Part From the Parts-Marking Requirements of This 
          Standard Pursuant to 49 CFR Part 543
Appendix B to Part 541--Light Duty Truck Lines With Theft Rates below 
          the 1990/91 Median Theft Rate, Subject to the Requirements of 
          This Standard
Appendix C to Part 541--Appendix C to Part 541--Criteria for Selecting 
          Light Duty Truck Lines Likely To Have High Theft Rates

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 33101, 33102, 33103, 33105; delegation of 
authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 50 FR 43190, Oct. 24, 1985, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 541.1  Scope.

    This standard specifies performance requirements for identifying 
numbers or symbols to be placed on major parts of certain passenger 
motor vehicles.


<R05>
Sec. 541.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this standard is to reduce the incidence of motor 
vehicle thefts by facilitating the tracing and recovery of parts from 
stolen vehicles.


<R05>
Sec. 541.3  Application.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) and (c) of this section, 
this standard applies to the following:
    (1) Passenger motor vehicle parts identified in Sec. 541.5(a) that 
are present in:
    (i) Passenger cars; and
    (ii) Multipurpose passenger vehicles with a gross vehicle weight 
rating of 6,000 pounds or less; and
    (iii) Light-duty trucks with a gross vehicle weight rating of 6,000 
pounds or less, that NHTSA has determined to be high theft in accordance 
with 49 CFR 542.1; and
    (iv) Light duty trucks with a gross vehicle weight rating of 6,000 
pounds or less, that NHTSA has determined to be subject to the 
requirements of this section in accordance with 49 CFR 542.2.
    (2) Replacement passenger motor vehicle parts identified in Sec. 
541.5(a) for vehicles listed in paragraphs (1)(i) to (iv) of this 
section.
    (b) Exclusions. This standard does not apply to the following:
    (1) Passenger motor vehicle parts identified in Sec. 541.5(a) that 
are present in vehicles manufactured by a motor vehicle manufacturer 
that manufactures fewer than 5,000 vehicles for sale in the United 
States each year.
    (2) Passenger motor vehicle parts identified in Sec. 541.5(a) that 
are present in a line with an annual production of not more than 3,500 
vehicles.
    (3) Passenger motor vehicle parts identified in Sec. 541.5(a) that 
are present in light-duty trucks with a gross vehicle weight rating of 
6,000 pounds or less, that NHTSA has determined to be subject to the 
requirements of this section in accordance with 49 CFR 542.2, if

[[Page 170]]

the vehicle line with which these light-duty trucks share majority of 
major interchangeable parts is exempt from parts marking requirements 
pursuant to part 543.
    (c) For vehicles listed in subparagraphs (1)(i) to (iv) of this 
section that are (1) not subject to the requirements of this standard 
until September 1, 2006, and (2) manufactured between September 1, 2006 
and August 31, 2007; a manufacturer needs to meet the requirements of 
this part only for lines representing at least 50% of a manufacturer's 
total production of these vehicles.

[70 FR 28851, May 19, 2005]


<R05>
Sec. 541.4  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory terms. All terms defined in 49 U.S.C. chapter 331 are 
used in accordance with their statutory meanings unless otherwise 
defined in paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) Other definitions. (1) Interior surface means, with respect to a 
vehicle part, a surface that is not directly exposed to sun and 
precipitation.
    (2) Light-duty truck (LDT) means a motor vehicle, with motive power, 
except a trailer, designed primarily for the transportation of property 
or special purpose equipment, that is rated at 6,000 pounds gross 
vehicle weight or less.
    (3) Line means a name which a manufacturer applies to a group of 
motor vehicles of the same make which have the same body or chassis, or 
otherwise are similar in construction or design. A ``line'' may, for 
example, include 2-door, 4-door, station wagon, and hatchback vehicles 
of the same make.
    (4) 1990/91 median theft rate means 3.5826 thefts per thousand 
vehicles produced.
    (5) Multipurpose passenger vehicle (MPV) means a passenger motor 
vehicle which is constructed either on a truck chassis or with special 
features for occasional off-road operation and which is rated at 6,000 
pounds gross vehicle weight or less.
    (6) Passenger car is used as defined in Sec. 571.3 of this chapter.
    (7) VIN means the vehicle identification number required by part 565 
of this chapter.

[59 FR 64168, Dec. 13, 1994, as amended at 61 FR 29033, June 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 541.5  Requirements for passenger motor vehicles.

    (a) Each passenger motor vehicle subject to this standard must have 
an identifying number affixed or inscribed on each of the parts 
specified in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(18) inclusive, if the part is 
present on the passenger motor vehicle. In the case of passenger motor 
vehicles not originally manufactured to comply with applicable U.S. 
vehicle safety and bumper standards, each such motor vehicle subject to 
this standard must have an identifying number inscribed in a manner 
which conforms to paragraph (d)(2) of this section, on each of the parts 
specified in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(18), inclusive, if the part 
is present on the motor vehicle.

(1) Engine.
(2) Transmission.
(3) Right front fender.
(4) Left front fender.
(5) Hood.
(6) Right front door.
(7) Left front door.
(8) Right rear door.
(9) Left rear door.
(10) Sliding or cargo door(s).
(11) Front bumper.
(12) Rear bumper.
(13) Right rear quarter panel (passenger cars).
(14) Left rear quarter panel (passenger cars).
(15) Right-side assembly (MPVs).
(16) Left-side assembly (MPVs).
(17) Pickup box, and/or cargo box (LDTs).
(18) Rear door(s) (both doors in case of double doors), decklid, 
    tailgate, or hatchback (whichever is present).

    (b)(1) Except as provided in paragraphs (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this 
section, the number required to be inscribed or affixed by paragraph (a) 
shall be the VIN of the passenger motor vehicle.
    (2) In place of the VIN, manufacturers who were marking engines and/
or transmissions with a VIN derivative consisting of at least the last 
eight characters of the VIN on October 24,

[[Page 171]]

1984, may continue to mark engines and/or transmissions with such VIN 
derivative.
    (3) In the case of passenger motor vehicles not originally 
manufactured to comply with U.S. vehicle safety and bumper standards, 
the number required to be inscribed by paragraph (a) of this section 
shall be the original vehicle identification number assigned to the 
motor vehicle by its original manufacturer in the country where the 
motor vehicle was originally produced or assembled.
    (c) The characteristics of the number required to be affixed or 
inscribed by paragraph (a) of this section shall satisfy the size and 
style requirements set forth for vehicle certification labels in Sec. 
567.4(g) of this chapter.
    (d) The number required by paragraph (a) of this section must be 
affixed by means that comply with paragraph (d)(1) of this section or 
inscribed by means that comply with paragraph (d)(2) of this section.
    (1) Labels. (i) The number must be printed indelibly on a label, and 
the label must be permanently affixed to the passenger motor vehicle's 
part.
    (ii) The number must be placed on each part specified in paragraph 
(a) of this section in a location such that the number is, if 
practicable, on an interior surface of the part as installed on the 
vehicle and in a location where it:
    (A) Will not be damaged by the use of any tools necessary to 
install, adjust, or remove the part and any adjoining parts, or any 
portions thereof;
    (B) Is on a portion of the part not likely to be damaged in a 
collision; and
    (C) Will not be damaged or obscured during normal dealer preparation 
operations (including rustproofing and undercoating).
    (iii) The number must be placed on each part specified in paragraph 
(a) of this section in a location that is visible without further 
disassembly once the part has been removed from the vehicle.
    (iv) The number must be placed entirely within the target area 
specified by the original manufacturer for that part, pursuant to 
paragraph (e) of this section, on each part specified in paragraph (a) 
of this section.
    (v) Removal of the label must--
    (A) Cause the label to self-destruct by tearing or rendering the 
number on the label illegible, and
    (B) Discernibly alter the appearance of that area of the part where 
the label was affixed by leaving residual parts of the label or adhesive 
in that area, so that investigators will have evidence that a label was 
originally present.
    (vi) Alteration of the number on the label must leave traces of the 
original number or otherwise visibly alter the appearance of the label 
material.
    (vii) The label and the number shall be resistant to counterfeiting.
    (viii) The logo or some other unique identifier of the vehicle 
manufacturer must be placed in the material of the label in a manner 
such that alteration or removal of the logo visibly alters the 
appearance of the label.
    (2) Other means of identification. (i) Removal or alteration of any 
portion of the number must visibly alter the appearance of the section 
of the vehicle part on which the identification is marked.
    (ii) The number must be placed on each part specified in paragraph 
(a) of this section in a location that is visible without further 
disassembly once the part has been removed from the vehicle.
    (iii) The number must be placed entirely within the target area 
specified by the original manufacturer for that part, pursuant to 
paragraph (e) of this section, on each part specified in paragraph (a) 
of this section.
    (e) Target areas. (1) Each manufacturer that is the original 
producer who installs or assembles the covered major parts on a line 
shall designate a target area for the identifying numbers to be marked 
on each part specified in paragraph (a) of this section for each of its 
lines subject to this standard. The target area shall not exceed 50 
percent of the surface area on the surface of the part on which the 
target area is located.
    (2) Each manufacturer subject to paragraph (e)(1) of this section 
shall, not later than 30 days before the line is introduced into 
commerce, inform NHTSA in writing of the target areas designated for 
each line subject to this standard. In those instances where a

[[Page 172]]

manufacturer has submitted this target area information to NHTSA with a 
request for confidential treatment pursuant to 49 CFR part 512, the 
manufacturer must also submit a complete copy of the target area 
information within seven (7) days after the information becomes public, 
or the new line is released for sale to the public, whichever comes 
first. The information must be submitted to: Docket Management, Room 
W12-140, West Building, Ground Floor, 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE., 
Washington, DC 20590 by any of the following methods. In all cases, the 
docket number for the submission, (Docket No. NHTSA-2009-0069) must be 
cited.
    (i) Electronic submission to the Federal eRulemaking Portal: http://
www.regulations.gov. Follow the instructions for submitting information.
    (ii) By U.S. Mail: Docket Management Facility: U.S. Department of 
Transportation, 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE., West Building, Ground 
Floor, Room W12-140, Washington, D.C. 20590.
    (iii) Hand delivery or by courier: 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE., West 
Building, Ground Floor, Room W12-140, Washington, DC 20590, between 9 
a.m. and 5 p.m., Monday through Friday, except Federal holidays. 
Telephone: 1-800-647-5527.
    (iv) By Fax transmission: (202) 493-2251.
    (3) The target areas designated by the original vehicle manufacturer 
for a part on a line shall be maintained for the duration of the 
production of such line, unless a restyling of the part makes it no 
longer practicable to mark the part within the original target area. If 
there is such a restyling, the original vehicle manufacturer shall 
inform NHTSA of that fact and the new target area, in accordance with 
the requirements of paragraph (e)(2) of this section.

[59 FR 64168, Dec. 13, 1994, as amended at 69 FR 17967, Apr. 6, 2004; 76 
FR 24403, May 2, 2011]


<R05>
Sec. 541.6  Requirements for replacement parts.

    (a) Each replacement part for a part specified in Sec. 541.5(a) 
must have the registered trademark of the manufacturer of the 
replacement part, or some other unique identifier if the manufacturer 
does not have a registered trademark, and the letter ``R'' affixed or 
inscribed on such replacement part by means that comply with Sec. 
541.5(d), except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section. In the 
case of replacement parts subject to the marking requirements of this 
section, which were not originally manufactured for sale in the United 
States, the importer of the part shall inscribe its registered 
trademark, or some other unique identifier if the importer does not have 
a registered trademark, and the letter ``R'' on the part by means that 
comply with Sec. 541.5(d)(2), except as provided in paragraph (d) of 
this section.
    (b) A replacement part subject to paragraph (a) of this section 
shall not be marked pursuant to Sec. 541.5.
    (c) The trademark and the letter ``R'' required by paragraph (a) of 
this section must be at least one centimeter high.
    (d) The trademark and the letter ``R'' required by paragraph (a) of 
this section must be placed entirely within the target area specified by 
the vehicle manufacturer, pursuant to paragraph (e) of this section.
    (e) Target areas. (1) Each manufacturer that is the original 
producer or assembler of the vehicle for which the replacement part is 
designed shall designate a target area for the identifying symbols to be 
marked on each replacement part subject to the requirements of paragraph 
(a) of this section. Such target areas shall not exceed 25 percent of 
the surface area of the surface on which the replacement part marking 
will appear.
    (2) The boundaries of the target area designated under paragraph 
(e)(1) of this section shall be at least 10 centimeters at all points 
from the nearest boundaries of the target area designated for that part 
under Sec. 541.5(e) of this part.
    (3) Each manufacturer subject to paragraph (e)(1) of this section 
shall inform NHTSA in writing of the target areas designated for each 
replacement part subject to paragraph (a) of this section, at the same 
time as it informs the agency of the target area designated for the 
original equipment parts of the line, pursuant to

[[Page 173]]

Sec. 541.5(e)(2) of this part. In those instances where a manufacturer 
has submitted this target area information to NHTSA with a request for 
confidential treatment under 49 CFR part 512, the manufacturer shall 
also submit a complete copy of the target area information within seven 
(7) days after the information has become public or the new line has 
been released for sale to the public, whichever comes first. The 
information should be submitted to: Docket Management, Room W12-140, 
Ground Floor, 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE., Washington, DC 20590 by any 
of the following methods. In all cases, the docket number for the 
submission, (Docket No. NHTSA-2009-0069) must be cited.
    (i) Electronic submission to the Federal eRulemaking Portal: http://
www.regulations.gov. Follow the instructions for submitting information.
    (ii) By U.S. Mail: Docket Management Facility: U.S. Department of 
Transportation, 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE., West Building, Ground 
Floor, Room W12-140, Washington, DC 20590.
    (iii) Hand delivery or by courier: 1200 New Jersey Avenue, S.E., 
West Building, Ground Floor, Room W12-140, Washington, DC 20590, between 
9 a.m. and 5 p.m., Monday through Friday, except Federal holidays. 
Telephone: 1-800-647-5527.
    (iv) By Fax transmission: (202) 493-2251.
    (4) The target area designated by the original vehicle manufacturer 
for the parts subject to the requirements of paragraph (a) of this 
section shall be maintained for the duration of the production of such 
replacement part, unless a restyling of the part makes it no longer 
practicable to mark the part within the original target area. If there 
is such a restyling, the original vehicle manufacturer shall inform 
NHTSA of that fact and the new target area, in accordance with the 
requirements of paragraph (e)(3) of this section.
    (f) Each replacement part must bear the symbol ``DOT'' in letters at 
least one centimeter high within 5 centimeters of the trademark and of 
the letter ``R'', and entirely within the target area specified under 
paragraph (d) of this section. The symbol ``DOT'' constitutes the 
manufacturer's certification that the replacement part conforms to the 
applicable theft prevention standard, and shall be inscribed or affixed 
by means that comply with paragraph (a) of this section. In the case of 
replacement parts subject to the requirements of paragraph (a) of this 
section, which were not originally manufactured for sale in the United 
States, the importer shall inscribe the ``DOT'' symbol before the part 
is imported into the United States.

[50 FR 43190, Oct. 24, 1985, as amended at 76 FR 24403, May 2, 2011]


<R05>
   Sec. Appendix A to Part 541--Light Duty Truck Lines Subject to the 

                      Requirements of This Standard

------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Manufacturer                         Subject lines
------------------------------------------------------------------------
General Motors............................  Chevrolet S-10 Pickup.
                                            GMC Sonoma Pickup.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[69 FR 17967, Apr. 6, 2004]

[[Page 174]]

    Appendix A-I to Part 541--Lines With Antitheft Devices Which are 
 Exempted From the Parts-Marking Requirements of This Standard Pursuant 
                           to 49 CFR Part 543
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12AP11.002


[[Page 175]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12AP11.003


[[Page 176]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12AP11.004


[[Page 177]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12AP11.005


[76 FR 20252, Apr. 12, 2011]

[[Page 178]]


<R05>
 Sec. Appendix A-II to Part 541--Lines With Antitheft Devices Which Are 

 Exempted in-Part From the Parts-Marking Requirements of This Standard 

                       Pursuant to 49 CFR Part 543

------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Manufacturers            Subject lines      Parts to be marked
------------------------------------------------------------------------
General Motors................  Cadillac Eldorado  Engine, Transmission.
                                Cadillac Concours  Engine, Transmission.
                                Oldsmobile Ninety- Engine, Transmission.
                                 Eight.
                                Pontiac Firebird.  Engine, Transmission.
                                Chevrolet Camaro.  Engine, Transmission.
                                Oldsmobile Eighty- Engine, Transmission.
                                 Eight.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[66 FR 40625, Aug. 3, 2001]


<R05>
  Sec. Appendix B to Part 541--Light Duty Truck Lines With Theft Rates 

Below the 1990/91 Median Theft Rate, Subject to the Requirements of This 

                                Standard

------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Manufacturer                         Subject lines
------------------------------------------------------------------------
None
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[69 FR 17967, Apr. 6, 2004]


<R05>
  Sec. Appendix C to Part 541--Criteria for Selecting Light Duty Truck 

                  Lines Likely To Have High Theft Rates

                                  Scope

    These criteria specify the factors the Administrator will take into 
account in determining whether a new line is likely to have a high theft 
rate, and, therefore, whether such line will be subject to the 
requirements of this theft prevention standard.

                                 Purpose

    The purpose of these criteria is to enable the Administrator to 
select, by agreement with the manufacturer, if possible, those new lines 
which are likely to have high theft rates.

                               Application

    These criteria apply to lines of passenger motor vehicles initially 
introduced into commerce on or after September 1, 2006.

                               Methodology

    These criteria will be applied to each line initially introduced 
into commerce on or after September 1, 2006. The likely theft rate for 
such lines will be determined in relation to the national median theft 
rate for 1990 and 1991. If the line is determined to be likely to have a 
theft rate above the national median, the Administrator will select such 
line for coverage under this theft prevention standard.

                                Criteria

    1. Retail price of the vehicle line.
    2. Vehicle image or marketing strategy.
    3. Vehicle lines with which the new line is intended to compete, and 
the theft rates of such lines.
    4. Vehicle line(s), if any, which the new line is intended to 
replace, and the theft rate(s) of such line(s).
    5. Presence or absence of any new theft prevention devices or 
systems.
    6. Preliminary theft rate for the line, if it can be determined on 
the basis of currently available data.

[50 FR 43190, Oct. 24, 1985, as amended at 69 FR 17967, Apr. 6, 2004; 69 
FR 34613, June 22, 2004]


<R03>
PART 542_PROCEDURES FOR SELECTING LIGHT DUTY TRUCK LINES TO BE COVERED BY THE 

THEFT PREVENTION STANDARD--Table of Contents



Sec.
542.1 Procedures for selecting new light duty truck lines that are 
          likely to have high or low theft rates.
542.2 Procedures for selecting low theft light duty truck lines with a 
          majority of major parts interchangeable with those of a 
          passenger motor vehicle line.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 33101, 33102, 33103, 33104, 33105; 
delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 59 FR 21672, Apr. 26, 1994, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 542.1  Procedures for selecting new light duty truck lines that are 

likely to have high or low theft rates.

    (a) Scope. This section sets forth the procedures for motor vehicle 
manufacturers and NHTSA to follow in the determination of whether any 
new light duty truck line is likely to have a theft rate above or below 
the 1990/91 median theft rate.

[[Page 179]]

    (b) Application. These procedures apply to each manufacturer that 
plans to introduce a new light duty truck line into commerce in the 
United States on or after September 1, 2006, and to each of those new 
lines.
    (c) Procedures. (1) Each manufacturer shall use the criteria in 
appendix C of part 541 of this chapter to evaluate each new light duty 
truck line and to conclude whether the new line is likely to have a 
theft rate above or below the 1990/91 median theft rate.
    (2) For each new light duty truck line, the manufacturer shall 
submit its evaluations and conclusions made under paragraph (c) of this 
section, together with the underlying factual information, to NHTSA not 
less than 15 months before the date of introduction. The manufacturer 
may request a meeting with the agency during this period to further 
explain the bases for its evaluations and conclusions.
    (3) Within 90 days after its receipt of the manufacturer's 
submission under paragraph (c)(2) of this section, the agency 
independently evaluates the new light duty truck line using the criteria 
in appendix C of part 541 of this chapter and, on a preliminary basis, 
determines whether the new line should or should not be subject to Sec. 
541.2 of this chapter. NHTSA informs the manufacturer by letter of the 
agency's evaluations and determinations, together with the factual 
information considered by the agency in making them.
    (4) The manufacturer may request the agency to reconsider any of its 
preliminary determinations made under paragraph (c)(3) of this section. 
The manufacturer shall submit its request to the agency within 30 days 
of its receipt of the letter under paragraph (c)(3) of this section. The 
request shall include the facts and arguments underlying the 
manufacturer's objections to the agency's preliminary determinations. 
During this 30-day period, the manufacturer may also request a meeting 
with the agency to discuss those objections.
    (5) Each of the agency's preliminary determinations under paragraph 
(c)(3) of this section shall become final 45 days after the agency sends 
the letter specified in paragraph (c)(3) of this section unless a 
request for reconsideration has been received in accordance with 
paragraph (c)(4) of this section. If such a request has been received, 
the agency makes its final determinations within 60 days of its receipt 
of the request. NHTSA informs the manufacturer by letter of those 
determinations and its response to the request for reconsideration.

[69 FR 17967, Apr. 6, 2004; 69 FR 34613, June 22, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 542.2  Procedures for selecting low theft light duty truck lines with a 

majority of major parts interchangeable with those of a passenger motor 

vehicle line.

    (a) Scope. This section sets forth the procedures for motor vehicle 
manufacturers and NHTSA to follow in the determination of whether any 
light duty truck lines that have or are likely to have a low theft rate 
have major parts interchangeable with a majority of the covered major 
parts of a passenger motor vehicle line.
    (b) Application. These procedures apply to:
    (1) Each manufacturer that produces--
    (i) At least one passenger motor vehicle line identified in 49 CFR 
541.3(a)(1) and (2) that has been or will be introduced into commerce in 
the United States, and
    (ii) At least one light duty truck line that has been or will be 
introduced into commerce in the United States and that the manufacturer 
identifies as likely to have a theft rate below the median theft rate; 
and
    (2) Each of those likely sub-median theft rate light duty truck 
lines.
    (c) Procedures. (1) For each light duty truck line that a 
manufacturer identifies under appendix C of part 541 of this chapter as 
having or likely to have a theft rate below the median rate, the 
manufacturer identifies how many and which of the major parts of that 
line will be interchangeable with the covered major parts of any of its 
passenger motor vehicle lines.
    (2) If the manufacturer concludes that a light duty truck line that 
has or is likely to have a theft rate below the median theft rate has 
major parts that are interchangeable with a majority of

[[Page 180]]

the covered major parts of a passenger motor vehicle line, the 
manufacturer determines whether all the vehicles of those lines with 
sub-median or likely sub-median theft rates will account for more than 
90 percent of the total annual production of all of the manufacturer's 
lines with those interchangeable parts.
    (3) The manufacturer submits its evaluations and conclusions made 
under paragraphs (c)(1) and (2) of this section, together with the 
underlying factual information, to NHTSA not less than 15 months before 
the date of introduction. During this period, the manufacturer may 
request a meeting with the agency to further explain the bases for its 
evaluations and conclusions.
    (4) Within 90 days after its receipt of the manufacturer's 
submission under paragraph (c)(3) of this section, NHTSA considers that 
submission, if any, and independently makes, on a preliminary basis, the 
determinations of those light duty truck lines with sub-median or likely 
sub-median theft rates which should or should not be subject to Sec. 
541.5 of this chapter. NHTSA informs the manufacturer by letter of the 
agency's preliminary determinations, together with the factual 
information considered by the agency in making them.
    (5) The manufacturer may request the agency to reconsider any of its 
preliminary determinations made under paragraph (c)(4) of this section. 
The manufacturer must submit its request to the agency within 30 days of 
its receipt of the letter under paragraph (c)(4) of this section 
informing it of the agency's evaluations and preliminary determinations. 
The request must include the facts and arguments underlying the 
manufacturer's objections to the agency's preliminary determinations. 
During this 30-day period, the manufacturer may also request a meeting 
with the agency to discuss those objections.
    (6) Each of the agency's preliminary determinations made under 
paragraph (c)(4) of this section becomes final 45 days after the agency 
sends the letter specified in that paragraph unless a request for 
reconsideration has been received in accordance with paragraph (c)(5) of 
this section. If such a request has been received, the agency makes its 
final determinations within 60 days of its receipt of the request. NHTSA 
informs the manufacturer by letter of those determinations and its 
response to the request for reconsideration.

[69 FR 17968, Apr. 6, 2004]


<R03>
PART 543_EXEMPTION FROM VEHICLE THEFT PREVENTION STANDARD--Table of Contents



Sec.
543.1 Scope.
543.2 Purpose.
543.3 Application.
543.4 Definitions.
543.5 Petition: General requirements.
543.6 Petition: Specific content requirements.
543.7 Processing an exemption petition.
543.8 Duration of exemption.
543.9 Terminating or modifying an exemption.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 33101, 33102, 33103, 33104, 33105; 
delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 52 FR 33829, Sept. 8, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 543.1  Scope.

    This part establishes procedures under section 605 of the Motor 
Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act (15 U.S.C. 2025) for filing and 
processing petitions to exempt lines of passenger motor vehicles from 
part 541 of this chapter, and procedures for terminating or modifying an 
exemption.


<R05>
Sec. 543.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to specify the content and format of 
petitions which may be filed by manufacturers of passenger motor 
vehicles to obtain an exemption from the parts-marking requirements of 
the vehicle theft prevention standard for passenger motor vehicle lines 
which include, as standard equipment, an antitheft device if the agency 
concludes that the device is likely to be as effective in reducing and 
deterring motor vehicle theft as compliance with the parts-marking 
requirements. This part also provides the procedures that the agency 
will follow in processing those petitions and in terminating or 
modifying exemptions.

[[Page 181]]


<R05>
Sec. 543.3  Application.

    This part applies to manufacturers of vehicles subject to the 
requirements of part 541 of this chapter, and to any interested person 
who seeks to have NHTSA terminate an exemption.

[70 FR 28851, May 19, 2005]


<R05>
Sec. 543.4  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory terms. All terms defined in sections 2, 601, and 605 
of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act are used in 
accordance with their statutory meanings unless otherwise defined in 
paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) Other definitions.
    Line or car line means a name which a manufacturer applies to a 
group of motor vehicles of the same make which have the same body or 
chassis, or otherwise are similar in construction or design. A ``line'' 
may, for example, include 2-door, 4-door, station wagon, and hatchback 
vehicles of the same make.
    NHTSA means the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.


<R05>
Sec. 543.5  Petition: General requirements.

    (a) For each model year, a manufacturer may petition NHTSA for an 
exemption of one car line from the requirements of part 541 of this 
chapter. However, for car lines not subject to the requirements of part 
541 of this chapter until September 1, 2006, a manufacturer may not 
petition NHTSA for an exemption for model years before model year 2006.
    (b) Each petition filed under this part for an exemption must--
    (1) Be written in the English language;
    (2) Be submitted in three copies to: Administrator, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 
20590;
    (3) State the full name and address of the petitioner, the nature of 
its organization (individual, partnership, corporation, etc.), and the 
name of the State or country under the laws of which it is organized;
    (4) Be submitted at least 8 months before the commencement of 
production of the lines specified under paragraph (5) of Sec. 543.5(b) 
for the first model year in which the petitioner wishes those lines to 
be exempted, and identify that model year;
    (5) Identify the passenger motor vehicle line or lines for which 
exemption is sought;
    (6) Set forth in full the data, views, and arguments of the 
petitioner supporting the exemption, including the information specified 
in Sec. 543.6; and
    (7) Specify and segregate any part of the information and data 
submitted which the petitioner requests be withheld from public 
disclosure in accordance with part 512, Confidential Business 
Information, of this chapter.

[52 FR 33829, Sept. 8, 1987, as amended at 59 FR 10758, Mar. 8, 1994; 70 
FR 28851, May 19, 2005]


<R05>
Sec. 543.6  Petition: Specific content requirements.

    (a) Each petition for exemption filed under this part must include:
    (1) A statement that an antitheft device will be installed as 
standard equipment on all vehicles in the line for which an exemption is 
sought;
    (2) A list naming each component in the antitheft system, and a 
diagram showing the location of each of those components within the 
vehicle;
    (3) A discussion that explains the means and process by which the 
device is activated and functions, including any aspect of the device 
designed to--
    (i) Facilitate or encourage its activation by motorists,
    (ii) Attract attention to the efforts of an unauthorized person to 
enter or move a vehicle by means other than a key,
    (iii) Prevent defeating or circumventing the device by an 
unauthorized person attempting to enter a vehicle by means other than a 
key,
    (iv) Prevent the operation of a vehicle which an unauthorized person 
has entered using means other than a key, and
    (v) Ensure the reliability and durability of the device;
    (4) The reasons for the petitioner's belief that the antitheft 
device will be effective in reducing and deterring motor vehicle theft, 
including any theft data and other data that are available to the 
petitioner and form a basis for that belief;

[[Page 182]]

    (5) The reasons for the petitioner's belief that the agency should 
determine that the antitheft device is likely to be as effective as 
compliance with the parts-marking requirements of part 541 in reducing 
and deterring motor vehicle theft, including any statistical data that 
are available to the petitioner and form a basis for petitioner's belief 
that a line of passenger motor vehicles equipped with the antitheft 
device is likely to have a theft rate equal to or less than that of 
passenger motor vehicles of the same, or a similar, line which have 
parts marked in compliance with part 541.
    (b) Any petitioner submitting data under paragraph (a) (4) or (5) of 
this section shall submit an explanation of its belief that the data are 
sufficiently representative and reliable to warrant NHTSA's reliance 
upon them.

[52 FR 33829, Sept. 8, 1987, as amended at 59 FR 10758, Mar. 8, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 543.7  Processing an exemption petition.

    (a) NHTSA processes any complete petition. If a manufacturer submits 
a petition that does not contain all the information required by this 
part, NHTSA informs the manufacturer of the areas of insufficiency and 
advises the manufacturer that the agency does not process the petition 
until it receives the required information.
    (b) The agency grants a petition for an exemption from the parts-
marking requirements of part 541 either in whole or in part, if it 
determines that, based upon substantial evidence, the standard equipment 
antitheft device is likely to be as effective in reducing and deterring 
motor vehicle theft as compliance with the parts-marking requirements of 
part 541.
    (c) The agency issues its decision either to grant or deny an 
exemption petition not later than 120 days after the date on which a 
complete petition is filed.
    (d) Any exemption granted under this part applies only to the 
vehicle line or lines that are the subject of the grant, and are 
equipped with the antitheft device on which the line's exemption was 
based.
    (e) An exemption granted under this part is effective for the model 
year beginning after the model year in which NHTSA issue the notice of 
exemption, unless the notice of exemption specifies a later model year.
    (f) NHTSA publishes a notice of its decision to grant or deny an 
exemption petition in the Federal Register, and notifies the petitioner 
in writing of the agency's decision.


<R05>
Sec. 543.8  Duration of exemption.

    Each exemption under this part continues in effect unless it is 
modified or terminated under Sec. 543.9, or the manufacturer ceases 
production of the exempted line.


<R05>
Sec. 543.9  Terminating or modifying an exemption.

    (a) On its own initiative or in response to a petition, NHTSA may 
commence a proceeding to terminate or modify any exemption granted under 
this part.
    (b) Any interested person may petition the agency to commence a 
proceeding to terminate or modify an exemption.
    (c)(1) In a petition to terminate an exemption, the petitioner must:
    (i) Identify the vehicle line or lines that are the subject of the 
exemption;
    (ii) State the reasons for petitioner's belief that the standard 
equipment antitheft device installed under the exemption is not as 
effective as compliance with the parts-marking requirements of part 541 
in reducing and deterring motor vehicle theft;
    (iii) Comply with Sec. 543.5, paragraphs (b) (1) through (3) and 
(7).
    (2) In a petition to modify an exemption, the petitioner must:
    (i) Identify the vehicle line or lines that are the subject of the 
exemption;
    (ii) Request permission to use an antitheft device similar to, but 
different from the standard equipment antitheft device which is 
installed under the exemption;
    (iii) Comply with Sec. 543.5, paragraphs (b) (1) through (3) and 
(7); and
    (iv) Provide the same information for the modified device that is 
required under Sec. 543.6 for a new device, except that the information 
specified by Sec. 543.6(a)(3) need by provided only to the extent that 
the modified device differs from the standard equipment

[[Page 183]]

antitheft device installed under the exemption.
    (d) NHTSA processes any complete petition. If a person submits a 
petition under this section that does not contain all the information 
required by it, NHTSA informs the manufacturer of the areas of 
insufficiency and advises the manufacturer that the agency does not 
process the petition until it receives the required information.
    (e) If NHTSA denies a petition requesting a proceeding to terminate 
or modify an exemption, the agency notifies the petitioner by letter.
    (f) If NHTSA commences a termination proceeding on its own 
initiative or in response to a petition, the agency provides the 
manufacturer of the exempted line with a copy of the petition, if any, a 
written statement of NHTSA's reasons for commencing the proceeding, and 
an opportunity to present its written views.
    (g)(1) The agency terminates an exemption if it determines that the 
antitheft device installed under the exemption has not been as effective 
as parts-marking in reducing and deterring motor vehicle theft.
    (2) Except as provided in paragraph (g)(3) of this section, a 
decision to terminate an exemption under this section takes effect on 
the later of the following dates:
    (i) The last day of the model year in which NHTSA issues the 
termination decision, or
    (ii) Six months after the manufacturer receives written notice of 
the termination.
    (3) If a manufacturer shows good cause why terminating its exemption 
effective on a date later than the one specified in paragraph (g)(2) of 
this section is consistent with the public interest and the purposes of 
the Act, the agency may set such later date.
    (h)(1) The agency modifies an exemption if it detemines, based on 
substantial evidence, that the modified antitheft device described in 
the petition is likely to be as effective in reducing and deterring 
motor vehicle theft as compliance with the parts-marking requirements of 
part 541.
    (2)(i) Except as provided in paragraph (h)(2)(ii) of this section, a 
decision to modify an exemption under this section takes effect on the 
first day of the model year following the model year in which NHTSA 
issued the modification decision.
    (ii) If a manufacturer shows good cause why modifying its exemption 
effective on a date earlier than the one specified in paragraph 
(h)(2)(i) of this section is consistent with the public interest and the 
purposes of the Act, the agency may set such earlier date.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (j) NHTSA publishes notice in the Federal Register of any agency 
decision terminating or modifying an exemption, and notifies the 
affected manufacturer in writing.


<R03>
PART 544_INSURER REPORTING REQUIREMENTS--Table of Contents



Sec.
544.1 Scope.
544.2 Purpose.
544.3 Application.
544.4 Definitions.
544.5 General requirements for reports.
544.6 Contents of insurer reports.
544.7 Incorporating previously filed documents.

Appendix A to Part 544--Insurers of Motor Vehicle Insurance Policies 
          Subject to the Reporting Requirements in Each State in Which 
          They Do Business
Appendix B to Part 544--Issuers of Motor Vehicle Insurance Policies 
          Subject to the Reporting Requirements Only in Designated 
          States
Appendix C to Part 544--Motor Vehicle Rental and Leasing Companies 
          (Including Licensees and Franchisees) Subject to the Reporting 
          Requirements of Part 544

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 33112; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 52 FR 76, Jan. 2, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 544.1  Scope.

    This part sets forth requirements for insurers to report to the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration information about motor 
vehicle thefts and recoveries, the effects of the Federal motor vehicle 
theft prevention standard on those thefts and recoveries, and related 
insurance practices.

[[Page 184]]


<R05>
Sec. 544.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of these reporting requirements in this part is to aid 
in implementing and evaluating the provisions of 49 U.S.C. Chapter 331 
Theft Prevention to prevent or discourage the theft of motor vehicles, 
to prevent or discourage the sale or distribution in interstate commerce 
of used parts removed from stolen motor vehicles, and to help reduce the 
cost to consumers of comprehensive insurance coverage for motor 
vehicles.

[62 FR 33756, June 23, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 544.3  Application.

    This part applies to the motor vehicle insurance policy issuers 
listed in appendices A or B, and to the motor vehicle rental and leasing 
companies listed in appendix C.

[55 FR 25609, June 22, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 544.4  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory terms. All terms defined in 49 U.S.C. 33101 and 33112 
are used in accordance with their statutory meanings unless otherwise 
defined in paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) Other definitions. (1) Comprehensive insurance coverage means 
the indemnification of motor vehicle owners by an insurer against losses 
due to fire, theft, robbery, pilferage, malicious mischief and 
vandalism, and damage resulting from floods, water, tornadoes, cyclones, 
or windstorms.
    (2) Gross vehicle weight rating is used as defined at Sec. 571.3 of 
this chapter.
    (3) Heavy truck means a truck with a gross vehicle weight rating of 
more than 10,000 pounds.
    (4) Light truck means a truck with a gross vehicle weight rating of 
10,000 pounds or less.
    (5) Major part means--
    (i) In the case of passenger motor vehicles, any part listed in 
Sec. 541.5(a) (1) through (14) of this chapter;
    (ii) In the case of light trucks, any part listed in Sec. 541.4(a) 
(1) through (14) of this chapter, or the cargo bed or transfer case;
    (iii) In the case of heavy trucks, any part listed in Sec. 541.5(a) 
(1) through (14) of this chapter, or the cargo bed, drive axle assembly, 
fifth wheel, sleeper, or the transfer case;
    (iv) In the case of multipurpose passenger vehicles, any part listed 
in Sec. 541.5(a) (1) through (14) of this chapter, or the cargo bed or 
transfer case; and
    (v) In the case of motorcycles, the crankcase, engine, frame, front 
fork, or transmission.
    (6) Motorcycle is used as defined at Sec. 571.3 of this chapter.
    (7) Motorcycle vehicle means a passenger motor vehicle, multipurpose 
passenger vehicle, truck, or motorcycle.
    (8) Multipurpose passenger vehicle is used as defined at Sec. 571.3 
of this chapter.
    (9) Recovery means regaining physical possession of a motor vehicle 
or a major portion of the superstructure of a motor vehicle with one or 
more major parts still attached to the superstructure, after that 
vehicle has been stolen.
    (10) Recovery-in-part means a recovery in which one or more of the 
recovered vehicle's major parts is missing at the time of recovery.
    (11) Recovery intact means a recovery with none of the recovered 
vehicle's major parts missing at the time of recovery, and with no 
apparent damage to any part of the motor vehicle other than those parts 
damaged in order to enter, start, and operate the vehicle, but with 
additional mileage and ordinary wear and tear.
    (12) Recovery-in-whole means a recovery with none of the recovered 
vehicle's major parts missing at the time of recovery, but with apparent 
damage to some part or parts of the vehicle in addition to those parts 
damaged in order to enter, start, and operate the vehicle.
    (13) Reporting period means the calendar year covered by a report 
submitted under this part.
    (14) Truck is used as defined at Sec. 571.3 of this chapter.
    (15)(i) In the case of insurers that issue motor vehicle insurance 
policies, vehicle theft means an actual physical removal of a motor 
vehicle without the permission of its owner, but does not include the 
removal of component parts, accessories, or personal belongings from a 
motor vehicle which is not moved.

[[Page 185]]

    (ii) In the case of an insurer which has a fleet of 20 or more 
vehicles (other than a governmental entity) used primarily for rental or 
lease and not covered by theft insurance policies issued by insurers of 
motor vehicles, ``vehicle theft'' means an actual physical removal of a 
motor vehicle without the permission of its owner, or keeping possession 
of the motor vehicle without permission of its owner for a sufficient 
period of time so that the vehicle could have been reported as stolen to 
the State police in the State in which the vehicle was to have been 
returned. However, vehicle theft does not include the removal of 
component parts, accessories, or personal belongings from a motor 
vehicle which is not moved.

[52 FR 76, Jan. 2, 1987, as amended at 60 FR 33148, June 27, 1995; 61 FR 
41987, Aug. 13, 1996; 62 FR 33756, June 23, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 544.5  General requirements for reports.

    (a) Each insurer to which this part applies shall submit a report 
annually before October 25, beginning on October 25, 1986. This report 
shall contain the information required by Sec. 544.6 of this part for 
the calendar year 3 years previous to the year in which the report is 
filed (e.g., the report due by October 25, 2011 will contain the 
required information for the 2008 calendar year).
    (b) Each report required by this part must:
    (1) Have a heading preceding its text that includes the words 
``Insurer Report'';
    (2) Identify the insurer, including all subsidiary companies, on 
whose behalf the report is submitted, and the designated agent, if any, 
submitting the report or that will submit further documents to complete 
the report;
    (3) Identify the State or States in which the insurer did business 
during the reporting period;
    (4) State the full name and title of the official responsible for 
preparing the report, and the address of the insurer;
    (5) Identify the reporting period covered by the report;
    (6) Be written in the English language;
    (7) Include a glossary defining all acronyms and terms of art used 
in the report, unless those acronyms and terms of art are defined 
immediately after they first appear in the report;
    (8) Be submitted in three copies to: Administrator, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 
20590; and
    (9) If the insurer wishes to submit certain information under a 
claim of confidentiality, be submitted in accordance with part 512 of 
this chapter.

[52 FR 76, Jan. 2, 1987]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 544.5 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected which appears in the Finding Aids 
section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.


<R05>
Sec. 544.6  Contents of insurer reports.

    (a)(1) In the case of insurers that issue motor vehicle insurance 
policies, provide the information specified in paragraphs (b) through 
(g) of this section for each State in which the insurer, including any 
subsidiary, did business during the reporting period if the insurer is 
listed in appendix A, or for each State listed after the insurer's name 
if the insurer is listed in appendix B.
    (2) In the case of a motor vehicle rental or leasing company listed 
in appendix C, provide the information specified in paragraphs (c), 
(d)(2)(iv), and (g) of this section for each vehicle type listed in 
paragraph (b) of this section, for each State in which the company, 
including any licensee, franchisee, or subsidiary, did business during 
the reporting period. The information for each listed company shall 
include all relevant information from any licensee, franchisee, or 
subsidiary.
    (b) For each of the following vehicle types, provide the information 
specified in paragraphs (c) through (g) of this section for all vehicles 
of that type insured by the insurer during the reporting period--
    (1) Passenger cars.
    (2) Multipurpose passenger vehicles.
    (3) Light trucks.
    (4) Heavy trucks.
    (5) Motorcycles.
    (c)(1) List the total number of vehicle thefts for vehicles 
manufactured in the 1983 or subsequent model years, subdivided into 
model year, model, make, and line, for this type of motor vehicle.

[[Page 186]]

    (2) List the total number of recoveries for vehicles manufactured in 
the 1983 or subsequent model years, subdivided into model year, model, 
make, and line, for this type of motor vehicle. Beginning with the 
report due not later than October 25, 1987, for each of these subdivided 
number of recoveries, indicate how many were:
    (i) Recoveries intact;
    (ii) Recoveries-in-whole; and
    (iii) Recoveries-in-part.
    (3) Explain how the theft and recovery data set forth in response to 
paragraphs (c) (1) and (2) of this section were obtained by the insurer, 
and the steps taken by the insurer to ensure that these data are 
accurate and timely.
    (4) Explain the use made by the insurer of the information set forth 
in response to paragraphs (c) (1) and (2) of this section, including the 
extent to which such information is reported to national, public, and 
private entities (e.g., the Federal Bureau of Investigation and State 
and local police). If such reports are made, state the frequency and 
timing of the reporting.
    (d)(1) Provide the rating characteristics used by the insurer to 
establish the premiums it charges for comprehensive insurance coverage 
for this type of motor vehicle and the premium penalties for vehicles of 
this type considered by the insurer as more likely to be stolen. This 
requirement may be satisfied by furnishing the pertinent sections of the 
insurer's rate manual(s).
    (2) Provide the loss data used by the insurer to establish the 
premiums it charges for comprehensive insurance coverage for this type 
of motor vehicle and the premium penalties it charges for vehicles of 
this type it considers as more likely to be stolen. This requirement may 
be satisfied by providing the following:
    (i) The total number of comprehensive insurance claims paid by the 
insurer during the reporting period;
    (ii)(A) The total number of claims listed in (d)(2)(i) of this 
section that arose from a theft;
    (B) The insurer's best estimate of the percentage of the number 
listed in paragraph (d)(2)(ii)(A) of this section that arose from 
vehicle thefts, and an explanation of the basis for the estimate;
    (iii) The total amount (in dollars) paid out by the insurer during 
the reporting period in response to all the comprehensive claims filed 
by its policyholders;
    (iv)(A) In the case of insurers listed in appendix A or B, provide--
    (1) The total amount (in dollars) listed under paragraph (d)(2)(iii) 
of this section paid out by the insurer as a result of theft; and
    (2) The insurer's best estimate of the percentage of the dollar 
total listed in paragraph (d)(2)(iv)(A)(1) of this section that arose 
from vehicle thefts, and an explanation of the basis for the estimate;
    (B) In the case of other insurers subject to this part, the net 
losses suffered by the insurer (in dollars) as a result of vehicle 
theft;
    (v)(A) The total amount (in dollars) recovered by the insurer from 
the sale of recovered vehicles, major parts recovered not attached to 
the vehicle superstructure, or other recovered parts, after the insurer 
had made a payment listed under paragraph (d)(2)(iv) of this section.
    (B) The insurer's best estimate of the percentage of the dollar 
total listed in paragraph (d)(2)(v)(A) of this section that arose from 
vehicle thefts, and an explanation of the basis for the estimate;
    (vi) An identification of the vehicles for which the insurer charges 
comprehensive insurance premium penalties, because the insurer considers 
such vehicles as more likely to be stolen;
    (vii) The total number of comprehensive insurance claims paid by the 
insurer for each vehicle risk grouping identified in paragraph 
(d)(2)(vi) of this section during the reporting period, and the total 
amount (in dollars) paid out by the insurer in response to each of the 
listed claims totals; and
    (viii) The maximum premium adjustments (as a percentage of the basic 
comprehensive insurance premium) made for each vehicle risk grouping 
identified in paragraph (d)(2)(vi) of this section during the reporting 
period, as a result of the insurer's determination

[[Page 187]]

that such vehicles are more likely to be stolen.
    (3) Identify any other rating rules and plans used by the insurer to 
establish its comprehensive insurance premiums and premium penalties for 
motor vehicles it considers as more likely to be stolen, and explain how 
such rating rules and plans are used to establish the premiums and 
premium penalties.
    (4) Explain the basis for the insurer's comprehensive insurance 
premiums and the premium penalties charged for motor vehicles it 
considers as more likely to be stolen. This requirement may be satisfied 
by providing the pertinent sections of materials filed with State 
insurance regulatory officials and clearly indicating which information 
in those sections is being submitted in compliance with this paragraph.
    (e) List each action taken by the insurer to reduce the premiums it 
charges for comprehensive insurance coverage because of a reduction in 
thefts of this type of motor vehicle. For each action:
    (1) State the conditions that must be satisfied to receive such a 
reduction (e.g., installation of antitheft device, marking of vehicle in 
accordance with theft prevention standard, etc.);
    (2) State the number of the insurer's policyholders and the total 
number of vehicles insured by the insurer that received this reduction; 
and
    (3) State the difference in average comprehensive insurance premiums 
for those policyholders that received this reduction versus those 
policyholders that did not receive the reduction.
    (f) In the case of an insurer that offered a reduction in its 
comprehensive insurance premiums for vehicles equipped with antitheft 
devices, provide:
    (1) The specific criteria used by the insurer to determine whether a 
vehicle is eligible for the reduction (original equipment antitheft 
device, passive antitheft device, etc.);
    (2) The total number of vehicle thefts for vehicles manufactured in 
the 1983 or subsequent model years that received a reduction under each 
listed criterion; and
    (3) The total number of recoveries of vehicles manufactured in the 
1983 or subsequent model years that received a reduction under each 
listed criterion. Beginning with the report due not later than October 
25, 1987, indicate how many of the total number of recoveries were--
    (i) Recoveries intact;
    (ii) Recoveries-in-whole; and
    (iii) Recoveries-in-part.
    (g)(1) List each action taken by the insurer to assist in deterring 
or reducing thefts of motor vehicles. For each action, describe the 
action and explain why the insurer believed it would be effective in 
deterring or reducing motor vehicle thefts.
    (2)(i) State the insurer's policy regarding the use of used parts to 
effect repairs paid for by the insurer on vehicles it insures. Indicate 
whether the insurer required, promoted, allowed, or forbade the use of 
used parts in those repairs.
    (ii) In the case of insurers requiring, promoting, or allowing the 
use of used parts to make repairs paid for by the insurer on vehicles it 
insures, indicate the precautions taken by or on behalf of the insurer 
to identify the origin of those used parts.

[52 FR 76, Jan. 2, 1987, as amended at 55 FR 25610, June 22, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 544.7  Incorporating previously filed documents.

    (a) In any report required by this part, an insurer may incorporate 
by reference any document or portion thereof previously filed with any 
Federal or State agency or department within the past four years.
    (b) An insurer that incorporates by reference a document not 
previously submitted to the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration shall append that document or the pertinent sections of 
that document to its report, and clearly indicate on the cover or first 
page of the document or pertinent section the regulatory requirement in 
response to which the document is being submitted.
    (c) An insurer that incorporates by reference a document shall 
clearly identify the document and the specific portions thereof sought 
to be incorporated, and, in the case of a document

[[Page 188]]

previously submitted to the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, indicate the date on which the document was submitted to 
the agency and the person whose signature appeared on the document.


<R05>
Sec. Appendix A to Part 544--Issuers of Motor Vehicle Insurance Policies 

  Subject to the Reporting Requirements in Each State in Which They Do 

                                Business

Allstate Insurance Group
American Family Insurance Group
American International Group
Auto Club Enterprise Insurance Group
Auto-Owners Insurance Group
Berkshire Hathaway/GEICO Corporation Group
Erie Insurance Group
Farmers Insurance Group
Hartford Insurance Group
Liberty Mutual Insurance Companies
Metropolitan Life Auto & Home Group
Mercury General Group
Nationwide Group
Progressive Group
State Farm Group
Travelers Companies
USAA Group

[76 FR 41140, July 13, 2011]


<R05>
Sec. Appendix B to Part 544--Issuers of Motor Vehicle Insurance Policies 

     Subject to the Reporting Requirements Only in Designated States

Alfa Insurance Group (Alabama)
Auto Club (Michigan)
Commerce Group, Inc. (Massachusetts)
Kentucky Farm Bureau Group (Kentucky)
New Jersey Manufacturers Group (New Jersey)
Safety Group (Massachusetts)
Southern Farm Bureau Group (Arkansas, Mississippi)
Tennessee Farmers Companies (Tennessee)

[76 FR 41140, July 13, 2011]


<R05>
Sec. Appendix C to Part 544--Motor Vehicle Rental and Leasing Companies 

     (Including Licensees and Franchisees) Subject to the Reporting 

                        Requirements of Part 544

Avis Budget Group (subsidiary of Cendant)
Dollar Thrifty Automotive Group
Enterprise Holding Inc./Enterprise Rent-A-Car Company
Hertz Rent-A-Car Division (subsidiary of The Hertz Corporation)
U-Haul International, Inc. (Subsidiary of AMERCO)

[76 FR 41140, July 13, 2011]


<R03>
PART 545_FEDERAL MOTOR VEHICLE THEFT PREVENTION STANDARD PHASE-IN AND SMALL-

VOLUME LINE REPORTING REQUIREMENTS--Table of Contents



Sec.
545.1 Scope.
545.2 Purpose.
545.3 Applicability.
545.4 Response to inquiries.
545.5 Definitions.
545.6 Reporting requirements for vehicles listed in Sec. 541.3(a)(1).
545.7 Reporting requirements for vehicles listed in Sec. 541.3(b)(2).
545.8 Records.
545.9 Petition to extend period to file report.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 33101, 33102, 33103, 33104, 33105; 
delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 70 FR 28851, May 19, 2005, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 545.1  Scope.

    This part establishes requirements for manufacturers of motor 
vehicles to respond to NHTSA inquiries, to submit reports, and to 
maintain records related to the reports, concerning the number of 
vehicles that meet the requirements of 49 CFR part 541, and the number 
of vehicles that are excluded from the requirements of 49 CFR part 541 
pursuant to 49 CFR 541.3(b)(2).

[72 FR 46176, Aug. 17, 2007]


<R05>
Sec. 545.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of these requirements is to assist the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration in determining whether a manufacturer has 
complied with the requirements of 49 CFR 541.5.


<R05>
Sec. 545.3  Applicability.

    This subpart applies to manufacturers of motor vehicles.


<R05>
Sec. 545.4  Response to inquiries.

    (a) At any time prior to August 31, 2007, each manufacturer must, 
upon request from the Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance, provide 
information identifying the vehicles (by make, model,

[[Page 189]]

and vehicle identification number) that have been certified as complying 
with the requirements of 49 CFR part 541. The manufacturers designation 
of a vehicle as a certified vehicle is irrevocable.
    (b) At any time prior to August 31, 2007, each manufacturer must, 
upon request from the Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance, provide 
information identifying the vehicles (by make, model, and vehicle 
identification number) that are excluded from the requirements of 49 CFR 
part 541 pursuant to 49 CFR 541.3(b)(2).

[70 FR 28851, May 19, 2005, as amended at 72 FR 46176, Aug. 17, 2007]


<R05>
Sec. 545.5  Definitions.

    Production year means the 12-month period between September 1 of 
2006 and August 31, 2007, inclusive.
    Small-volume line means a line with an annual production of not more 
than 3,500 vehicles.


<R05>
Sec. 545.6  Reporting requirements for vehicles listed in Sec. 541.3(a)(1).

    (a) General reporting requirements. Within 60 days after the end of 
the production year ending August 31, 2007, each manufacturer shall 
submit a report to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
concerning its compliance with 49 CFR part 541 for vehicles listed in 
Sec. 541.3(a)(1) that were manufactured between September 1, 2006 and 
August 31, 2007. Each report must--
    (1) Identify the manufacturer;
    (2) State the full name, title, and address of the official 
responsible for preparing the report;
    (3) Identify the production year being reported on;
    (4) Contain a statement regarding whether or not the manufacturer 
complied with the requirements of 49 CFR part 541 for the period covered 
by the report, and the basis for that statement;
    (5) Provide the information specified in paragraph (b) of this 
section;
    (6) Be written in the English language; and
    (7) Be submitted to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, Room, 400 7th Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590.
    (b) Report content--(1) Basis for Statement of Compliance. Each 
manufacturer shall provide the number of motor vehicles listed in Sec. 
541.3(a)(1) that were manufactured between September 1, 2006 and August 
31, 2007 (excluding those motor vehicles that were subject to the 
requirements of 49 CFR part 541 before September 1, 2006).
    (2) Production. Each manufacturer shall provide (1) the number of 
motor vehicles manufactured between September 1, 2006 and August 31, 
2007 (excluding those motor vehicles that were subject to the 
requirements of 49 CFR part 541 before September 1, 2006), that meet the 
requirements of 49 CFR 541.5; and (2) the number of motor vehicles 
manufactured between September 1, 2006 and August 31, 2007 (excluding 
those motor vehicles that were subject to the requirements of 49 CFR 
part 541 before September 1, 2006), that are exempt from 49 CFR part 541 
pursuant to 49 CFR part 543.
    (3) Statement regarding compliance. Each manufacturer must provide a 
statement regarding whether or not the manufacturer complied with 49 CFR 
541.5 requirements as applicable to the period covered by the report, 
and the basis for that statement.

[70 FR 28851, May 19, 2005, as amended at 72 FR 46176, Aug. 17, 2007]


<R05>
Sec. 545.7  Reporting requirements for vehicles listed in Sec. 541.3(b)(2).

    (a) General reporting requirements. Within 60 days after the end of 
the production year ending August 31, 2007, each manufacturer must 
submit a report to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
concerning small-volume lines that were manufactured between September 
1, 2006 and August 31, 2007. Each report must--
    (1) Identify the manufacturer;
    (2) State the full name, title, and address of the official 
responsible for preparing the report;
    (3) Identify the production year being reported on;
    (4) Provide the information specified in paragraph (b) of this 
section;
    (5) Be written in the English language; and

[[Page 190]]

    (6) Be submitted to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, Room, 400 7th Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590.
    (b) Report content. Within 60 days after the end of the production 
year ending August 31, 2007, each manufacturer shall provide: (1) The 
name of each small-volume line the manufacturer produces; (2) the number 
of motor vehicles in each small-volume line the manufacturer produced.

[70 FR 28851, May 19, 2005, as amended at 72 FR 46176, Aug. 17, 2007]


<R05>
Sec. 545.8  Records.

    Each manufacturer shall maintain records of the Vehicle 
Identification Number for each vehicle for which information is reported 
under Sec. Sec. 545.6(b)(2) and 545.7(b)(2) until December 31, 2008.


<R05>
Sec. 545.9  Petition to extend period to file report.

    A manufacturer may petition for extension of time to submit a report 
under this part. A petition will be granted only if the petitioner shows 
good cause for the extension and if the extension is consistent with the 
public interest. The petition must be received not later than 15 days 
before expiration of the time stated in Sec. 545.5(a). The filing of a 
petition does not automatically extend the time for filing a report. The 
petition must be submitted to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 7th Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590.


<R03>
PART 551_PROCEDURAL RULES--Table of Contents



                            Subpart A_General

Sec.
551.1 Scope.

Subpart B [Reserved]

                     Subpart C_Submittals in Writing

551.31 Form of communications.
551.33 Address of communications.
551.35 Subscription of communications.
551.37 Language of communications.

   Subpart D_Service of Process on Foreign Manufacturers and Importers

             Designation of an Agent for Service of Process

551.45 What is the purpose of this subpart?
551.46 Who must comply with this subpart and when?
551.47 Who may serve as an agent for a foreign manufacturer?
551.48 May an official of a foreign manufacturer serve as its agent?
551.49 May a foreign manufacturer replace its agent?
551.50 May more than one foreign manufacturer designate the same person 
          as agent?
551.51 May an agent assign performance of its functions to another 
          individual or entity?
551.52 How long will a foreign manufacturer's designation of agent 
          remain in effect?

                    Form and Contents of Designation

551.53 What is the required format for a designation?
551.54 What are the required contents for a designation?
551.55 What information must a Designation by Foreign Manufacturer 
          contain?
551.56 What information must an Acceptance by Agent contain?
551.57 Who may sign the Designation by Foreign Manufacturer?
551.58 Who may sign the Acceptance by Agent?
551.59 May the same individual sign both the Designation by Foreign 
          Manufacturer and Acceptance by Agent?
551.60 When must the Designation by Foreign Manufacturer be signed?
551.61 When must the Acceptance by Agent be signed?
551.62 Where should a foreign manufacturer mail the designation?
551.63 May a foreign manufacturer submit a designation by email or 
          facsimile?
551.64 What if designation documents submitted by a foreign manufacturer 
          do not comply with this subpart?
551.65 What if a foreign manufacturer changes its name, address or 
          product names or marks?

                      Method of Service of Process

551.66 What is the legal effect of service of process on an agent?
551.67 Where and how may an agent be served?
551.68 What if an agent cannot be served?

    Authority: Secs. 110(e), 119, 80 Stat. 719, 728 (15 U.S.C. 1399, 
1407); 23 U.S.C. 315, 401-404; delegation of authority, 31 FR 13952, 32 
FR 5606.

[[Page 191]]


    Source: 33 FR 19700, Dec. 25, 1968, unless otherwise noted. 
Redesignated at 35 FR 5118, Mar. 26, 1970.


<R04>
                            Subpart A_General


<R05>
Sec. 551.1  Scope.

    This part contains rules of procedure generally applicable to the 
transaction of official business under the National Traffic and Motor 
Vehicle Safety Act of 1966, the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost 
Savings Act, and the Highway Safety Act of 1966. These rules apply in 
addition to the rules governing specific proceedings. In case of 
inconsistency with these general rules, the specific rules prevail.

[33 FR 19700, Dec. 25, 1968. Redesignated at 35 FR 5118, Mar. 26, 1970, 
and amended at 38 FR 20086, July 27, 1973]

Subpart B [Reserved]


<R04>
                     Subpart C_Submittals in Writing


<R05>
Sec. 551.31  Form of communications.

    Any communication in writing relating to official business 
(including formal documents) shall be on opaque and durable paper not 
larger than 9 by 14 inches in size. Tables, charts, or originals of 
other documents that are attached to communications shall be folded to 
this size, if possible. The left margin of communications shall be at 
least 1\1/2\ inches wide, and if a communication is bound, it shall be 
bound on the left side. All copies submitted shall be legible.


<R05>
Sec. 551.33  Address of communications.

    Unless otherwise specified, communications shall be addressed to the 
Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, U.S. 
Department of Transportation, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 
20590. Communications may not be addressed to a staff member's private 
address.

[36 FR 1147, Jan. 23, 1971; 38 FR 20086, July 27, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 551.35  Subscription of communications.

    Each communication shall be signed in ink and shall disclose the 
full legal name and the address of the person signing it and, if he is 
an agent, of his principal.


<R05>
Sec. 551.37  Language of communications.

    Communications and attachments thereto shall be in English. Any 
matter written in a foreign language will be considered only if 
accompanied by a translation into English. A translation shall bear a 
certificate by the translator certifying that he is qualified to make 
the translation; that the translation is complete except as otherwise 
clearly indicated; and that it is accurate to the best of the 
translator's knowledge and belief. The translator shall sign the 
certificate in ink and state his full legal name, occupation, and 
address.


<R04>
   Subpart D_Service of Process on Foreign Manufacturers and Importers

    Source: 70 FR 45567, Aug. 8, 2005, unless otherwise noted.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 30164.

             Designation of an Agent for Service of Process


<R05>
Sec. 551.45  What is the purpose of this subpart?

    The purpose of this subpart is to establish a procedure for foreign 
manufacturers, assemblers and importers of motor vehicles and motor 
vehicle equipment to designate an agent in the United States on whom 
service of administrative or judicial notices or processes may be made.


<R05>
Sec. 551.46  Who must comply with this subpart and when?

    (a) All foreign manufacturers, assemblers, and importers of motor 
vehicles or motor vehicle equipment (hereinafter referred to as 
``foreign manufacturers'') must comply with this subpart before offering 
a motor vehicle or item of motor vehicle equipment for importation into 
the United States.
    (b) Unless and until a foreign manufacturer appoints an agent in 
accordance with the requirements of this subpart, it may not import 
motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment into the United States.

[[Page 192]]


<R05>
Sec. 551.47  Who may serve as an agent for a foreign manufacturer?

    Only an individual, a domestic firm or a domestic corporation that 
is a permanent resident of the United States may serve as an agent under 
this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 551.48  May an official of a foreign manufacturer serve as its agent?

    (a) Generally no; an agent must be a permanent resident of the 
United States. Typically officials of foreign manufacturers and 
importers are not United States residents.
    (b) Occasionally an official of a foreign manufacturer also serves 
as an official of a domestic firm or corporation or is a permanent 
resident of the United States. In such cases, the official may serve as 
agent and sign the designation documents both on behalf of the foreign 
manufacturer and as agent. However, the foreign manufacturer must submit 
to NHTSA, along with the designation documents, a letter explaining that 
the individual signing the designation is both an official of the 
foreign manufacturer with authority to appoint an agent and a permanent 
resident of the United States or official of a domestic firm or 
corporation. If NHTSA does not receive an explanatory letter at the same 
time it receives the designation, the agency will deem the designation 
insufficient under this subpart and reject the submission.


<R05>
Sec. 551.49  May a foreign manufacturer replace its agent?

    (a) Yes, a foreign manufacturer may replace its agent in the same 
way it originally designated the agent. It must submit designation 
documents that meet the form and content requirements identified in the 
following section of this subpart. Until NHTSA receives designation 
documents meeting those requirements or a letter withdrawing an existing 
designation, the individual or domestic corporation originally 
designated will continue to serve as its agent for service of process.
    (b) A foreign manufacturer that has withdrawn but not replaced its 
agent may not continue to import motor vehicles or motor vehicle 
equipment into the United States. In order to do so, it must appoint a 
new agent in accordance with the requirements of this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 551.50  May more than one foreign manufacturer designate the same person 

as agent?

    Yes, any number of foreign manufacturers separately may designate 
the same person as agent.


<R05>
Sec. 551.51  May an agent assign performance of its functions to another 

individual or entity?

    No, an agent may not assign performance of its functions.


<R05>
Sec. 551.52  How long will a foreign manufacturer's designation of agent 

remain in effect?

    (a) A designation of agent remains in effect until replaced or 
withdrawn by a foreign manufacturer.
    (b) A foreign manufacturer that has withdrawn but not replaced its 
agent may not continue to import motor vehicles or motor vehicle 
equipment into the United States. In order to do so, it must appoint a 
new agent in accordance with the requirements of this subpart.

                    Form and Contents of Designation


<R05>
Sec. 551.53  What is the required format for a designation?

    (a) All documents submitted under this subpart must be:
    (1) Original documents;
    (2) Written in English; and
    (3) Signed in ink.
    (b) For each signature, the document must indicate in English:
    (1) The date of signature; and
    (2) The name and title of the individual who signed the document.
    (c) As long as documents submitted by a foreign manufacturer and its 
agent contain all required information (identified in Sec. Sec. 551.54, 
551.55 and 551.56 below), there is no mandatory format for the 
designation
    (d) NHTSA encourages foreign manufacturers to use the suggested 
designation form set forth in the appendix to this subpart. If completed 
and executed properly by both a foreign manufacturer and its agent, this 
form will comply fully with the requirements of Sec. Sec. 551.53 
through 551.65.

[[Page 193]]


<R05>
Sec. 551.54  What are the required contents for a designation?

    The suggested designation form set forth in the Appendix, if 
completed and signed properly by a foreign manufacturer and its agent, 
contains all of the information necessary to create a valid designation 
under this subpart. Specifically, a valid designation must contain:
    (a) A Designation by Foreign Manufacturer; and
    (b) An Acceptance by Agent.


<R05>
Sec. 551.55  What information must a Designation by Foreign Manufacturer 

contain?

    A Designation by Foreign Manufacturer must contain:
    (a) A statement that the designation is in valid form and binding on 
the foreign manufacturer under the laws, corporate bylaws or other 
requirements governing the making of designations at the place and time 
where it is made;
    (b) The full legal name, principal place of business and mailing 
address of the foreign manufacturer;
    (c) All trade or brand names, marks, logos or other designations of 
origin under which the foreign manufacturer's products will be sold; and
    (d) The signature in ink, and the name and title of the official or 
employee signing the designation on behalf of the foreign manufacturer, 
who must have authority to appoint an agent.


<R05>
Sec. 551.56  What information must an Acceptance by Agent contain?

    An Acceptance by Agent must contain:
    (a) The full legal name, mailing address and telephone number of the 
agent;
    (b) A statement that the agent accepts the designation and 
understands that (s)he may not assign performance of the agent's 
functions under the designation to another person or entity, and that 
the designation shall remain in effect until it is withdrawn or replaced 
by the foreign manufacturer;
    (c) The signature in ink of the agent, or an official or employee of 
the domestic firm or corporation serving as the agent, who must 
authority to sign for the firm or corporation; and
    (d) The name and title of the individual signing the acceptance.


<R05>
Sec. 551.57  Who may sign the Designation by Foreign Manufacturer?

    Only an official or employee of the foreign manufacturer with 
authority to appoint an agent may sign the Designation by Foreign 
Manufacturer.


<R05>
Sec. 551.58  Who may sign the Acceptance by Agent?

    Only the agent, in the case of an individual, or an official or 
employee, in the case of a domestic firm or corporation serving as the 
agent with authority to sign for that firm of corporation, may sign the 
Acceptance of Agent.


<R05>
Sec. 551.59  May the same individual sign both the Designation by Foreign 

Manufacturer and Acceptance by Agent?

    (a) Generally no; the Designation by Manufacturer must be signed by 
an official or employee of the foreign manufacturer and the Acceptance 
by Agent must be signed by the foreign manufacturer's agent, in the case 
of an individual, or by an official or employee, in the case of a 
domestic firm or corporation serving as its agent.
    (b) Occasionally an official of a foreign manufacturer also serves 
as an official of a domestic firm or corporation or is a permanent 
resident of the United States. In such cases, the official may serve as 
agent and sign the designation documents both on behalf of the foreign 
manufacturer and as agent. However, the foreign manufacturer must submit 
to NHTSA, along with the designation documents, a letter explaining that 
the individual signing the designation is both an official of the 
foreign manufacturer with authority to appoint an agent and a permanent 
resident of the United States or official of a domestic firm or 
corporation. If NHTSA does not receive an explanatory letter at the same 
time it receives the designation, the agency will deem the designation 
insufficient under this subpart and reject the submission.

[[Page 194]]


<R05>
Sec. 551.60  When must the Designation by Foreign Manufacturer be signed?

    (a) The foreign manufacturer must sign the Designation by Foreign 
Manufacturer on or before the date that the agent signs the Acceptance 
by Agent. It is not possible for an individual or entity to accept a 
designation as agent until on or after the date on which a foreign 
manufacturer makes the designation.
    (b) If the Designation by Foreign Manufacturer is dated after the 
Acceptance by Agent, NHTSA will deem the designation insufficient under 
this subpart and reject the submission.


<R05>
Sec. 551.61  When must the Acceptance by Agent be signed?

    (a) The agent, in the case of an individual, or an employee or 
official, in the case of a domestic firm or corporation serving as 
agent, must sign the Acceptance by Agent on or after the date that the 
manufacturer signs the Designation by Foreign Manufacturer. It is not 
possible for an individual or entity to accept a designation as agent 
until on or after the date on which the foreign manufacturer makes the 
designation.
    (b) If the Acceptance by Agent is dated before the Designation by 
Foreign Manufacturer, NHTSA will deem the designation insufficient under 
this subpart and reject the submission.


<R05>
Sec. 551.62  Where should a foreign manufacturer mail the designation?

    Foreign manufacturers must mail their designations to the Office of 
the Executive Secretariat, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, Room 5221, 400 Seventh Street, SW, Washington, DC 20590. 
No other NHTSA office is authorized to accept designation documents. To 
avoid delays, the agency suggests using express mail services.


<R05>
Sec. 551.63  May a foreign manufacturer submit a designation by email or 

facsimile?

    No, the statute requires designation documents submitted by foreign 
manufacturers to contain original ink signatures. NHTSA will reject 
designation documents submitted via email or facsimile, as they do not 
satisfy this requirement.


<R05>
Sec. 551.64  What if designation documents submitted by a foreign manufacturer 

do not comply with this subpart?

    Designations of agent are binding on the foreign manufacturer even 
when their form and contents do not comply with this subpart, unless 
rejected by the agency.


<R05>
Sec. 551.65  What if a foreign manufacturer changes its name, address or 

product names or marks?

    (a) A foreign manufacturer must provide written notice to NHTSA of 
any changes in its name, address or marks, trade names, or other 
designations of origin appearing on its products.
    (b) Foreign manufacturers should mail notices to the Office of the 
Executive Secretariat, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
Room 5221, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. To avoid 
delays, the agency suggests using express mail services.

                      Method of Service of Process


<R05>
Sec. 551.66  What is the legal effect of service of process on an agent?

    Service on an agent of administrative or judicial notices or process 
is deemed to be service on a manufacturer.


<R05>
Sec. 551.67  Where and how may an agent be served?

    An agent may be served at the agent's office or usual place of 
residence, by registered or certified mail addressed to the agent with 
return receipt requested, or by any other manner authorized by law.


<R05>
Sec. 551.68  What if an agent cannot be served?

    If an agent cannot be served because the agent cannot be located, 
has ceased to exist or does not receive correctly addressed mail, 
service may be made by posting the notice or process in the Office of 
the Secretary of Transportation.

[[Page 195]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AU05.043


[[Page 196]]




<R03>
PART 552_PETITIONS FOR RULEMAKING, DEFECT, AND NONCOMPLIANCE ORDERS--Table of 

Contents



                            Subpart A_General

Sec.
552.1 Scope.
552.2 Purpose.
552.3 General.
552.4 Requirements for petition.
552.5 Improperly filed petitions.
552.6 Technical review.
552.7 Public meeting.
552.8 Notification of agency action on the petition.
552.9 Grant of petition.
552.10 Denial of petition.

   Subpart B_Petitions for Expedited Rulemaking To Establish Dynamic 
 Automatic Suppression System Test Procedures for Federal Motor Vehicle 
           Safety Standard No. 208, Occupant Crash Protection

552.11 Application.
552.12 Definitions.
552.13 Form of petition.
552.14 Content of petition.
552.15 Processing of petition.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 30111, 30118, 30162; delegation of authority at 
49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 40 FR 42014, Sept. 10, 1975, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                            Subpart A_General


<R05>
Sec. 552.1  Scope.

    This part establishes procedures for the submission and disposition 
of petitions filed by interested persons pursuant to 49 U.S.C. Chapters 
301, 305, 321, 323, 325, 327, 329 and 331 to initiate rulemaking or to 
make a decision that a motor vehicle or item of replacement equipment 
does not comply with an applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standard 
or contains a defect which relates to motor vehicle safety.

[60 FR 17267, Apr. 5, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 552.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to enable the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration to identify and respond on a timely basis to 
petitions for rulemaking or defect or noncompliance decisions, and to 
inform the public of the procedures following in response to such 
petitions.

[60 FR 17267, Apr. 5, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 552.3  General.

    Any interested person may file with the Administrator a petition 
requesting him:
    (a) To commence a proceeding respecting the issuance, amendment or 
revocation of a motor vehicle safety standard, or
    (b) To commence a proceeding to decide whether to issue an order 
concerning the notification and remedy of a failure of a motor vehicle 
or item of replacement equipment to comply with an applicable motor 
vehicle safety standard or a defect in such vehicle or equipment that 
relates to motor vehicle safety.

[60 FR 17267, Apr. 5, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 552.4  Requirements for petition.

    A petition filed under this part should be addressed and submitted 
to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 
Seventh Street, S.W., Washington, DC 20590. Each petition filed under 
this part must:
    (a) Be written in the English language;
    (b) Have, preceding its text, a heading that includes the word 
``Petition'';
    (c) Set forth facts which it is claimed establish that an order is 
necessary;
    (d) Set forth a brief description of the substance of the order 
which it is claimed should be issued; and
    (e) Contain the name and address of the petitioner.


<R05>
Sec. 552.5  Improperly filed petitions.

    (a) A petition that is not addressed as specified in Sec. 552.4, 
but that meets the other requirements of that section, will be treated 
as a properly filed petition, received as of the time it is discovered 
and identified.
    (b) A document that fails to conform to one or more of the 
requirements of Sec. 552.4(a) through (e) will not be treated as a 
petition under this part. Such a document will be treated according to 
the existing correspondence or other appropriate procedures of the 
NHTSA, and any suggestions contained in it

[[Page 197]]

will be considered at the discretion of the Administrator or his 
delegate.


<R05>
Sec. 552.6  Technical review.

    The appropriate Associate Administrator conducts a technical review 
of the petition. The technical review may consist of an analysis of the 
material submitted, together with information already in the possession 
of the agency. It may also include the collection of additional 
information, or a public meeting in accordance with Sec. 552.7.

[60 FR 17267, Apr. 5, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 552.7  Public meeting.

    If the Associate Administrator decides that a public meeting on the 
subject of the petition would contribute to the determination whether to 
commence a proceeding, he issues a notice of public meeting for 
publication in the Federal Register to advise interested persons of the 
time, place, and subject matter of the public meeting and invite their 
participation. Interested persons may submit their views and evidence 
through oral or written presentations, or both. There is no cross 
examination of witnesses. A transcript of the meeting is kept and 
exhibits may be accepted as part of the transcript. Sections 556 and 557 
of title 5, U.S.C., do not apply to meetings held under this part. The 
Chief Counsel designates a member of his staff to serve as legal officer 
at the meeting.


<R05>
Sec. 552.8  Notification of agency action on the petition.

    After considering the technical review conducted under Sec. 552.6, 
and taking into account appropriate factors, which may include, among 
others, allocation of agency resources, agency priorities and the 
likelihood of success in litigation which might arise from the order, 
the Administrator will grant or deny the petition. NHTSA will notify the 
petitioner of the decision to grant or deny the petition within 120 days 
after its receipt of the petition.

[60 FR 17267, Apr. 5, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 552.9  Grant of petition.

    (a) If a petition for rulemaking with respect to a motor vehicle 
safety standard is granted, a rulemaking proceeding is promptly 
commenced in accordance with applicable NHTSA and statutory procedures. 
The granting of such a petition and the commencement of a rulemaking 
proceeding does not signify, however, that the rule in question will be 
issued. A decision as to the issuance of the rule is made on the basis 
of all available information developed in the course of the rulemaking 
proceeding, in accordance with statutory criteria.
    (b) If a petition with respect to a noncompliance or a defect is 
granted, a proceeding to determine the existence of the noncompliance or 
defect is promptly commenced by the initiation of an investigation by 
the Office of Standards Enforcement or the Office of Defects 
Investigation, as appropriate.


<R05>
Sec. 552.10  Denial of petition.

    If a petition is denied, a Federal Register notice of the denial is 
issued within 45 days of the denial, setting forth the reasons for 
denial of the petition.


<R04>
   Subpart B_Petitions for Expedited Rulemaking To Establish Dynamic 

 Automatic Suppression System Test Procedures for Federal Motor Vehicle 

           Safety Standard No. 208, Occupant Crash Protection

    Source: 65 FR 30744, May 12, 2000, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 552.11  Application.

    This subpart establishes procedures for the submission and 
disposition of petitions filed by interested parties to initiate 
rulemaking to add a test procedure to 49 CFR 571.208, S28.


<R05>
Sec. 552.12  Definitions.

    For purposes of this subpart, the following definitions apply:
    (a) Dynamic automatic suppression system (DASS) means a portion of 
an air bag system that automatically controls whether or not the air bag 
deploys during a crash by:
    (1) Sensing the location of an occupant, moving or still, in 
relation to the air bag;

[[Page 198]]

    (2) Interpreting the occupant characteristics and location 
information to determine whether or not the air bag should deploy; and
    (3) Activating or suppressing the air bag system based on the 
interpretation of characteristics and occupant location information.
    (b) Automatic suppression zone (ASZ) means a three-dimensional zone 
adjacent to the air bag cover, specified by the vehicle manufacturer, 
where air bag deployment will be suppressed by the DASS if a vehicle 
occupant enters the zone under specified conditions.
    (c) Standard No. 208 means 49 CFR 571.208.


<R05>
Sec. 552.13  Form of petition.

    Each petition filed under this subpart shall--
    (a) Be submitted to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh Street, S.W., Washington, DC 20590.
    (b) Be written in the English language.
    (c) State the name and address of the petitioner.
    (d) Set forth in full the data, views and arguments of the 
petitioner supporting the requested test procedure, including all of the 
content information specified by Sec. 552.14. Any documents 
incorporated by reference in the procedure shall be submitted with the 
petition.
    (e) Specify and segregate any part of the information and data 
submitted that the petitioner wishes to have withheld from public 
disclosure in accordance with part 512 of this chapter including, if 
requested, the name and address of the petitioner.
    (f) Not request confidential treatment for the requested test 
procedure and, to the extent confidential treatment is requested 
concerning a particular DASS or data and analysis submitted in support 
of the petition, provide a general non-confidential description of the 
operation of the DASS and of the data and analysis supporting the 
petition.
    (g) Set forth a requested effective date and be submitted at least 
nine months before that date.


<R05>
Sec. 552.14  Content of petition.

    The petitioner shall provide the following information:
    (a) A set of proposed test procedures for S28.1, S28.2, S28.3, and 
S28.4 of Standard No. 208 which the petitioner believes are appropriate 
for assessing a particular DASS.
    (1) For S28.1 of Standard No. 208, the petitioner shall specify at 
least one specific position for the Part 572, subpart O 5th percentile 
female dummy that is:
    (i) Outside but adjacent to the ASZ, and
    (ii) Representative of an unbelted occupant position that is likely 
to occur during a frontal crash.
    (2) For S28.2 of Standard No. 208, the petitioner shall specify at 
least one specific position for the Part 572 Subpart P 3-year-old child 
dummy and at least one specific position for the Part 572 Subpart N 6-
year-old child dummy that are:
    (i) Outside but adjacent to the ASZ, and
    (ii) Representative of unbelted occupant positions that are likely 
to occur during a frontal crash where pre-crash braking occurs.
    (3) For S28.3 of Standard No. 208, the petitioner shall specify a 
procedure which tests the operation of the DASS by moving a test device 
toward the driver air bag in a manner that simulates the motion of an 
unbelted occupant during pre-crash braking or other pre-crash maneuver. 
The petitioner shall include a complete description, including drawings 
and instrumentation, of the test device employed in the proposed test. 
The petitioner shall include in the procedure a means for determining 
whether the driver air bag was suppressed before any portion of the 
specified test device entered the ASZ during the test. The procedure 
shall also include a means of determining when the specified test device 
occupies the ASZ.
    (4) For S28.4 of Standard No. 208, the petitioner shall specify a 
procedure which tests the operation of the DASS by moving a test device 
toward the passenger air bag in a manner that simulates the motion of an 
unbelted occupant during pre-crash braking or

[[Page 199]]

other pre-crash maneuver. The petitioner shall include a complete 
description, including drawings and instrumentation, of the test device 
employed in the proposed test. The petitioner shall include in the 
procedure a means for determining whether the passenger air bag was 
suppressed before any portion of the specified test device entered the 
ASZ during the test. The procedure shall also include a means of 
determining when the specified test device occupies the ASZ.
    (b) A complete description and explanation of the particular DASS 
that the petitioner believes will be appropriately assessed by the 
recommended test procedures. This shall include:
    (1) A description of the logic used by the DASS in determining 
whether to suppress the air bag or allow it to deploy. Such description 
shall include flow charts or similar materials outlining the operation 
of the system logic, the system reaction time, the time duration used to 
evaluate whether the air bag should be suppressed or deployed, changes, 
if any, in system performance based on the size of an occupant and 
vehicle speed, and a description of the size and shape of the zone where 
under similar circumstances and conditions the DASS may either allow or 
suppress deployment. Such description shall also address whether and how 
the DASS discriminates between an occupant's torso or head entering the 
ASZ as compared to an occupant's hand or arm, and whether and how the 
DASS discriminates between an occupant entering the ASZ and an inanimate 
object such as a newspaper or ball entering the ASZ.
    (2) Detailed specifications for the size and shape of the ASZ, 
including whether the suppression zone is designed to change size or 
shape depending on the vehicle speed, occupant size, or other factors.
    (c) Analysis and data supporting the appropriateness, repeatability, 
reproducibility and practicability of each of the proposed test 
procedures.
    (1) For the procedures proposed for inclusion in S28.1 and S28.2 of 
Standard No. 208, the petitioner shall provide the basis for the 
proposed dummy positions, including but not limited to, why the 
positions are representative of what is likely to occur in real world 
crashes.
    (2) For the procedures proposed for inclusion in S28.3 and S28.4 of 
Standard No. 208, the petitioner shall provide:
    (i) A complete explanation of the means used in the proposed test to 
ascertain whether the air bag is suppressed or activated during the 
test.
    (ii) A complete description of the means used to evaluate the 
ability of the DASS to detect and respond to an occupant moving toward 
an air bag, including the method used to move a test device toward an 
air bag at speeds representative of occupant movement during pre-crash 
braking or other pre-crash maneuver.
    (iii) The procedure used for locating the test device inside a test 
vehicle in preparation for testing, including an accounting of the 
reference points used to specify such location.
    (iv) An explanation of the methods used to measure the amount of 
time needed by a suppression system to suppress an air bag once a 
suppression triggering event occurs.
    (v) High speed film or video of at least two tests of the DASS using 
the proposed test procedure.
    (vi) Data generated from not less than two tests of the DASS using 
the proposed test procedure, including an account of the data streams 
monitored during testing and complete samples of these data streams from 
not less than two tests performed under the proposed procedure.
    (d) Analysis concerning the variety of potential DASS designs for 
which the requested test procedure is appropriate; e.g., whether the 
test procedures are appropriate only for the specific DASS design 
contemplated by the petitioner, for all DASS designs incorporating the 
same technologies, or for all DASS designs.


<R05>
Sec. 552.15  Processing of petition.

    (a) NHTSA will process any petition that contains the information 
specified by this subpart. If a petition fails to provide any of the 
information, NHTSA will not process the petition but will advise the 
petitioner of the information that shall be provided if the agency is to 
process the petition. The agency will seek to notify the petitioner of

[[Page 200]]

any such deficiency within 30 days after receipt of the petition.
    (b) At any time during the agency's consideration of a petition 
submitted under this part, the Administrator may request the petitioner 
to provide additional supporting information and data and/or provide a 
demonstration of any of the requested test procedures. The agency will 
seek to make any such request within 60 days after receipt of the 
petition. Such demonstration may be at either an agency designated 
facility or one chosen by the petitioner, provided that, in either case, 
the facility shall be located in North America. If such a request is not 
honored to the satisfaction of the agency, the petition will not receive 
further consideration until the requested information is submitted.
    (c) The agency will publish in the Federal Register either a Notice 
of Proposed Rulemaking proposing adoption of the requested test 
procedures, possibly with changes and/or additions, or a notice denying 
the petition. The agency will seek to issue either notice within 120 
days after receipt of a complete petition. However, this time period may 
be extended by any time period during which the agency is awaiting 
additional information it requests from the petitioner or is awaiting a 
requested demonstration. The agency contemplates a 30 to 60 day comment 
period for any Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, and will endeavor to issue 
a final rule within 60 days thereafter.


<R03>
PART 553_RULEMAKING PROCEDURES--Table of Contents



                            Subpart A_General

Sec.
553.1 Applicability.
553.3 Definitions.
553.5 Regulatory docket.
553.7 Records.

               Subpart B_Procedures for Adoption of Rules

553.11 Initiation of rulemaking.
553.13 Notice of proposed rulemaking.
553.15 Contents of notices of proposed rulemaking.
553.17 Participation of interested persons.
553.19 Petitions for extension of time to comment.
553.21 Contents of written comments.
553.23 Consideration of comments received.
553.25 Additional rulemaking proceedings.
553.27 Hearings.
553.29 Adoption of final rules.
553.31-553.33 [Reserved]
553.35 Petitions for reconsideration.
553.37 Proceedings on petitions for reconsideration.
553.39 Effect of petition for reconsideration on time for seeking 
          judicial review.

Appendix A to Part 553--Statement of Policy: Action on Petitions for 
          Reconsideration
Appendix B to Part 553--Statement of Policy: Rulemakings Involving the 
          Assessment of the Functional Equivalence of Safety Standards
Appendix C to Part 553--Statement of Policy: Implementation of the 
          United Nations/Economic Commission for Europe (UN/ECE) 1998 
          Agreement on Global Technical Regulations--Agency Policy Goals 
          and Public Participation

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 1657, 30103, 30122, 30124, 30125, 30127, 
30146, 30162, 32303, 32502, 32504, 32505, 32705, 32901, 32902, 33102, 
33103, and 33107; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 60 FR 62222, Dec. 5, 1995, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                            Subpart A_General


<R05>
Sec. 553.1  Applicability.

    This part prescribes rulemaking procedures that apply to the 
issuance, amendment, and revocation of rules pursuant to Title 49, 
Subtitle VI of the United States Code (49 U.S.C. 30101, et seq.).


<R05>
Sec. 553.3  Definitions.

    Administrator means the Administrator of the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration or a person to whom he has delegated final 
authority in the matter concerned.
    Rule includes any order, regulation, or Federal motor vehicle safety 
standard issued under Title 49.
    Title 49 means 49 U.S.C. 30101, et seq.


<R05>
Sec. 553.5  Regulatory docket.

    (a) Information and data deemed relevant by the Administrator 
relating to rulemaking actions, including notices of proposed 
rulemaking; comments received in response to notices; petitions for 
rulemaking and reconsideration; denials of petitions for rulemaking and

[[Page 201]]

reconsideration; records of additional rulemaking proceedings under 
Sec. 553.25; and final rules are maintained in the Docket Room, 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., 
Washington, DC 20590.
    (b) Any person may examine any docketed material at the Docket Room 
at any time during regular business hours after the docket is 
established, except material ordered withheld from the public under 
applicable provisions of Title 49 and section 552(b) of title 5 of the 
U.S.C., and may obtain a copy of it upon payment of a fee.


<R05>
Sec. 553.7  Records.

    Records of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
relating to rulemaking proceedings are available for inspection as 
provided in section 552(b) of title 5 of the U.S.C. and part 7 of the 
regulations of the Secretary of Transportation (part 7 of this title).


<R04>
               Subpart B_Procedures for Adoption of Rules


<R05>
Sec. 553.11  Initiation of rulemaking.

    The Administrator may initiate rulemaking either on his own motion 
or on petition by any interested person after a determination in 
accordance with Part 552 of this title that grant of the petition is 
advisable. The Administrator may, in his discretion, also consider the 
recommendations of other agencies of the United States.


<R05>
Sec. 553.13  Notice of proposed rulemaking.

    Unless the Administrator, for good cause, finds that notice is 
impracticable, unnecessary, or contrary to the public interest, and 
incorporates that finding and a brief statement of the reasons for it in 
the rule, a notice of proposed rulemaking is issued and interested 
persons are invited to participate in the rulemaking proceedings under 
applicable provisions of Title 49.


<R05>
Sec. 553.15  Contents of notices of proposed rulemaking.

    (a) Each notice of proposed rulemaking is published in the Federal 
Register, unless all persons subject to it are named and are personally 
served with a copy of it.
    (b) Each notice, whether published in the Federal Register or 
personally served, includes
    (1) A statement of the time, place, and nature of the proposed 
rulemaking proceeding;
    (2) A reference to the authority under which it is issued;
    (3) A description of the subjects and issues involved or the 
substance and terms of the proposed rule;
    (4) A statement of the time within which written comments must be 
submitted; and
    (5) A statement of how and to what extent interested persons may 
participate in the proceedings.


<R05>
Sec. 553.17  Participation of interested persons.

    (a) Any interested person may participate in rulemaking proceeding 
by submitting comments in writing containing information, views or 
arguments.
    (b) In his discretion, the Administrator may invite any interested 
person to participate in the rulemaking procedures described in Sec. 
553.25.


<R05>
Sec. 553.19  Petitions for extension of time to comment.

    A petition for extension of the time to submit comments must be 
received not later than 15 days before expiration of the time stated in 
the notice. The petitions must be submitted to: Administrator, National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, U.S. Department of 
Transportation, 400 Seventh Street SW, Washington, DC, 20590. It is 
requested, but not required, that 10 copies be submitted. The filing of 
the petition does not automatically extend the time for petitioner's 
comments. Such a petition is granted only if the petitioner shows good 
cause for the extension, and if the extension is consistent with the 
public interest. If an extension is granted, it is granted to all 
persons, and it is published in the Federal Register.


<R05>
Sec. 553.21  Contents of written comments.

    All written comments shall be in English. Unless otherwise specified 
in a

[[Page 202]]

notice requesting comments, comments may not exceed 15 pages in length, 
but necessary attachments may be appended to the submission without 
regard to the 15-page limit. Any interested person shall submit as a 
part of his written comments all material that he considers relevant to 
any statement of fact made by him. Incorporation by reference should be 
avoided. However, if incorporation by reference is necessary, the 
incorporated material shall be identified with respect to document and 
page. It is requested, but not required, that 10 copies and attachments, 
if any, be submitted.


<R05>
Sec. 553.23  Consideration of comments received.

    All timely comments are considered before final action is taken on a 
rulemaking proposal. Late filed comments may be considered as far as 
practicable.


<R05>
Sec. 553.25  Additional rulemaking proceedings.

    The Administrator may initiate any further rulemaking proceedings 
that he finds necessary or desirable. For example, interested persons 
may be invited to make oral arguments, to participate in conferences 
between the Administrator or his representative and interested persons 
at which minutes of the conference are kept, to appear at informal 
hearings presided over by officials designated by the Administrator, at 
which a transcript or minutes are kept, or participate in any other 
proceeding to assure informed administrative action and to protect the 
public interest.


<R05>
Sec. 553.27  Hearings.

    (a) Sections 556 and 557 of title 5, United States Code, do not 
apply to hearings held under this part. Unless otherwise specified, 
hearings held under this part are informal, nonadversary, fact-finding 
proceedings, at which there are no formal pleadings or adverse parties. 
Any rule issued in a case in which an informal hearing is held is not 
necessarily based exclusively on the record of the hearing.
    (b) The Administrator designates a representative to conduct any 
hearing held under this part. The Chief Counsel designates a member of 
his staff to serve as legal officer at the hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 553.29  Adoption of final rules.

    Final rules are prepared by representatives of the office concerned 
and the Office of the Chief Counsel. The rule is then submitted to the 
Administrator for its consideration. If the Administrator adopts the 
rule, it is published in the Federal Register, unless all persons 
subject to it are named and are personally served with a copy of it.


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 553.31-553.33  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 553.35  Petitions for reconsideration.

    (a) Any interested person may petition the Administrator for 
reconsideration of any rule issued under this part. The petition shall 
be submitted to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW, Washington, DC, 20590. It is 
requested, but not required, that 10 copies be submitted. The petition 
must be received not later than 45 days after publication of the rule in 
the Federal Register. Petitions filed after that time will be considered 
as petitions filed under Part 552 of this chapter. The petition must 
contain a brief statement of the complaint and an explanation as to why 
compliance with the rule is not practicable, is unreasonable, or is not 
in the public interest. Unless otherwise specified in the final rule, 
the statement and explanation together may not exceed 15 pages in 
length, but necessary attachments may be appended to the submission 
without regard to the 15-page limit.
    (b) If the petitioner requests the consideration of additional 
facts, he must state the reason they were not presented to the 
Administrator within the prescribed time.
    (c) The Administrator does not consider repetitious petitions.
    (d) Unless the Administrator otherwise provides, the filing of a 
petition under this section does not stay the effectiveness of the rule.


<R05>
Sec. 553.37  Proceedings on petitions for reconsideration.

    The Administrator may grant or deny, in whole or in part, any 
petition

[[Page 203]]

for reconsideration without further proceedings. In the event he 
determines to reconsider any rule, he may issue a final decision on 
reconsideration without further proceedings, or he may provide such 
opportunity to submit comment or information and data as he deems 
appropriate. Whenever the Administrator determines that a petition 
should be granted or denied, he prepares a notice of the grant or denial 
of a petition for reconsideration, for issuance to the petitioner, and 
issues it to the petitioner. The Administrator may consolidate petitions 
relating to the same rule.


<R05>
Sec. 553.39  Effect of petition for reconsideration on time for seeking 

judicial review.

    The filing of a timely petition for reconsideration of any rule 
issued under this part postpones the expiration of the statutory period 
in which to seek judicial review of that rule only as to the petitioner, 
and not as to other interested persons. For the petitioner, the period 
for seeking judicial review will commence at the time the agency takes 
final action upon the petition for reconsideration.

[60 FR 63651, Dec. 12, 1995]


<R05>
 Sec. Appendix A to Part 553--Statement of Policy: Action on Petitions 

                           for Reconsideration

    It is the policy of the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration to issue notice of the action taken on a petition for 
reconsideration within 90 days after the closing date for receipt of 
such petitions, unless it is found impracticable to take action within 
that time. In cases where it is so found and the delay beyond that 
period is expected to be substantial, notice of that fact, and the date 
by which it is expected that action will be taken, will be published in 
the Federal Register.


<R05>
Sec. Appendix B to Part 553--Statement of Policy: Rulemakings Involving 

    the Assessment of the Functional Equivalence of Safety Standards

    (a) Based on a comparison of the performance of vehicles or 
equipment, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) 
may tentatively determine that a foreign motor vehicle safety standard 
is better than or at least functionally equivalent to a Federal Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standard (FMVSS), either on its own motion or in 
connection with a petition for rulemaking by any interested party under 
49 CFR Part 552. Such determinations will be made in accordance with the 
process described in the flowchart in Figure 1 of this Appendix.
    (b) Under the process, if NHTSA decides that there is reason to 
believe that a foreign standard is better than or at least functionally 
equivalent to a FMVSS in accordance with the process, it will commence a 
rulemaking proceeding that may lead to the issuance of a proposal to add 
the foreign standard as an alternative compliance option to the FMVSS, 
to harmonize the FMVSS with the foreign standard or to upgrade the FMVSS 
to the level of the foreign standard, as appropriate. Such a proposal 
will request comment on the agency's tentative determination regarding 
relative benefits and functional equivalence as well as the proposed 
amendment. Final determinations regarding these matters will also be 
made in accordance with the analytical criteria in the flowchart.
    (c) As used in this appendix, the term ``standard'' refers to 
mandatory requirements and thus has the same meaning given the term 
``technical regulation'' in Annex 1 to the World Trade Organization 
Technical Barriers to Trade Agreement.

[[Page 204]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13MY98.017


[[Page 205]]



                        Explanation of Flowchart

                            A. Ultimate Goal

    The ultimate goal in comparing standards is to assess the real world 
safety performance of the covered vehicles or equipment. Particularly in 
the case of crashworthiness standards, the most reliable basis for 
making that assessment is fatality and injury data directly drawn from 
actual crashes. Accordingly, NHTSA will make appropriate efforts to 
ensure the availability of such data regarding crashes in the U.S.

                          B. Guiding Principles

                             Best Practices

    NHTSA pursues a ``best practices'' policy in comparing U.S. and 
foreign safety standards, i.e., NHTSA will propose to upgrade its 
standards if it tentatively concludes that a Country B standard offers 
greater benefits than the counterpart FMVSS, and if upgrading appears 
appropriate, considering the incremental costs and benefits and 
applicable statutory criteria. (For a discussion of another type of 
rulemaking proposal that may be considered in these circumstances, see 
the paragraph below on comparisons that indicate that a foreign 
standard's safety benefits are greater than those of the counterpart 
FMVSS.)

                              Conservatism

    1. NHTSA places priority on preserving the safety benefits of the 
FMVSSs.
    2. NHTSA can best preserve those benefits by being conservative in 
reaching any conclusion that a Country B standard is better than or at 
least functionally equivalent to the counterpart FMVSS. One reason for 
conservatism is that differences from vehicle model to vehicle model and 
manufacturer to manufacturer in margins of compliance may confound 
efforts to assess the relative benefits of two standards. Further, there 
may be circumstantial differences, such as special environmental 
conditions, driver demographics, driver behavior, occupant behavior 
(e.g., level of safety belt use), road conditions, size distribution of 
vehicle fleet (e.g., proportion of big versus small vehicles and 
disparity between extremes), that could influence real world safety 
benefits. These differences may result in a particular standard having a 
safety record in a foreign country that would not necessarily be 
repeated in the United States.

                         Best Available Evidence

    1. NHTSA will base its comparison of standards on the best available 
evidence. If available, estimates of real world safety benefits based on 
fatality and injury data directly drawn from actual crashes are the best 
evidence. If such data are not available, then estimates based on other 
information, such as compliance test data, may be used, although 
increased caution needs to be exercised in making judgment based on 
those estimates. If sufficient crash data regarding real world safety 
benefits are available, and a comparison of those benefits shows that 
the Country B standard is less beneficial than the counterpart Federal 
Motor Vehicle Safety Standard (FMVSS), NHTSA would avoid wasting 
resources making comparisons on the basis of less probative types of 
evidence.
    2. The types of benefits examined in comparing two standards might 
differ depending on whether the standards are crash avoidance standards 
or crashworthiness standards. Translating differences in performance (an 
input measure) into numbers of crashes or numbers of deaths and injuries 
(output measures) is more difficult in the case of crash avoidance 
standards. As a result, while the relative benefits of two 
crashworthiness standards would typically be assessed in terms of their 
impacts on deaths and injuries in crashes, the relative merits of two 
different crash avoidance standards might well be assessed in terms of 
their impact on vehicle or equipment performance.

                         Sufficiency of Evidence

    1. Many types of data are available for a comparison of two 
standards. Often there is an abundance of one type of data and little or 
no data from other sources. If insufficient data are available, and such 
data either cannot be generated through engineering analysis (e.g., real 
world safety benefits estimates), or conducting additional research and 
development is not cost effective, then NHTSA will stop consideration of 
such data and consider the other available data instead.
    2. The essentially horizontal, left-to-right path through the 
flowchart is intended to illustrate the sources of data that will be 
considered and provide a rough idea of the priority they will receive. 
Each step branches independently to the tentative determination of 
relative benefits and functional equivalency by its ``yes'' path. This 
may seem to preclude later steps once any ``yes'' path is encountered. 
In practice, however, all data sources will be considered to the extent 
that they are available before a final determination regarding these 
matters is made.

                               Reciprocity

    1. NHTSA will take steps to encourage reciprocity by other countries 
in the making of functional equivalence determinations.
    2. When NHTSA's comparison of standards indicates that one of the 
FMVSSs has benefits equal to or greater than the counterpart Country B 
standard, NHTSA may forward the results of that comparison to Country B

[[Page 206]]

and request that consideration be given by Country B to determining that 
the FMVSS is better than or at least functionally equivalent to the 
counterpart Country B standard, and to subsequently amending its 
standard accordingly.

             C. Agency Decisions in Which Flowchart Is Used

    This flowchart guides agency decisions in connection with a 
rulemaking proceeding that involves the issue of relative benefits and 
functional equivalence.
    1. Decision whether to grant a rulemaking petition. If the agency 
receives a petition for rulemaking based on a claim that one of Country 
B's standards is better than or at least functionally equivalent to one 
of the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (FMVSSs), the agency will 
consider the merits of the petition in accordance with 49 CFR Part 552, 
Petitions for rulemaking, defect, and noncompliance orders, and with the 
functional equivalence process set forth in the flowchart. If it appears 
that there is reason to believe that Country B's standard provides 
safety benefits are greater than or at least equal to those of the 
FMVSS, the agency will likely grant the petition and commence a 
rulemaking proceeding.
    The agency emphasizes that its priority with respect to 
international harmonization is identifying and adopting those foreign 
safety standards that represent best practices. Accordingly, if resource 
limitations make it necessary to choose between competing petitions in 
granting or processing them, the agency would give priority to petitions 
asking the agency to upgrade one of its standards to the level of a 
superior foreign standard over petitions simply asking the agency to add 
a compliance alternative.
    2. Decision whether to issue a notice of proposed rulemaking. If 
NHTSA grants the petition, it will proceed, as in any other rulemaking 
regarding the FMVSSs, to determine whether amending an FMVSS would be 
appropriate under the applicable statutory criteria in chapter 301 of 
title 49, U.S.C. Following the process set forth in the flowchart, the 
agency will use data submitted by the petitioner, supplemented by data 
from other sources, to compare performance and tentatively determine 
whether Country B's standard specified in the petition is better than or 
at least functionally equivalent to the FMVSS specified in the petition.
    This comparison could have a variety of possible outcomes:
    a. The comparison may indicate that the foreign standard's safety 
benefits are less than those of the counterpart FMVSS. If NHTSA 
determines that the foreign standard results in fewer safety benefits 
than the counterpart FMVSS, it will terminate the rulemaking proceeding.
    b. The comparison may indicate that the foreign standard's safety 
benefits are approximately equal to those of the counterpart FMVSS. If 
the agency tentatively determines that the safety benefits of a foreign 
standard are approximately equal to those of a FMVSS, it will take one 
of two steps in most instances. One possibility is that it will develop 
a notice of proposed rulemaking (NPRM) proposing to amend the FMVSS by 
adding the foreign standard as an alternative to the existing 
requirements of the FMVSS. The other possibility is that the agency will 
develop an NPRM proposing to harmonize the FMVSS with the foreign 
standard. This second approach would enable NHTSA to maintain a single 
set of requirements and test procedures in its standard, thereby 
minimizing any drain on its enforcement resources. An additional 
possibility that might be considered in some instances would be 
``qualified functional equivalence.'' Under this third approach, the 
agency would regard Country B's standard to be functionally equivalent 
if it is supplemented by a specified requirement in the counterpart 
FMVSS.
    c. The comparison may indicate that the foreign standard's safety 
benefits are greater than those of the counterpart FMVSS. If NHTSA 
tentatively determines that the foreign standard results in greater 
safety benefits than the counterpart FMVSS, and if upgrading is 
appropriate, based on the incremental benefits and costs and applicable 
statutory criteria, the agency issues an NPRM proposing to upgrade the 
FMVSS to the level of Country B's std. If upgrading is not appropriate, 
NHTSA considers issuing an NPRM proposing to add the requirements of 
Country B's std to the FMVSS as an alternative compliance option. The 
proposal to add the compliance option would set forth the basis for the 
agency's conclusion that upgrading the FMVSS is inappropriate.
If NHTSA issues an NPRM, it would request comment on the tentative 
determination and the proposed amendment.
    3. Decision whether to issue a final rule. Any final decision to 
make a determination regarding relative benefits and functional 
equivalency and to amend the FMVSS will be made in accordance with the 
process in the flowchart and applicable law and only after careful 
consideration and analysis of the public comments.

[63 FR 26514, May 13, 1998]

[[Page 207]]


<R05>
Sec. Appendix C to Part 553--Statement of Policy: Implementation of the 

United Nations/Economic Commission for Europe (UN/ECE) 1998 Agreement on 

      Global Technical Regulations--Agency Policy Goals and Public 

                              Participation

 I. Agency Policy Goals for the 1998 Global Agreement and International 
                   Motor Vehicle Safety Harmonization

        A. Paramount Policy Goal Under the 1998 Global Agreement

    Continuously improve safety and seek high levels of safety, 
particularly by developing and adopting new global technical regulations 
reflecting consideration of current and anticipated technology and 
safety problems.

                          B. Other Policy Goals

    1. Adopt and maintain U.S. standards that fully meet the need in the 
U.S. for vehicle safety.
    2. Harmonize U.S. standards with those of other countries or 
regions, particularly by raising U.S. standards at least to the level of 
the best practices in those other safety standards.
    3. Enhance regulatory effectiveness through regulatory cooperation 
with other countries and regions, thereby providing greater safety 
protection with available government resources.

   II. Public Participation and the Establishing of Global Technical 
   Regulations for Motor Vehicle Safety, Theft, and Energy Efficiency

     A. Summary of the Process Under the 1998 Global Agreement for 
                Establishing Global Technical Regulations

                            1. Proposal Stage

    A Contracting Party submits a proposal for either a harmonized or 
new global technical regulation to the Executive Committee of the 1998 
Global Agreement (i.e., the Contracting Parties to the Agreement). If 
appropriate, the Committee then refers the proposal to a working party 
of experts to develop the technical elements of the regulation.

                         2. Recommendation Stage

    When a working party of experts recommends a harmonized or new 
global technical regulation, it sends a report and the recommended 
regulation to the Executive Committee. The Committee then determines 
whether the recommendations are adequate and considers the establishment 
of the recommended regulation.

                         3. Establishment Stage

    If the Executive Committee reaches consensus in favor of that 
recommended global technical regulation, the global technical regulation 
is established in the Global Registry.

                B. Notice of Annual Work Program of WP.29

    Each year, NHTSA will publish a notice concerning the motor vehicle 
safety, theft, and energy efficiency aspects of the annual program of 
work for the UN/ECE's World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle 
Regulations (WP.29). Each notice will include:
    1. A calendar of scheduled meetings of WP.29 participants and 
working parties of experts, and meetings of the Executive Committee; and
    2. A list of the global technical regulations that:
    a. Have been proposed and referred to a working party of experts, or
    b. Have been recommended by a working party of experts.

Periodically, the notice will also include a request for public comments 
on the subjects for which global technical regulations should be 
established under the 1998 Global Agreement. The agency will publish a 
subsequent notice identifying the priorities on which NHTSA will focus 
in the future under the 1998 Global Agreement.

                           C. Public Meetings

    NHTSA will hold periodic public meetings on its activities under the 
1998 Global Agreement. If the extent of recent and anticipated 
significant developments concerning those activities so warrant, NHTSA 
will hold a public meeting within the 60-day period before each of the 
three sessions of WP.29 held annually. At each of these public meetings, 
NHTSA will:
    1. Brief the public on the significant developments that occurred at 
the session of WP.29, the meetings of the working parties of experts and 
the meetings of the Executive Committee since the previous public 
meeting;
    2. Based on the availability of provisional agendas, inform the 
public about the significant issues to be addressed at upcoming session 
of WP.29 and meetings of the working parties of experts and any votes 
scheduled at the next session of the Executive Committee on recommended 
global technical regulations; and
    3. Invite public comment and questions concerning those past 
developments and upcoming issues and votes and the general positions 
that the U.S. could take regarding those votes, and concerning any other 
significant developments and upcoming matters relating to pending 
proposed or recommended global technical regulations.


[[Page 208]]


Appropriate agency officials will participate in the public meetings. 
These public meetings may be held separately from or in conjunction with 
the agency's quarterly meetings on its vehicle rulemaking and research 
and development programs. The agency may hold additional public 
meetings.

      D. Notices Concerning Individual Global Technical Regulations

   1. Notice Requesting Written Comment on Proposed Global Technical 
                               Regulations

    a. Proposals by the U.S. (See Figure 1.)
    Before submitting a draft U.S. proposal for a global technical 
regulation to WP.29, NHTSA will publish a notice requesting public 
comments on the draft proposed global technical regulation. In the case 
of a draft proposal for a harmonized global technical regulation, the 
notice will compare that regulation with any existing, comparable U.S. 
standard, including the relative impacts of the regulation and standard. 
In the case of a draft proposal for a new global technical regulation, 
the notice will generally discuss the problem addressed by the proposal, 
the rationale for the proposed approach for addressing the problem, and 
the impacts of the proposal. NHTSA will consider the public comments 
and, as it deems appropriate, revise the proposal and any of its 
supporting documentation and then submit the proposal to WP.29.
    b. Proposals by a Contracting Party other than the U.S. (See Figure 
2.)
    After a proposal by a Contracting Party other than the U.S. has been 
referred to a working party of experts and has been made available in 
English by WP.29, NHTSA will make the draft proposal available in the 
DOT docket (http://dms.dot.gov/). The agency will then publish a notice 
requesting public comment on the draft proposal and will consider the 
comments in developing a U.S. position on the proposal.

  2. Notice Requesting Written Comment on Recommended Global Technical 
                               Regulations

    If a working party of experts recommends a global technical 
regulation and sends a report and the recommended regulation to the 
Executive Committee, NHTSA will make an English language version of the 
report and the regulation available in the DOT docket (http://
dms.dot.gov/) after they are made available by WP.29. The agency will 
publish a notice requesting public comment on the report and regulation. 
Before participating in a vote of the Executive Committee regarding the 
establishment of the regulation, the agency will consider the comments 
and develop a U.S. position on the recommended technical regulation.

  3. Notice Requesting Written Comment on Established Global Technical 
                               Regulations

    If a global technical regulation is established in the Global 
Registry by a consensus vote of the Executive Committee, and if the U.S. 
voted for establishment, NHTSA will publish a notice requesting public 
comment on adopting the regulation as a U.S. standard. Any decision by 
NHTSA whether to issue a final rule adopting the regulation or to issue 
a notice terminating consideration of that regulation will be made in 
accordance with applicable U.S. law and only after careful consideration 
and analysis of public comments.

                      E. Availability of Documents

    As we obtain English versions of key documents relating to motor 
vehicle safety, theft or energy conservation that are generated under 
the 1998 Agreement (e.g., proposals referred to a working party of 
experts, and reports and recommendations issued by a working party), we 
will place them in the internet-accessible DOT docket (http://
dms.dot.gov/). Within the limits of available resources, we will also 
place the documents on an international activities page that will be 
included in our Website (http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov/cars/rules/
international/index.html).

[[Page 209]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU00.000


[[Page 210]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU00.001


[65 FR 51245, Aug. 23, 2000]

[[Page 211]]


<R03>
PART 554_STANDARDS ENFORCEMENT AND DEFECTS INVESTIGATION--Table of Contents



Sec.
554.1 Scope.
554.2 Purpose.
554.3 Application.
554.4 Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance.
554.5 Office of Defects Investigation.
554.6 Opening an investigation.
554.7 Investigation priorities.
554.8 Monthly reports.
554.9 Availability of files.
554.10 Initial determinations and public meetings.
554.11 Final decisions.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 30102-103, 30111-112, 30117-121, 30162, 30165-
67; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 45 FR 10797, Feb. 19, 1980, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 554.1  Scope.

    This part establishes procedures for enforcing Federal motor vehicle 
safety standards and associated regulations, investigating possible 
safety-related defects, and making non-compliance and defect 
determinations.


<R05>
Sec. 554.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to inform interested persons of the 
procedures followed by the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration in order more fairly and effectively to implement 49 
U.S.C. Chapter 301.

[60 FR 17267, Apr. 5, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 554.3  Application.

    This part applies to actions, investigations, and defect and 
noncompliance decisions of the National Highway traffic Safety 
Administration under 49 U.S.C. 30116, 30117, 30118, 30120 and 30165.

[60 FR 17267, Apr. 5, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 554.4  Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance.

    The Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance, investigates compliance 
with Federal motor vehicle safety standards and associated regulations, 
and to this end may:
    (a) Verify that manufacturers certify compliance with all applicable 
safety standards;
    (b) Collect field reports from all sources;
    (c) Inspect manufacturers' certification test data and other 
supporting evidence, including dealer communications;
    (d) Inspect vehicles and equipment already in use or new vehicles 
and equipment at any stage of the manufacturing, distribution and sales 
chain;
    (e) Conduct selective compliance tests; and
    (f) Utilize other means necessary to conduct investigations.


<R05>
Sec. 554.5  Office of Defects Investigation.

    The Office of Defects Investigation conducts investigations to 
implement the provisions of the Act concerning the identification and 
correction of safety-related defects in motor vehicles and motor vehicle 
equipment. It elicits from every available source and evaluates on a 
continuing basis any information suggesting the existence of a safety-
related defect.


<R05>
Sec. 554.6  Opening an investigation.

    (a) A compliance or defect investigation is opened either on the 
motion of the Administrator or his delegate or on the granting of a 
petition of an interested party under part 552 of this chapter.
    (b) A manufacturer is notified immediately by telephone of any 
compliance test failure in order to enable the manufacturer to begin his 
own investigation. Notification is sent by mail at the beginning of any 
defect or noncompliance investigation.


<R05>
Sec. 554.7  Investigation priorities.

    (a) Compliance investigation priorities are reviewed annually and 
are set according to the following criteria:
    (1) Prior compliance test data;
    (2) Accident data;
    (3) Engineering analysis of vehicle and equipment designs;
    (4) Consumer complaints; and
    (5) Market share.
    (b) Defects inputs are reviewed periodically by an appropriate panel 
of engineers in consultation with the Office of Chief Counsel to 
determine whether a formal investigation should be opened by the Office 
of Defects Investigation.

[[Page 212]]


<R05>
Sec. 554.8  Monthly reports.

    (a) Compliance. A monthly compliance report is issued which lists 
investigations opened, closed, and pending during that month, identifies 
compliance test reports accepted, and indicates how individual reports 
may be obtained.
    (b) Defects. A monthly defects report is issued which lists 
investigations opened, closed, pending, and suspended during that month. 
An investigation may be designated ``suspended'' where the information 
available is insufficient to warrant further investigation. Suspended 
cases are automatically closed 60 days after appearing in a monthly 
report unless new information is received which justifies a different 
disposition.


<R05>
Sec. 554.9  Availability of files.

    All files of closed or suspended investigations are available for 
public inspection in the NHTSA Technical Reference Library. 
Communications between the agency and a manufacturer with respect to 
ongoing investigations are also available. Such files and communications 
may contain material which is considered confidential but has been 
determined to be necessary to the subject proceeding. Material which is 
considered confidential but has not been determined to be necessary to 
the subject proceeding will not be disclosed. Reproduction of entire 
public files or of individual documents can be arranged.


<R05>
Sec. 554.10  Initial determinations and public meetings.

    (a) An initial decision of failure to comply with safety standards 
or of a safety-related defect is made by the Administrator or his 
delegate based on the completed investigative file compiled by the 
appropriate office.
    (b) The decision is communicated to the manufacturer in a letter 
which makes available all information on which the decision is based. 
The letter advises the manufacturer of his right to present information, 
views, and arguments to establish that there is no defect or failure to 
comply or that the alleged defect does not affect motor vehicle safety. 
The letter also specifies the time and place of a public meeting for the 
presentation of arguments or sets a date by which written comments must 
be submitted. Submission of all information, whether at a public meeting 
or in written form, is normally scheduled about 30 days after the 
initial decision. The deadline for submission of information can be 
extended for good cause shown.
    (c) Public notice of an initial decision is made in a Federal 
Register notice that--
    (1) Identifies the motor vehicle or item of equipment and its 
manufacturer;
    (2) Summarizes the information on which the decision is based.
    (3) Gives the location of all information available for public 
examination; and
    (4) States the time and place of a public meeting or the deadline 
for written submission in which the manufacturer and interested persons 
may present information, views, and arguments respecting the decision.
    (d) A transcript of the public meeting is kept and exhibits may be 
offered. There is no cross-examination of witnesses.

[45 FR 10797, Feb. 19, 1980, as amended at 60 FR 17267, Apr. 5, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 554.11  Final decisions.

    (a) The Administrator bases his final decision on the completed 
investigative file and on information, views, and arguments submitted at 
the public meeting.
    (b) If the Administrator decides that a failure to comply or a 
safety-related defect exists, he orders the manufacturer to furnish the 
notification specified in 49 U.S.C. 30118 and 30119 and to remedy the 
defect or failure to comply.
    (c) If the Administrator closes an investigation following an 
initial determination, without making a final determination that a 
failure to comply or a safety-related defect exists, he or she will so 
notify the manufacturer and publish a notice of that closing in the 
Federal Register.
    (d) A statement of the Administrator's final decision and the 
reasons for it appears in each completed public file.

[60 FR 17268, Apr. 5, 1995]

[[Page 213]]


<R03>
PART 555_TEMPORARY EXEMPTION FROM MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY AND BUMPER STANDARDS--

Table of Contents



                            Subpart A_General

Sec.
555.1 Scope.
555.2 Purpose.
555.3 Application.
555.4 Definitions.
555.5 Application for exemption.
555.6 Basis for application.
555.7 Processing of applications.
555.8 Termination of temporary exemptions.
555.9 Temporary exemption labels.
555.10 Availability for public inspection.

   Subpart B_Vehicles Built In Two or More Stages and Altered Vehicles

555.11 Application.
555.12 Petition for exemption.
555.13 Basis for petition.
555.14 Processing of petitions.
555.15 Time period for exemptions.
555.16 Renewal of exemptions.
555.17 Termination of temporary exemptions.
555.18 Temporary exemption labels.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 30113, 32502, Pub. L. 105-277; delegation of 
authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 38 FR 2694, Jan. 29, 1973, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                            Subpart A_General


<R05>
Sec. 555.1  Scope.

    This part establishes requirements for the temporary exemption by 
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) of certain 
motor vehicles from compliance with one or more Federal motor vehicle 
safety standards in accordance with 49 U.S.C. 30113, and of certain 
passenger motor vehicles from compliance with all or part of a Federal 
bumper standard in accordance with 49 U.S.C. 32502.

[64 FR 2861, Jan. 19, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 555.2  Purpose.

    (a) The purpose of this part is to provide a means by which 
manufacturers of motor vehicles may obtain temporary exemptions from 
Federal motor vehicle safety standards on the basis of substantial 
economic hardship, facilitation of the development of new motor vehicle 
safety or low-emission engine features, or existence of an equivalent 
overall level of motor vehicle safety.
    (b) The purpose of this part is also to provide a means by which 
manufacturers of passenger motor vehicles may obtain a temporary 
exemption from compliance with all or part of a Federal bumper standard 
issued under part 581 of this chapter on a basis similar to that 
provided for exemptions from the Federal motor vehicle safety standards.

[38 FR 2694, Jan. 29, 1973, as amended at 64 FR 2861, Jan. 19, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 555.3  Application.

    This part applies to manufacturers of motor vehicles and passenger 
motor vehicles.

[64 FR 2861, Jan. 19, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 555.4  Definitions.

    Administrator means the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administrator or his delegate.
    Passenger motor vehicle means a motor vehicle with motive power 
designed to carry not more than 12 individuals, but does not include a 
truck not designed primarily to carry its operator or passengers, or a 
motorcycle.
    United States means the several States, the District of Columbia, 
the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands, the Canal 
Zone, and American Samoa.

[38 FR 2694, Jan. 29, 1973, as amended at 64 FR 2861, Jan. 19, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 555.5  Application for exemption.

    (a) A manufacturer of motor vehicles or passenger motor vehicles may 
apply to NHTSA for a temporary exemption from any Federal motor vehicle 
safety or bumper standard or for a renewal of any exemption on the bases 
of substantial economic hardship, making easier the development or field 
evaluation of new motor vehicle safety or impact protection, or low-
emission vehicle features, or that compliance with a standard would 
prevent it from selling a vehicle with an overall level of safety or 
impact protection at least equal to that of nonexempted vehicles.

[[Page 214]]

    (b) Each application filed under this part for an exemption or its 
renewal must--
    (1) Be written in the English language;
    (2) Be submitted in three copies to: Administrator, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, Washington, DC 20590;
    (3) State the full name and address of the applicant, the nature of 
its organization (individual, partnership, corporation, etc.) and the 
name of the State or country under the laws of which it is organized;
    (4) State the number and title, and the text or substance of the 
standard or portion thereof from which the temporary exemption is 
sought, and the length of time desired for such exemption;
    (5) Set forth the basis for the application and the information 
required by Sec. 555.6(a), (b), (c), or (d) as appropriate.
    (6) Specify any part of the information and data submitted which 
petitioner requests be withheld from public disclosure in accordance 
with part 512 of this chapter.
    (i) The information and data which petitioner requests be withheld 
from public disclosure must be submitted in accordance with Sec. 512.4 
of this chapter.
    (ii) The petitioner's request for withholding from public disclosure 
must be accompanied by a certification in support as set forth in 
appendix A to part 512 of this chapter.
    (7) Set forth the reasons why the granting of the exemption would be 
in the public interest, and, as applicable, consistent with the 
objectives of 49 U.S.C. Chapter 301 or Chapter 325.
    (c) The knowing and willful submission of false, fictitious or 
fraudulent information will subject the petitioner to the civil and 
criminal penalties of 18 U.S.C. 1001.

[38 FR 2694, Jan. 29, 1973, as amended at 39 FR 5489, Feb. 13, 1974; 46 
FR 2063, Jan. 8, 1981; 63 FR 44173, Aug. 18, 1998; 64 FR 2861, Jan. 19, 
1999; 70 FR 7429, Feb. 14, 2005]


<R05>
Sec. 555.6  Basis for application.

    (a) If the basis of the application is that compliance with the 
standard would cause substantial economic hardship to a manufacturer 
that has tried to comply with the standard in good faith, the applicant 
shall provide the following information:
    (1) Engineering and financial information demonstrating in detail 
how compliance or failure to obtain an exemption would cause substantial 
economic hardship, including--
    (i) A list or description of each item of motor vehicle equipment 
that would have to be modified in order to achieve compliance;
    (ii) The itemized estimated cost to modify each such item of motor 
vehicle equipment if compliance were to be achieved--
    (A) As soon as possible,
    (B) At the end of a 1-year exemption period (if the petition is for 
1 year or more),
    (C) At the end of a 2-year exemption period (if the petition is for 
2 years or more),
    (D) At the end of a 3-year exemption period (if the petition is for 
3 years),
    (iii) The estimated price increase per vehicle to balance the total 
costs incurred pursuant to paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section and a 
statement of the anticipated effect of each such price increase;
    (iv) Corporate balance sheets and income statements for the three 
fiscal years immediately preceding the filing of the application;
    (v) Projected balance sheet and income statement for the fiscal year 
following a denial of the application; and
    (vi) A discussion of any other hardships (e.g., loss of market, 
difficulty of obtaining goods and services for compliance) that the 
petitioner desires the agency to consider.
    (2) A description of its efforts to comply with the standards, 
including--
    (i) A chronological analysis of such efforts showing its 
relationship to the rule making history of the standard from which 
exemption is sought;
    (ii) A discussion of alternate means of compliance considered and 
the reasons for rejection of each;
    (iii) A discussion of any other factors (e.g., the resources 
available to the petitioner, inability to procure goods and services 
necessary for compliance following a timely request) that the petitioner 
desires the NHTSA to consider in deciding whether the petitioner

[[Page 215]]

tried in good faith to comply with the standard;
    (iv) A description of the steps to be taken, while the exemption is 
in effect, and the estimated date by which full compliance will be 
achieved either by design changes or termination of production of 
nonconforming vehicles; and
    (v) The total number of motor vehicles produced by or on behalf of 
the petitioner in the 12-month period prior to filing the petition, and 
the inclusive dates of the period. (49 U.S.C. 30113(d) limits 
eligibility for exemption on the basis of economic hardship to 
manufacturers whose total motor vehicle production in the year preceding 
the filing of their applications does not exceed 10,000.)
    (b) If the basis of the application is that the exemption would make 
easier the development or field evaluation of a new motor vehicle safety 
or impact protection features providing a safety or impact protection 
level at least equal to that of the standard, the applicant shall 
provide the following information:
    (1) A description of the safety or impact protection features, and 
research, development, and testing documentation establishing the 
innovational nature of such features.
    (2) An analysis establishing that the level of safety or impact 
protection of the feature is equivalent to or exceeds the level of 
safety or impact protection established in the standard from which 
exemption is sought, including--
    (i) A detailed description of how a vehicle equipped with the safety 
or impact protection feature differs from one that complies with the 
standard;
    (ii) If applicant is presently manufacturing a vehicle conforming to 
the standard, the results of tests conducted to substantiate 
certification to the standard; and
    (iii) The results of tests conducted on the safety or impact 
protection features that demonstrates performance which meets or exceeds 
the requirements of the standard.
    (3) Substantiation that a temporary exemption would facilitate the 
development or field evaluation of the vehicle.
    (4) A statement whether, at the end of the exemption period, the 
manufacturer intends to conform to the standard, apply for a further 
exemption, or petition for rulemaking to amend the standard to 
incorporate the safety or impact protection features.
    (5) A statement that not more than 2,500 exempted vehicles will be 
sold in the United States in any 12-month period for which an exemption 
may be granted pursuant to this paragraph. An application for renewal of 
such an exemption shall also include the total number of exempted 
vehicles sold in the United States under the existing exemption.
    (c) If the basis of the application is that the exemption would make 
the development or field evaluation of a low-emission vehicle easier and 
would not unreasonably lower the safety or impact protection level of 
that vehicle, the applicant shall provide--
    (1) Substantiation that the vehicle is a low-emission vehicle as 
defined by 49 U.S.C. 30113(a).
    (2) Research, development, and testing documentation establishing 
that a temporary exemption would not unreasonably degrade the safety or 
impact protection of the vehicle, including--
    (i) A detailed description of how the motor vehicle equipped with 
the low-emission engine would, if exempted, differ from one that 
complies with the standard;
    (ii) If the applicant is presently manufacturing a vehicle 
conforming to the standard, the results of tests conducted to 
substantiate certification to the standard;
    (iii) The results of any tests conducted on the vehicle that 
demonstrate its failure to meet the standard, expressed as comparative 
performance levels; and
    (iv) Reasons why the failure to meet the standard does not 
unreasonably degrade the safety or impact protection of the vehicle.
    (3) Substantiation that a temporary exemption would facilitate the 
development or field evaluation of the vehicle.
    (4) A statement whether, at the end of the exemption period, the 
manufacturer intends to conform with the standard.
    (5) A statement that not more than 2,500 exempted vehicles will be 
sold in

[[Page 216]]

the United States in any 12-month period for which an exemption may be 
granted pursuant to this paragraph. An application for renewal of an 
exemption shall also include the total number of exempted vehicles sold 
in the United States under the existing exemption.
    (d) If the basis of the application is that the applicant is 
otherwise unable to sell a vehicle whose overall level of safety or 
impact protection is at least equal to that of a nonexempted vehicle, 
the applicant shall provide--
    (1) A detailed analysis of how the vehicle provides the overall 
level of safety or impact protection at least equal to that of 
nonexempted vehicles, including--
    (i) A detailed description of how the motor vehicle, if exempted, 
differs from one that conforms to the standard;
    (ii) A detailed description of any safety or impact protection 
features that the vehicle offers as standard equipment that are not 
required by the Federal motor vehicle safety or bumper standards;
    (iii) The results of any tests conducted on the vehicle 
demonstrating that it fails to meet the standard, expressed as 
comparative performance levels;
    (iv) The results of any tests conducted on the vehicle demonstrating 
that its overall level of safety or impact protection exceeds that which 
is achieved by conformity to the standards.
    (v) Other arguments that the overall level of safety or impact 
protection of the vehicle is at least equal to that of nonexempted 
vehicles.
    (2) Substantiation that compliance would prevent the sale of the 
vehicle.
    (3) A statement whether, at the end of the exemption period, the 
manufacturer intends to comply with the standard.
    (4) A statement that not more than 2,500 exempted vehicles will be 
sold in the United States in any 12-month period for which an exemption 
may be granted pursuant to this paragraph. An application for renewal of 
any exemption shall also include the total number of exempted vehicles 
sold in the United States under the existing exemption.

[38 FR 2694, Jan. 29, 1973, as amended at 39 FR 5489, Feb. 13, 1974; 63 
FR 44173, Aug. 18, 1998; 64 FR 2861, Jan. 19, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 555.7  Processing of applications.

    (a) The NHTSA publishes in the Federal Register, affording 
opportunity for comment, a notice of each application containing the 
information required by this part. However, if the NHTSA finds that an 
application does not contain the information required by this part, it 
so informs the applicant, pointing out the areas of insufficiency and 
stating that the application will not receive further consideration 
until the required information is submitted.
    (b) No public hearing, argument, or other formal proceeding is held 
directly on an application filed under this part before its disposition 
under this section.
    (c) Any interested person may, upon written request, appear 
informally before an appropriate official of the NHTSA to discuss an 
application for exemption or the action taken in response to a petition.
    (d) If the Administrator determines that the application does not 
contain adequate justification, he denies it and notifies the petitioner 
in writing. He also publishes in the Federal Register a notice of the 
denial and the reasons for it.
    (e) If the Administrator determines that the application contains 
adequate justification, he grants it, and notifies the petitioner in 
writing. He also publishes in the Federal Register a notice of the grant 
and the reasons for it.
    (f) Unless a later effective date is specified in the notice of the 
grant, a temporary exemption is effective upon publication of the notice 
in the Federal Register and exempts vehicles manufactured on and after 
the effective date.

[38 FR 2694, Jan. 29, 1973, as amended at 39 FR 5489, Feb. 13, 1974; 39 
FR 37988, Oct. 25, 1974; 64 FR 2861, 2862, Jan. 19, 1999]

[[Page 217]]


<R05>
Sec. 555.8  Termination of temporary exemptions.

    (a) A temporary exemption from a standard granted on the basis of 
substantial economic hardship terminates according to its terms but not 
later than 3 years after the date of issuance unless terminated sooner 
pursuant to paragraph (d) of this section.
    (b) A temporary exemption from a standard granted on a basis other 
than substantial economic hardship terminates according to its terms but 
not later than 2 years after the date of issuance unless terminated 
sooner pursuant to paragraph (d) of this section.
    (c) Any interested person may petition for the termination or 
modification of an exemption granted under this part. The petition will 
be processed in accordance with the procedures of part 552 of this 
chapter.
    (d) The Administrator terminates or modifies a temporary exemption 
if he determines that--
    (1) The temporary exemption is no longer consistent with the public 
interest and the objectives of the Act; or
    (2) The temporary exemption was granted on the basis of false, 
fraudulent, or misleading representations or information.
    (e) If an application for renewal of a temporary exemption that 
meets the requirements of Sec. 555.5 has been filed not later than 60 
days before the termination date of an exemption, the exemption does not 
terminate until the Administrator grants or denies the application for 
renewal.
    (f) The Administrator publishes in the Federal Register a notice of:
    (1) An application for termination or modification of an exemption 
and the action taken in response to it; and
    (2) Any termination or modification of an exemption pursuant to the 
Administrator's own motion.

[38 FR 2694, Jan. 29, 1973, as amended at 39 FR 37989, Oct. 25, 1974; 40 
FR 42015, Sept. 10, 1975; 64 FR 2861, Jan. 19, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 555.9  Temporary exemption labels.

    A manufacturer of an exempted vehicle shall--
    (a) Submit to the Administrator, within 30 days after receiving 
notification of the grant of an exemption, a sample of the certification 
label required by part 567 of this chapter and paragraph (c) of this 
section;
    (b) Affix securely to the windshield or side window of each exempted 
vehicle a label in the English language containing the statement 
required by paragraph (c)(1) or (2) of this section, and with the words 
``Shown above'' omitted.
    (c) Meet all applicable requirements of part 567 of this chapter, 
except that--
    (1) The statement required by Sec. 567.4(g)(5) of this chapter 
shall end with the phrase ``except for Standards Nos. [listing the 
standards by number and title for which an exemption has been granted] 
exempted pursuant to NHTSA Exemption No. ----------------.''
    (2) Instead of the statement required by Sec. 567.5(c)(7)(iii), the 
following statement shall appear:

    THIS VEHICLE CONFORMS TO ALL APPLICABLE FEDERAL MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY 
(AND BUMPER) STANDARDS IN EFFECT IN [Month, Year] EXCEPT FOR STANDARD 
NOS. [Listing the standards by number and title for which an exemption 
has been granted] EXEMPTED PURSUANT TO NHTSA EXEMPTION NO. ------------.

(Secs. 114, 119, Pub. L. 89-563, 80 Stat. 718 (15 U.S.C. 1403, 1408); 
sec. 3, Pub. L. 92-548, 86 Stat. 1159 (15 U.S.C. 1410); secs. 102, 105, 
Pub. L. 92-513, 86 Stat. 947 (15 U.S.C. 1912, 1915); delegations of 
authority at 49 CFR 1.50 and 501.8)

[38 FR 2694, Jan. 29, 1973, as amended at 50 FR 10772, Mar. 18, 1985; 60 
FR 1750, Jan. 5, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 555.10  Availability for public inspection.

    (a) Information relevant to an application under this part, 
including the application and supporting data, memoranda of informal 
meetings with the applicant or any other interested person, and the 
grant or denial of the application, is available for public inspection, 
except as specified in paragraph (b) of this section, in Room PL-401 
(Docket Management), 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. 
Copies of available information may be obtained, as provided in part 7 
of the regulations of the Office of the Secretary of Transportation (49 
CFR part 7).

[[Page 218]]

    (b) Except for the release of confidential information authorized by 
part 512 of this chapter, information made available for inspection 
under paragraph (a) shall not include materials not relevant to the 
petition for which confidentiality is requested and granted in 
accordance with 49 U.S.C. 30166 and 30167 and section 552(b) of title 5 
of the U.S.C.).

[38 FR 2694, Jan. 29, 1973, as amended at 46 FR 2064, Jan. 8, 1981; 48 
FR 44081, Sept. 27, 1983; 63 FR 44173, Aug. 18, 1998; 64 FR 2862, Jan. 
19, 1999]


<R04>
   Subpart B_Vehicles Built in Two or More Stages and Altered Vehicles

    Source: 70 FR 7429, Feb. 14, 2005, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 555.11  Application.

    This subpart applies to alterers and manufacturers of motor vehicles 
built in two or more stages to which one or more standards are 
applicable. No manufacturer or alterer that produces or alters a total 
exceeding 10,000 motor vehicles annually shall be eligible for a 
temporary exemption under this subpart. Any exemption granted under this 
subpart shall be limited, per manufacturer, to 2,500 vehicles to be sold 
in the United States in any 12 consecutive month period. Incomplete 
vehicle manufacturers and intermediate manufacturers that do not intend 
to certify the vehicles in accordance with 49 CFR 567.5(f) or (g), and 
instead furnish Incomplete Vehicle Documents to final-stage 
manufacturers in accordance with 49 CFR 568.4 or 49 CFR 568.5, are not 
eligible for temporary exemptions under this subpart.

[71 FR 28196, May 15, 2006]


<R05>
Sec. 555.12  Petition for exemption.

    An alterer; an incomplete vehicle manufacturer intending to certify 
the vehicle in accordance with 49 CFR 567.5(f); an intermediate 
manufacturer intending to certify the vehicle in accordance with 49 CFR 
567.5(g); a final-stage manufacturer; or an industry trade association 
representing a group of alterers, incomplete vehicle manufacturers, 
intermediate manufacturers and/or final-stage manufacturers may seek, as 
to any vehicle configuration altered and/or built in two or more stages, 
a temporary exemption or a renewal of a temporary exemption from any 
performance requirement for which a Federal motor vehicle safety 
standard specifies the use of a dynamic test procedure to determine 
compliance. Each petition for an exemption under this section must be 
submitted to NHTSA and must:
    (a) Be written in the English language;
    (b) Be submitted in three copies to: Administrator, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh St., SW., Washington, DC 
20590;
    (c) State the full name and address of the applicant, the nature of 
its organization (e.g., individual, partnership, corporation, or trade 
association), the name of the State or country under the laws of which 
it is organized, and the name of each alterer, incomplete vehicle 
manufacturer, intermediate manufacturer and/or final-stage manufacturer 
for which the exemption is sought;
    (d) State the number, title, paragraph designation, and the text or 
substance of the portion(s) of the standard(s) from which the exemption 
is sought;
    (e) Describe by type and use each vehicle configuration (or range of 
vehicle configurations) for which the exemption is sought;
    (f) State the estimated number of units of each vehicle 
configuration to be produced annually by each of the manufacturer(s) for 
whom the exemption is sought;
    (g) Specify any part of the information and data submitted that the 
petitioner requests be withheld from public disclosure in accordance 
with part 512 of this chapter, as provided by Sec. 555.5(b)(6).
    (1) The information and data which petitioner requests be withheld 
from public disclosure must be submitted in accordance with Sec. 512.4 
of this chapter.
    (2) The petitioner's request for withholding from public disclosure 
must be accompanied by a certification in support as set forth in 
appendix A to part 512 of this chapter.

[71 FR 28196, May 15, 2006]

[[Page 219]]


<R05>
Sec. 555.13  Basis for petition.

    The petition shall:
    (a) Discuss any factors (e.g., demand for the vehicle configuration, 
loss of market, difficulty in procuring goods and services necessary to 
conduct dynamic tests) that the applicant desires NHTSA to consider in 
deciding whether to grant the application based on economic hardship.
    (b) Explain the grounds on which the applicant asserts that the 
application of the dynamic test requirements of the standard(s) in 
question to the vehicles covered by the application would cause 
substantial economic hardship to each of the manufacturers on whose 
behalf the application is filed, providing a complete financial 
statement for each manufacturer and a complete description of each 
manufacturer's good faith efforts to comply with the standards, 
including a discussion of:
    (1) The extent that no Type (1) or Type (2) statement with respect 
to such standard is available in the incomplete vehicle document 
furnished, per part 568 of this chapter, by the incomplete vehicle 
manufacturer or by a prior intermediate-stage manufacturer or why, if 
one is available, it cannot be followed;
    (2) A description of the incomplete vehicle to be used to 
manufacture the vehicle(s) subject to the petition. This description 
must identify the manufacturer of the incomplete vehicle, state the 
incomplete vehicle's GVWR, and provide other available specifications;
    (3) The availability of alternative incomplete vehicles, including 
incomplete vehicles of different size, GVWR, and number of axles, from 
the same and other incomplete vehicle manufacturers, that could allow 
the petitioner to rely on Incomplete Vehicle Documents when certifying 
the completed vehicle, instead of petitioning under this subpart;
    (4) The existence, or lack thereof, of generic or cooperative 
testing that would provide a basis for demonstrating compliance with the 
standard(s); and
    (c) Explain why the requested temporary exemption would not 
unreasonably degrade safety.

[71 FR 28196, May 15, 2006]


<R05>
Sec. 555.14  Processing of petitions.

    The Administrator shall notify the petitioner whether the petition 
is complete within 30 days of receipt. The Administrator shall attempt 
to approve or deny any complete petition submitted under this subpart 
within 120 days after the agency acknowledges that the application is 
complete. Upon good cause shown, the Administrator may review a petition 
on an expedited basis.


<R05>
Sec. 555.15  Time period for exemptions.

    Subject to Sec. 555.16, each temporary exemption granted by the 
Administrator under this subpart shall be in effect for a period of 
three years from the effective date. The Administrator shall identify 
each exemption by a unique number.


<R05>
Sec. 555.16  Renewal of exemptions.

    An alterer, intermediate or final-stage manufacturer or a trade 
association representing a group of alterers or, intermediate and/or 
final-stage manufacturers may apply for a renewal of a temporary 
exemption. Any such renewal petition shall be filed at least 60 days 
prior to the termination date of the existing exemption and shall 
include all the information required in an initial petition. If a 
petition for renewal of a temporary exemption that meets the 
requirements of this subpart has been filed not later than 60 days 
before the termination date of an exemption, the exemption does not 
terminate until the Administrator grants or denies the petition for 
renewal.


<R05>
Sec. 555.17  Termination of temporary exemptions.

    The Administrator may terminate or modify a temporary exemption if 
(s)he determines that:
    (a) The temporary exemption was granted on the basis of false, 
fraudulent, or misleading representations or information; or
    (b) The temporary exemption is no longer consistent with the public 
interest and the objectives of the Act.


<R05>
Sec. 555.18  Temporary exemption labels.

    An alterer or final-stage manufacturer of a vehicle that is covered 
by

[[Page 220]]

one or more exemptions issued under this sub-part shall affix a label 
that meets meet all the requirements of 49 CFR 555.9.


<R03>
PART 556_EXEMPTION FOR INCONSEQUENTIAL DEFECT OR NONCOMPLIANCE--Table of 

Contents



Sec.
556.1 Scope.
556.2 Purpose.
556.3 Application.
556.4 Petition for exemption.
556.5 Processing of petition.
556.6 Meetings.
556.7 Disposition of petition.
556.8 Rescission of decision.
556.9 Public inspection of relevant information.

    Authority: Sec. 157, Pub. L. 93-492, 88 Stat. 1470 (15 U.S.C. 1417); 
delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 42 FR 7145, Feb. 7, 1977, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 556.1  Scope.

    This part sets forth procedures, pursuant to section 157 of the Act, 
for exempting manufacturers of motor vehicles and replacement equipment 
from the Act's notice and remedy requirements when a defect or 
noncompliance is determined to be inconsequential as it relates to motor 
vehicle safety.


<R05>
Sec. 556.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to enable manufacturers of motor 
vehicles and replacement equipment to petition the NHTSA for exemption 
from the notification and remedy requirements of the Act due to the 
inconsequentiality of the defect or noncompliance as it relates to motor 
vehicle safety, and to give all interested persons an opportunity for 
presentation of data, views, and arguments on the issues of 
inconsequentiality.


<R05>
Sec. 556.3  Application.

    This part applies to manufacturers of motor vehicles and replacement 
equipment.


<R05>
Sec. 556.4  Petition for exemption.

    (a) A manufacturer who has determined the existence, in a motor 
vehicle or item of replacement equipment that he produces, of a defect 
related to motor vehicle safety or a noncompliance with an applicable 
Federal motor vehicle safety standard, or who has received notice of an 
initial determination by the NHTSA of the existence of a defect related 
to motor vehicle safety or a noncompliance, may petition for exemption 
from the Act's notification and remedy requirements on the grounds that 
the defect or noncompliance is inconsequential as it relates to motor 
vehicle safety.
    (b) Each petition submitted under this part shall--
    (1) Be written in the English language;
    (2) Be submitted in three copies to: Administrator, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, Washington, DC 20590;
    (3) State the full name and address of the applicant, the nature of 
its organization (e.g., individual, partnership, or corporation) and the 
name of the State or country under the laws of which it is organized.
    (4) Describe the motor vehicle or item of replacement equipment, 
including the number involved and the period of production, and the 
defect or noncompliance concerning which an exemption is sought; and
    (5) Set forth all data, views, and arguments of the petitioner 
supporting his petition.
    (6) Be accompanied by three copies of the report the manufacturer 
has submitted, or is submitting, to NHTSA in accordance with part 573 of 
this chapter, relating to its determination of the existence of safety 
related defect or noncompliance with an applicable safety standard that 
is the subject of the petition.
    (c) In the case of defects related to motor vehicle safety or 
noncompliances determined to exist by a manufacturer, petitions under 
this part must be submitted not later than 30 days after such 
determination. In the case of defects related to motor vehicle safety or 
noncompliances initially determined to exist by the NHTSA, petitions 
must be submitted not later than 30 days after notification of the 
determination has been received by the manufacturer. Such a petition 
will not

[[Page 221]]

constitute a concession by the manufacturer of, nor will it be 
considered relevant to, the existence of a defect related to motor 
vehicle safety or a nonconformity.

[42 FR 7145, Feb. 7, 1977, as amended at 56 FR 66376, Dec. 23, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 556.5  Processing of petition.

    (a) The NHTSA publishes a notice of each petition in the Federal 
Register. Such notice includes:
    (1) A brief summary of the petition;
    (2) A statement of the availability of the petition and other 
relevant information for public inspection; and
    (3)(i) In the case of a defect related to motor vehicle safety or a 
noncompliance determined to exist by the manufacturer, an invitation to 
interested persons to submit written data, views, and arguments 
concerning the petition, and, upon request by the petitioner or 
interested persons, a statement of the time and place of a public 
meeting at which such materials may be presented orally if any person so 
desires.
    (ii) In the case of a defect related to motor vehicle safety or a 
noncompliance initially determined to exist by the NHTSA, an invitation 
to interested persons to submit written data, views, and arguments 
concerning the petition or to submit such data, views, and arguments 
orally at the meeting held pursuant to section 152(a) of the Act 
following the initial determination, or at a separate meeting if deemed 
appropriate by the agency.


<R05>
Sec. 556.6  Meetings.

    (a) At a meeting held under this part, any interested person may 
make oral (as well as written) presentations of data, views, and 
arguments on the question whether the defect or noncompliance described 
in the Federal Register notice is inconsequential as it relates to motor 
vehicle safety.
    (b) Sections 556 and 557 of Title 5, U.S.C., do not apply to any 
meeting held under this part. Unless otherwise specified, any meeting 
held under this part is an informal, nonadversary, fact-finding 
proceeding, at which there are no formal pleadings or adverse parties. A 
decision to grant or deny a petition, after a meeting on such petition, 
is not necessarily based exclusively on the record of the meeting.
    (c) The Administrator designates a representative to conduct any 
meeting held under this part. The Chief Counsel designates a member of 
his staff to serve as legal officer at the meeting. A transcript of the 
proceeding is kept and exhibits may be kept as part of the transcript.


<R05>
Sec. 556.7  Disposition of petition.

    Notice of either a grant or denial of a petition for exemption from 
the notice and remedy requirements of the Act based upon the 
inconsequentiality of a defect or noncompliance is issued to the 
petitioner and published in the Federal Register. The effect of a grant 
of a petition is to relieve the manufacturer from any further 
responsibility to provide notice and remedy of the defect or 
noncompliance. The effect of a denial is to continue in force, as 
against a manufacturer, all duties contained in the Act relating to 
notice and remedy of the defect or noncompliance. Any interested person 
may appeal the grant or denial of a petition by submitting written data, 
views, or arguments to the Administrator.


<R05>
Sec. 556.8  Rescission of decision.

    The Administrator may rescind a grant or denial of an exemption 
issued under this part any time after the receipt of new data and notice 
and opportunity for comment thereon, in accordance with Sec. Sec. 556.5 
and 556.7.


<R05>
Sec. 556.9  Public inspection of relevant information.

    Information relevant to a petition under this part, including the 
petition and supporting data, memoranda of informal meetings with the 
petitioner or any other interested person concerning the petition, and 
the notice granting or denying the petition, are available for public 
inspection in the Docket Section, Room 5109, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. 
Copies of available information may be obtained in accordance with part 
7 of the regulations of the Office of

[[Page 222]]

the Secretary of Transportation (49 CFR part 7).

(Authority: Sec. 104, Pub. L. 93-492, 88 Stat. 1470 (15 U.S.C. 1417))

[42 FR 7145, Feb. 7, 1977, as amended at 48 FR 44081, Sept. 27, 1983]


<R03>
PART 557_PETITIONS FOR HEARINGS ON NOTIFICATION AND REMEDY OF DEFECTS--Table 

of Contents



Sec.
557.1 Scope.
557.2 Purpose.
557.3 General.
557.4 Requirements for petition.
557.5 Improperly filed petitions.
557.6 Determination whether to hold a public hearing.
557.7 Public hearing.
557.8 Determination of manufacturer's obligation.

    Authority: Sec. 9, Pub. L. 89-670, 80 Stat. 931 (49 U.S.C. 1657); 
sec. 103, 119, Pub. L. 89-563, 80 Stat. 718 (15 U.S.C. 1392, 1407); sec. 
156, Pub. L. 93-492, 88 Stat. 1470 (15 U.S.C 1416); delegation of 
authority at 49 CFR 1.50).

    Source: 41 FR 56812, Dec. 30, 1976, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 557.1  Scope.

    This part establishes procedures under section 156 of the National 
Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966, as amended (88 Stat. 1470, 
15 U.S.C. 1416), for the submission and disposition of petitions filed 
by interested persons for hearings on the question of whether a 
manufacturer has reasonably met his obligation to notify owners, 
purchasers, and dealers of a safety-related defect or failure to comply 
with a Federal motor vehicle safety standard, or to remedy such defect 
or failure to comply. This part also establishes procedures for holding 
a hearing on these questions.


<R05>
Sec. 557.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to enable the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration to identify and respond on a timely basis to 
petitions for hearings on whether a manufacturer has reasonably met his 
obligation to notify or remedy, and to establish the procedures for such 
hearings.


<R05>
Sec. 557.3  General.

    Any interested person may file with the Administrator a petition 
requesting him to hold a hearing on--
    (a) Whether a manufacturer has reasonably met his obligation to 
notify owners, purchasers, and dealers of a safety-related defect in any 
motor vehicle or item of replacement equipment manufactured by him;
    (b) Whether a manufacturer has reasonably met his obligation to 
notify owners, purchasers, and dealers of a failure to comply with an 
applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standard in any motor vehicle or 
item of replacement equipment manufactured by him;
    (c) Whether the manufacturer has reasonably met his obligation to 
remedy a safety-related defect in any motor vehicle or item of 
replacement equipment manufactured by him; or
    (d) Whether the manufacturer has reasonably met his obligation to 
remedy a failure to comply with an applicable Federal motor vehicle 
safety standard in any motor vehicle or item of replacement equipment 
manufactured by him.


<R05>
Sec. 557.4  Requirements for petition.

    A petition filed under this part should be addressed and submitted 
to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 
Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. Each petition filed under 
this part must--
    (a) Be written in the English or Spanish language;
    (b) Have, preceding its text, the word ``Petition'';
    (c) Contain a brief statement concerning the alleged failure of a 
manufacturer to meet reasonably his obligation to notify or remedy;
    (d) Contain a brief summary of the data, views, or arguments that 
the petitioner wishes to present in a hearing on whether or not a 
manufacturer has reasonably met his obligations to notify or remedy;
    (e) Specifically request a hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 557.5  Improperly filed petitions.

    (a) A petition that is not addressed as specified in Sec. 557.4, 
but that meets the other requirements of that section, will

[[Page 223]]

be treated as a properly filed petition, received as of the time it is 
discovered and identified.
    (b) A document that fails to conform to one or more of the 
requirements of Sec. 557.4(a) (1) through (5) will not be treated as a 
petition under this part. Such a document will be treated according to 
the existing correspondence and other procedures of the NHTSA, and any 
information contained in it will be considered at the discretion of the 
Administrator.


<R05>
Sec. 557.6  Determination whether to hold a public hearing.

    (a) The Administrator considers the following factors in determining 
whether to hold a hearing:
    (1) The nature of the complaint;
    (2) The seriousness of the alleged breach of obligation to remedy;
    (3) The existence of similar complaints;
    (4) The ability of the NHTSA to resolve the problem without holding 
a hearing; and
    (5) Other pertinent matters.
    (b) If, after considering the above factors, the Administrator 
determines that a hearing should be held, the petition is granted. If it 
is determined that a hearing should not be held, the petition is denied. 
In either case, the petitioner is notified of the grant or denial not 
more than 60 days after receipt of the petition by the NHTSA.
    (c) If a petition submitted under this part is denied, a Federal 
Register notice of the denial is issued within 45 days of the denial, 
setting forth the reasons for it.
    (d) The Administrator may conduct a hearing under this part on his 
own motion.


<R05>
Sec. 557.7  Public hearing.

    If the Administrator decides that a public hearing under this part 
is necessary, he issues a notice of public hearing in the Federal 
Register, to advise interested persons of the time, place, and subject 
matter of the public hearing and invite their participation. Interested 
persons may submit their views through oral or written presentation, or 
both. There is no cross-examination of witnesses. A transcript of the 
hearing is kept and exhibits may be accepted as part of the transcript. 
Sections 556 and 557 of title 5, U.S.C., do not apply to hearings held 
under this part. When appropriate, the Chief Counsel designates a member 
of his staff to serve as legal officer at the hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 557.8  Determination of manufacturer's obligation.

    If the Administrator determines, on the basis of the information 
presented at a hearing or any other information that is available to 
him, that the manufacturer has not reasonably met his obligation to 
notify owners, dealers, and purchasers of a safety-related defect or 
failure to comply with a Federal motor vehicle safety standard or to 
remedy such defect or failure to comply, he orders the manufacturer to 
take specified action to comply with his obligation, consistent with the 
authority granted the Administrator by the Act.


<R03>
PART 563_EVENT DATA RECORDERS--Table of Contents



Sec.
563.1 Scope.
563.2 Purpose.
563.3 Application.
563.4 [Reserved]
563.5 Definitions.
563.6 Requirements for vehicles.
563.7 Data elements.
563.8 Data format.
563.9 Data capture.
563.10 Crash test performance and survivability.
563.11 Information in owner's manual.
563.12 Data retrieval tools.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 30101, 30111, 30115, 30117, 30166, 30168; 
delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 71 FR 51043, Aug. 28, 2006, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 563.1  Scope.

    This part specifies uniform, national requirements for vehicles 
equipped with event data recorders (EDRs) concerning the collection, 
storage, and retrievability of onboard motor vehicle crash event data. 
It also specifies requirements for vehicle manufacturers

[[Page 224]]

to make tools and/or methods commercially available so that crash 
investigators and researchers are able to retrieve data from EDRs.


<R05>
Sec. 563.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to help ensure that EDRs record, in a 
readily usable manner, data valuable for effective crash investigations 
and for analysis of safety equipment performance (e.g., advanced 
restraint systems). These data will help provide a better understanding 
of the circumstances in which crashes and injuries occur and will lead 
to safer vehicle designs.


<R05>
Sec. 563.3  Application.

    This part applies to the following vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2012, if they are equipped with an event data recorder: 
passenger cars, multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses with 
a GVWR of 3,855 kg (8,500 pounds) or less and an unloaded vehicle weight 
of 2,495 kg (5,500 pounds) or less, except for walk-in van-type trucks 
or vehicles designed to be sold exclusively to the U.S. Postal Service. 
This part also applies to manufacturers of those vehicles. However, 
vehicles manufactured before September 1, 2013 that are manufactured in 
two or more stages or that are altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 
567.7) after having been previously certified to the Federal motor 
vehicle safety standards in accordance with part 567 of this chapter 
need not meet the requirements of this part.

[73 FR 2179, Jan. 14, 2008]


<R05>
Sec. 563.4  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 563.5  Definitions.

    (a) Motor vehicle safety standard definitions. Unless otherwise 
indicated, all terms that are used in this part and are defined in the 
Motor Vehicle Safety Standards, part 571 of this subchapter, are used as 
defined therein.
    (b) Other definitions.
    ABS activity means the anti-lock brake system (ABS) is actively 
controlling the vehicle's brakes.
    Air bag warning lamp status means whether the warning lamp required 
by FMVSS No. 208 is on or off.
    Capture means the process of buffering EDR data in a temporary, 
volatile storage medium where it is continuously updated at regular time 
intervals.
    Delta-V, lateral means the cumulative change in velocity, as 
recorded by the EDR of the vehicle, along the lateral axis, starting 
from crash time zero and ending at 0.25 seconds, recorded every 0.01 
seconds.
    Delta-V, longitudinal means the cumulative change in velocity, as 
recorded by the EDR of the vehicle, along the longitudinal axis, 
starting from crash time zero and ending at 0.25 seconds, recorded every 
0.01 seconds.
    Deployment time, frontal air bag means (for both driver and right 
front passenger) the elapsed time from crash time zero to the deployment 
command, or for multi-staged air bag systems, the deployment command for 
the first stage.
    Disposal means the deployment command of the second (or higher, if 
present) stage of a frontal air bag for the purpose of disposing the 
propellant from the air bag device.
    End of event time means the moment at which the cumulative delta-V 
within a 20 ms time period becomes 0.8 km/h (0.5 mph) or less, or the 
moment at which the crash detection algorithm of the air bag control 
unit resets.
    Engine RPM means
    (1) For vehicles powered by internal combustion engines, the number 
of revolutions per minute of the main crankshaft of the vehicle's 
engine; and
    (2) For vehicles not entirely powered by internal combustion 
engines, the number of revolutions per minute of the motor shaft at the 
point at which it enters the vehicle transmission gearbox.
    Engine throttle, percent full means the driver-requested 
acceleration as measured by the throttle position sensor on the 
accelerator pedal compared to the fully-depressed position.
    Event means a crash or other physical occurrence that causes the 
trigger threshold to be met or exceeded, or an air bag to be deployed, 
whichever occurs first.
    Event data recorder (EDR) means a device or function in a vehicle 
that

[[Page 225]]

records the vehicle's dynamic time-series data during the time period 
just prior to a crash event (e.g., vehicle speed vs. time) or during a 
crash event (e.g., delta-V vs. time), intended for retrieval after the 
crash event. For the purposes of this definition, the event data do not 
include audio and video data.
    Frontal air bag means an inflatable restraint system that requires 
no action by vehicle occupants and is used to meet the applicable 
frontal crash protection requirements of FMVSS No. 208.
    Ignition cycle, crash means the number (count) of power cycles 
applied to the recording device at the time when the crash event 
occurred since the first use of the EDR.
    Ignition cycle download means the number (count) of power cycles 
applied to the recording device at the time when the data was downloaded 
since the first use of the EDR.
    Lateral acceleration means the component of the vector acceleration 
of a point in the vehicle in the y-direction. The lateral acceleration 
is positive from left to right, from the perspective of the driver when 
seated in the vehicle facing the direction of forward vehicle travel.
    Longitudinal acceleration means the component of the vector 
acceleration of a point in the vehicle in the x-direction. The 
longitudinal acceleration is positive in the direction of forward 
vehicle travel.
    Maximum delta-V, lateral means the maximum value of the cumulative 
change in velocity, as recorded by the EDR, of the vehicle along the 
lateral axis, starting from crash time zero and ending at 0.3 seconds.
    Maximum delta-V, longitudinal means the maximum value of the 
cumulative change in velocity, as recorded by the EDR, of the vehicle 
along the longitudinal axis, starting from crash time zero and ending at 
0.3 seconds.
    Maximum delta-V, resultant means the time-correlated maximum value 
of the cumulative change in velocity, as recorded by the EDR or 
processed during data download, along the vector-added longitudinal and 
lateral axes.
    Multi-event crash means the occurrence of 2 events, the first and 
last of which begin not more than 5 seconds apart.
    Non-volatile memory means the memory reserved for maintaining 
recorded EDR data in a semi-permanent fashion. Data recorded in non-
volatile memory is retained after loss of power and can be retrieved 
with EDR data extraction tools and methods.
    Normal acceleration means the component of the vector acceleration 
of a point in the vehicle in the z-direction. The normal acceleration is 
positive in a downward direction and is zero when the accelerometer is 
at rest.
    Occupant position classification means the classification indicating 
that the seating posture of a front outboard occupant (both driver and 
right front passenger) is determined as being out-of-position.
    Occupant size classification means, for the right front passenger, 
the classification of the occupant as an adult and not as a child, and 
for the driver, the classification of the driver as not being of small 
stature.
    Pretensioner means a device that is activated by a vehicle's crash 
sensing system and removes slack from a vehicle safety belt system.
    Record means the process of saving captured EDR data into a non-
volatile device for subsequent retrieval.
    Safety belt status means the feedback from the safety system that is 
used to determine that an occupant's safety belt (for both driver and 
right front passenger) is fastened or unfastened.
    Seat track position switch, foremost, status means the status of the 
switch that is installed to detect whether the seat is moved to a 
forward position.
    Service brake, on and off means the status of the device that is 
installed in or connected to the brake pedal system to detect whether 
the pedal was pressed. The device can include the brake pedal switch or 
other driver-operated service brake control.
    Side air bag means any inflatable occupant restraint device that is 
mounted to the seat or side structure of the vehicle interior, and that 
is designed to deploy in a side impact crash to help mitigate occupant 
injury and/or ejection.
    Side curtain/tube air bag means any inflatable occupant restraint 
device that

[[Page 226]]

is mounted to the side structure of the vehicle interior, and that is 
designed to deploy in a side impact crash or rollover and to help 
mitigate occupant injury and/or ejection.
    Speed, vehicle indicated means the vehicle speed indicated by a 
manufacturer-designated subsystem designed to indicate the vehicle's 
ground travel speed during vehicle operation.
    Stability control means any device that complies with FMVSS No. 126, 
``Electronic stability control systems.''
    Steering input means the angular displacement of the steering wheel 
measured from the straight-ahead position (position corresponding to 
zero average steer angle of a pair of steered wheels).
    Suppression switch status means the status of the switch indicating 
whether an air bag suppression system is on or off.
    Time from event 1 to 2 means the elapsed time from time zero of the 
first event to time zero of the second event.
    Time, maximum delta-V, lateral means the time from crash time zero 
to the point where the maximum value of the cumulative change in 
velocity is found, as recorded by the EDR, along the lateral axis.
    Time, maximum delta-V, longitudinal means the time from crash time 
zero to the point where the maximum value of the cumulative change in 
velocity is found, as recorded by the EDR, along the longitudinal axis.
    Time, maximum delta-V, resultant means the time from crash time zero 
to the point where the maximum delta-V resultant occurs, as recorded by 
the EDR or processed during data download.
    Time to deploy, pretensioner means the elapsed time from crash time 
zero to the deployment command for the safety belt pretensioner (for 
both driver and right front passenger).
    Time to deploy, side air bag/curtain means the elapsed time from 
crash time zero to the deployment command for a side air bag or a side 
curtain/tube air bag (for both driver and right front passenger).
    Time to first stage means the elapsed time between time zero and the 
time when the first stage of a frontal air bag is commanded to fire.
    Time to n\th\ stage means the elapsed time from crash time zero to 
the deployment command for the nth stage of a frontal air bag (for both 
driver and right front passenger).
    Time zero means whichever of the following occurs first:
    (1) For systems with ``wake-up'' air bag control systems, the time 
at which the occupant restraint control algorithm is activated; or
    (2) For continuously running algorithms,
    (i) The first point in the interval where a longitudinal cumulative 
delta-V of over 0.8 km/h (0.5 mph) is reached within a 20 ms time 
period; or
    (ii) For vehicles that record ``delta-V, lateral,'' the first point 
in the interval where a lateral cumulative delta-V of over 0.8 km/h (0.5 
mph) is reached within a 5 ms time period; or
    (3) An air bag deployment.
    Trigger threshold means a change in vehicle velocity, in the 
longitudinal direction, that equals or exceeds 8 km/h within a 150 ms 
interval. For vehicles that record ``delta-V, lateral,'' trigger 
threshold means a change in vehicle velocity in either the longitudinal 
or lateral direction that equals or exceeds 8 km/h within a 150 ms 
interval.
    Vehicle roll angle means the angle between the vehicle's y-axis and 
the ground plane.
    Volatile memory means the memory reserved for buffering of captured 
EDR data. The memory is not capable of retaining data in a semi-
permanent fashion. Data captured in volatile memory is continuously 
overwritten and is not retained in the event of a power loss or 
retrievable with EDR data extraction tools.
    X-direction means in the direction of the vehicle's X-axis, which is 
parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline. The X-direction is 
positive in the direction of forward vehicle travel.
    Y-direction means in the direction of the vehicle's Y-axis, which is 
perpendicular to its X-axis and in the same horizontal plane as that 
axis. The Y-direction is positive from left to right, from the 
perspective of the driver when seated in the vehicle facing the 
direction of forward vehicle travel.

[[Page 227]]

    Z-direction means in the direction of the vehicle's Z-axis, which is 
perpendicular to the X- and Y-axes. The Z-direction is positive in a 
downward direction.

[73 FR 2180, Jan. 14, 2008]

    Effective Date Note: At 76 FR 47486, Aug. 5, 2011, Sec. 563.5 was 
amended in paragraph (b), by revising the definitions of ``end of event 
time,'' ``event,'' ``occupant size classification,'' and ``time zero,'', 
removing the definition of ``service brake, on and off'', and adding a 
definition for ``service brake, on or off'', effective October 4, 2011. 
For the convenience of the user, the added and revised text is set forth 
as follows:


<R05>
Sec. 563.5  Definitions.

                                * * * * *

    (b) * * *
    End of event time means the moment at which the resultant cumulative 
delta-V within a 20 ms time period becomes 0.8 km/h (0.5 mph) or less, 
or the moment at which the crash detection algorithm of the air bag 
control unit resets.

                                * * * * *

    Event means a crash or other physical occurrence that causes the 
trigger threshold to be met or exceeded, or any non-reversible 
deployable restraint to be deployed, whichever occurs first.

                                * * * * *

    Occupant size classification means, for the right front passenger, 
the classification of the occupant as a child (as defined in 49 CFR part 
572, subpart N or smaller) or not as an adult (as defined in 49 CFR part 
572, subpart O), and for the driver, the classification of the driver as 
being a 5th percentile female (as defined in 49 CFR Part 572, subpart O) 
or larger.

                                * * * * *

    Service brake, on or off means the status of the device that is 
installed in or connected to the brake pedal system to detect whether 
the pedal was pressed. The device can include the brake pedal switch or 
other driver-operated service brake control.

                                * * * * *

    Time zero means whichever of the following occurs first:
    (1) For systems with ``wake-up'' air bag control systems, the time 
at which the occupant restraint control algorithm is activated; or
    (2) For continuously running algorithms,
    (i) The first point in the interval where a longitudinal cumulative 
delta-V of over 0.8 km/h (0.5 mph) is reached within a 20 ms time 
period; or
    (ii) For vehicles that record ``delta-V, lateral,'' the first point 
in the interval where a lateral cumulative delta-V of over 0.8 km/h (0.5 
mph) is reached within a 5 ms time period; or
    (3) Deployment of a non-reversible deployable restraint.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 563.6  Requirements for vehicles.

    Each vehicle equipped with an EDR must meet the requirements 
specified in Sec. 563.7 for data elements, Sec. 563.8 for data format, 
Sec. 563.9 for data capture, Sec. 563.10 for crash test performance 
and survivability, and Sec. 563.11 for information in owner's manual.


<R05>
Sec. 563.7  Data elements.

    (a) Data elements required for all vehicles. Each vehicle equipped 
with an EDR must record all of the data elements listed in Table I, 
during the interval/time and at the sample rate specified in that table.

  Table I--Data Elements Required for all Vehicles Equipped With an EDR
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Data sample
                                       Recording interval/       rate
            Data element              time \1\ (relative to    (samples
                                           time zero)        per second)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Delta-V, longitudinal..............  0 to 250 ms, or 0 to            100
                                      End of Event Time
                                      plus 30 ms, whichever
                                      is shorter.
Maximum delta-V, longitudinal......  0 to 300 ms, or 0 to            N/A
                                      End of Event Time
                                      plus 30 ms, whichever
                                      is shorter.
Time, maximum delta-V..............  0 to 300 ms, or 0 to            N/A
                                      End of Event Time
                                      plus 30 ms, whichever
                                      is shorter.
Speed, vehicle indicated...........  -5.0 to 0 sec.........            2
Engine throttle, % full (or          -5.0 to 0 sec.........            2
 accelerator pedal, % full).
Service brake, on/off..............  -5.0 to 0 sec.........            2
Ignition cycle, crash..............  -1.0 sec..............          N/A

[[Page 228]]

 
Ignition cycle, download...........  At time of download             N/A
                                      \3\.
Safety belt status, driver.........  -1.0 sec..............          N/A
Frontal air bag warning lamp, on/    -1.0 sec..............          N/A
 off \2\.
Frontal air bag deployment, time to  Event.................          N/A
 deploy, in the case of a single
 stage air bag, or time to first
 stage deployment, in the case of a
 multi-stage air bag, driver.
Frontal air bag deployment, time to  Event.................          N/A
 deploy, in the case of a single
 stage air bag, or time to first
 stage deployment, in the case of a
 multi-stage air bag, right front
 passenger.
Multi-event, number of events (1,    Event.................          N/A
 2).
Time from event 1 to 2.............  As needed.............          N/A
Complete file recorded (yes, no)...  Following other data..          N/A
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\Pre-crash data and crash data are asynchronous. The sample time
  accuracy requirement for pre-crash time is -0.1 to 1.0 sec (e.g., T =
  1 would need to occur between -1.1 and 0 seconds).
\2\The frontal air bag warning lamp is the readiness indicator specified
  in S4.5.2 of FMVSS No. 208.
\3\The ignition cycle at the time of download is not required to be
  recorded at the time of the crash, but shall be reported during the
  download process.

    (b) Data elements required for vehicles under specified conditions. 
Each vehicle equipped with an EDR must record each of the data elements 
listed in column 1 of Table II for which the vehicle meets the condition 
specified in column 2 of that table, during the interval/time and at the 
sample rate specified in that table.

                Table II--Data Elements Required for Vehicles Under Specified Minimum Conditions
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                        Recording interval/time     Data sample
            Data element name              Condition for requirement     \1\ (relative to time       rate (per
                                                                                 zero)                second)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lateral acceleration....................  If recorded \2\...........  0 to 250 ms...............             100
Longitudinal acceleration...............  If recorded...............  0 to 250 ms...............             100
Normal acceleration.....................  If recorded...............  0 to 250 ms...............             100
Delta-V, lateral........................  If recorded...............  0 to 250 ms, or 0 to End               100
                                                                       of Event Time plus 30 ms,
                                                                       whichever is shorter.
Maximum delta-V, lateral................  If recorded...............  0 to 300 ms, or 0 to End               N/A
                                                                       of Event Time plus 30 ms,
                                                                       whichever is shorter.
Time, maximum delta-V, lateral..........  If recorded...............  0 to 300 ms, or 0 to End               N/A
                                                                       of Event Time plus 30 ms,
                                                                       whichever is shorter.
Time, maximum delta-V, resultant........  If recorded...............  0 to 300 ms, or 0 to End               N/A
                                                                       of Event Time plus 30 ms,
                                                                       whichever is shorter.
Engine RPM..............................  If recorded...............  -5.0 to 0 sec.............               2
Vehicle roll angle......................  If recorded...............  -1.0 up to 5.0 sec \3\....              10
ABS activity (engaged, non-engaged).....  If recorded...............  -5.0 to 0 sec.............               2
Stability control (on, off, engaged)....  If recorded...............  -5.0 to 0 sec.............               2
Steering input..........................  If recorded...............  -5.0 to 0 sec.............               2
Safety belt status, right front           If recorded...............  -1.0 sec..................             N/A
 passenger (buckled, not buckled).
Frontal air bag suppression switch        If recorded...............  -1.0 sec..................             N/A
 status, right front passenger (on, off,
 or auto).
Frontal air bag deployment, time to nth   If equipped with a          Event.....................             N/A
 stage, driver \4\.                        driver's frontal air bag
                                           with a multi-stage
                                           inflator.
Frontal air bag deployment, time to nth   If equipped with a right    Event.....................             N/A
 stage, right front passenger \4\.         front passenger's frontal
                                           air bag with a multi-
                                           stage inflator.
Frontal air bag deployment, nth stage     If recorded...............  Event.....................             N/A
 disposal, driver, Y/N (whether the nth
 stage deployment was for occupant
 restraint or propellant disposal
 purposes).

[[Page 229]]

 
Frontal air bag deployment, nth stage     If recorded...............  Event.....................             N/A
 disposal, right front passenger, Y/N
 (whether the nth stage deployment was
 for occupant restraint or propellant
 disposal purposes).
Side air bag deployment, time to deploy,  If recorded...............  Event.....................             N/A
 driver.
Side air bag deployment, time to deploy,  If recorded...............  Event.....................             N/A
 right front passenger.
Side curtain/tube air bag deployment,     If recorded...............  Event.....................             N/A
 time to deploy, driver side.
Side curtain/tube air bag deployment,     If recorded...............  Event.....................             N/A
 time to deploy, right side.
Pretensioner deployment, time to fire,    If recorded...............  Event.....................             N/A
 driver.
Pretensioner deployment, time to fire,    If recorded...............  Event.....................             N/A
 right front passenger.
Seat track position switch, foremost,     If recorded...............  -1.0 sec..................             N/A
 status, driver.
Seat track position switch, foremost,     If recorded...............  -1.0 sec..................             N/A
 right front passenger.
Occupant size classification, driver....  If recorded...............  -1.0 sec..................             N/A
Occupant size classification, right       If recorded...............  -1.0 sec..................             N/A
 front passenger.
Occupant position classification, driver  If recorded...............  -1.0 sec..................             N/A
Occupant position classification, right   If recorded...............  -1.0 sec..................            N/A
 front passenger.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Pre-crash data and crash data are asynchronous The sample time accuracy requirement for pre-crash time is -
  0.1 to 1.0 sec (e.g., T = -1 would need to occur between -1.1 and 0 seconds)
\2\ ``If recorded'' means if the data is recorded in non-volatile memory for the purpose of subsequent
  downloading
\3\ ``Vehicle roll angle'' may be recorded in any time duration -1.0 to 5.0 seconds is suggested
\4\ List this element n--1 times, once for each stage of a multi-stage air bag system


[73 FR 2181, Jan. 14, 2008; 73 FR 8408, Feb. 13, 2008]

    Effective Date Note: At 76 FR 47486, Aug. 5, 2011, Sec. 563.7 was 
amended by revising Table I in paragraph (a) and Table II in paragraph 
(b), effective October 4, 2011. For the convenience of the user, the 
revised text is set forth as follows:


<R05>
Sec. 563.7  Data elements.

    (a) * * *

  Table I--Data Elements Required for All Vehicles Equipped With an EDR
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Recording interval/time    Data sample
          Data element            \1\  (relative to time  rate  (samples
                                          zero)             per second)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Delta-V, longitudinal..........  0 to 250 ms or 0 to End             100
                                  of Event Time plus 30
                                  ms, whichever is
                                  shorter.
Maximum delta-V, longitudinal..  0-300 ms or 0 to End of             N/A
                                  Event Time plus 30 ms,
                                  whichever is shorter.
Time, maximum delta-V..........  0-300 ms or 0 to End of             N/A
                                  Event Time plus 30 ms,
                                  whichever is shorter.
Speed, vehicle indicated.......  -5.0 to 0 sec..........               2
Engine throttle, % full (or      -5.0 to 0 sec..........               2
 accelerator pedal, % full).
Service brake, on/off..........  -5.0 to 0 sec..........               2
Ignition cycle, crash..........  -1.0 sec...............             N/A
Ignition cycle, download.......  At time of download \3\             N/A
Safety belt status, driver.....  -1.0 sec...............             N/A
Frontal air bag warning lamp,    -1.0 sec...............             N/A
 on/off \2\.
Frontal air bag deployment,      Event..................             N/A
 time to deploy, in the case of
 a single stage air bag, or
 time to first stage
 deployment, in the case of a
 multi-stage air bag, driver.

[[Page 230]]

 
Frontal air bag deployment,      Event..................             N/A
 time to deploy, in the case of
 a single stage air bag, or
 time to first stage
 deployment, in the case of a
 multi-stage air bag, right
 front passenger.
Multi-event, number of event...  Event..................             N/A
Time from event 1 to 2.........  As needed..............             N/A
Complete file recorded (yes,     Following other data...             N/A
 no).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Pre-crash data and crash data are asynchronous. The sample time
  accuracy requirement for pre-crash time is -0.1 to 1.0 sec (e.g., T =
  1 would need to occur between -1.1 and 0 seconds.)
\2\ The frontal air bag warning lamp is the readiness indicator
  specified in S4.5.2 of FMVSS No. 208, and may also illuminate to
  indicate a malfunction in another part of the deployable restraint
  system.
\3\ The ignition cycle at the time of download is not required to be
  recorded at the time of the crash, but shall be reported during the
  download process.

    (b) * * *

                Table II--Data Elements Required for Vehicles Under Specified Minimum Conditions
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                        Recording interval/time     Data sample
            Data element name             Condition for  requirement    \1\  (relative to time       rate (per
                                                                                 zero)                second)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lateral acceleration....................  If recorded \2\...........  N/A.......................             N/A
Longitudinal acceleration...............  If recorded...............  N/A.......................             N/A
Normal acceleration.....................  If recorded...............  N/A.......................             N/A
Delta-V, lateral........................  If recorded...............  0-250 ms or 0 to End of                100
                                                                       Event Time plus 30 ms,
                                                                       whichever is shorter.
Maximum delta-V, lateral................  If recorded...............  0-300 ms or 0 to End of                N/A
                                                                       Event Time plus 30 ms,
                                                                       whichever is shorter.
Time maximum delta-V, lateral...........  If recorded...............  0-300 ms or 0 to End of                N/A
                                                                       Event Time plus 30 ms,
                                                                       whichever is shorter.
Time for maximum delta-V, resultant.....  If recorded...............  0-300 ms or 0 to End of                N/A
                                                                       Event Time plus 30 ms,
                                                                       whichever is shorter.
Engine rpm..............................  If recorded...............  -5.0 to 0 sec.............               2
Vehicle roll angle......................  If recorded...............  -1.0 up to 5.0 sec \3\....              10
ABS activity (engaged, non-engaged).....  If recorded...............  -5.0 to 0 sec.............               2
Stability control (on, off, or engaged).  If recorded...............  -5.0 to 0 sec.............               2
Steering input..........................  If recorded...............  -5.0 to 0 sec.............               2
Safety belt status, right front           If recorded...............  -1.0 sec..................             N/A
 passenger (buckled, not buckled).
Frontal air bag suppression switch        If recorded...............  -1.0 sec..................             N/A
 status, right front passenger (on, off,
 or auto).
Frontal air bag deployment, time to nth   If equipped with a          Event.....................             N/A
 stage, driver \4\.                        driver's frontal air bag
                                           with a multi-stage
                                           inflator.
Frontal air bag deployment, time to nth   If equipped with a right    Event.....................             N/A
 stage, right front passenger \4\.         front passenger's frontal
                                           air bag with a multi-
                                           stage inflator.
Frontal air bag deployment, nth stage     If recorded...............  Event.....................             N/A
 disposal, driver, Y/N (whether the nth
 stage deployment was for occupant
 restraint or propellant disposal
 purposes).
Frontal air bag deployment, nth stage     If recorded...............  Event.....................             N/A
 disposal, right front passenger, Y/N
 (whether the nth stage deployment was
 for occupant restraint or propellant
 disposal purposes).
Side air bag deployment, time to deploy,  If recorded...............  Event.....................             N/A
 driver.
Side air bag deployment, time to deploy,  If recorded...............  Event.....................             N/A
 right front passenger.

[[Page 231]]

 
Side curtain/tube air bag deployment,     If recorded...............  Event.....................             N/A
 time to deploy, driver side.
Side curtain/tube air bag deployment,     If recorded...............  Event.....................             N/A
 time to deploy, right side.
Pretensioner deployment, time to fire,    If recorded...............  Event.....................             N/A
 driver.
Pretensioner deployment, time to fire,    If recorded...............  Event.....................             N/A
 right front passenger.
Seat track position switch, foremost,     If recorded...............  -1.0 sec..................             N/A
 status, driver.
Seat track position switch, foremost,     If recorded...............  -1.0 sec..................             N/A
 status, right front passenger.
Occupant size classification, driver....  If recorded...............  -1.0 sec..................             N/A
Occupant size classification, right       If recorded...............  -1.0 sec..................             N/A
 front passenger.
Occupant position classification, driver  If recorded...............  -1.0 sec..................             N/A
Occupant position classification, right   If recorded...............  -1.0 sec..................             N/A
 front passenger.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Pre-crash data and crash data are asynchronous. The sample time accuracy requirement for pre-crash time is -
  0.1 to 1.0 sec (e.g. T = -1 would need to occur between -1.1 and 0 seconds.)
\2\ ``If recorded'' means if the data is recorded in non-volatile memory for the purpose of subsequent
  downloading.
\3\ ``vehicle roll angle'' may be recorded in any time duration; -1.0 sec to 5.0 sec is suggested.
\4\ List this element n - 1 times, once for each stage of a multi-stage air bag system.


<R05>
Sec. 563.8  Data format.

    (a) The data elements listed in Tables I and II, as applicable, must 
be reported in accordance with the range, accuracy, and resolution 
specified in Table III

                                     Table III--Reported Data Element Format
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
             Data element                   Minimum range               Accuracy                Resolution
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lateral acceleration.................  -5 g to +5 g...........  <plus-minus<ls-thn-      0.5 g.
                                                                 eq>10%.
Longitudinal acceleration............  -50 g to +50 g.........  <plus-minus<ls-thn-      0.5 g.
                                                                 eq>10%.
Normal acceleration..................  -5 g to +5 g...........  <plus-minus<ls-thn-      0.5 g.
                                                                 eq>10%.
Longitudinal delta-V.................  -100 km/h to + 100 km/h  <plus-minus<ls-thn-      1 km/h.
                                                                 eq>10%.
Lateral delta-V......................  -100 km/h to + 100 km/h  <plus-minus<ls-thn-      1 km/h.
                                                                 eq>10%.
Maximum delta-V, longitudinal........  -100 km/h to + 100 km/h  <plus-minus<ls-thn-      1 km/h.
                                                                 eq>10%.
Maximum delta-V, lateral.............  -100 km/h to + 100 km/h  <plus-minus<ls-thn-      1 km/h.
                                                                 eq>10%.
Time, maximum delta-V, longitudinal..  0--300 ms, or 0--End of  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3  2.5 ms.
                                        Event Time plus 30 ms,   ms.
                                        whichever is shorter.
Time, maximum delta-V, lateral.......  0--300 ms, or 0--End of  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3  2.5 ms.
                                        Event Time plus 30 ms,   ms.
                                        whichever is shorter.
Time, maximum delta-V, resultant.....  0--300 ms, or 0--End of  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3  2.5 ms.
                                        Event Time plus 30 ms,   ms.
                                        whichever is shorter.
Vehicle roll angle...................  -1080 deg to + 1080 deg  <plus-minus<ls-thn-      10 deg.
                                                                 eq>10%.
Speed, vehicle indicated.............  0 km/h to 200 km/h.....  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1  1 km/h.
                                                                 km/h.
Engine throttle, percent full          0 to 100%..............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-      1%.
 (accelerator pedal percent full).                               eq>5%.
Engine RPM...........................  0 to 10,000 rpm........  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>   100 rpm.
                                                                 100 rpm..
Service brake (on, off)..............  On and Off.............  N/A....................  On and Off.
ABS activity.........................  On and Off.............  N/A....................  On and Off.
Stability control (on, off, engaged).  On, Off, Engaged.......  N/A....................  On, Off, Engaged.
Steering input.......................  -250 deg CW to + 250     <plus-minus<ls-thn-      1%.
                                        deg CCW.                 eq>5%.
Ignition cycle, crash................  0 to 60,000............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1  1 cycle.
                                                                 cycle.
Ignition cycle, download.............  0 to 60,000............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1  1 cycle.
                                                                 cycle.
Safety belt status, driver...........  On or Off..............  N/A....................  On or Off.
Safety belt status, right front        On or Off..............  N/A....................  On or Off.
 passenger.

[[Page 232]]

 
Frontal air bag warning lamp (on,      On or Off..............  N/A....................  On or Off.
 off).
Frontal air bag suppression switch     On, Off, or Auto.......  N/A....................  On, Off, or Auto.
 status.
Frontal air bag deployment, time to    0 to 250 ms............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2  1 ms.
 deploy/first stage, driver.                                     ms.
Frontal air bag deployment, time to    0 to 250 ms............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2  1 ms.
 deploy/first stage, right front                                 ms.
 passenger.
Frontal air bag deployment, time to    0 to 250 ms............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2  1 ms.
 n\th\ stage, driver.                                            ms.
Frontal air bag deployment, time to    0 to 250 ms............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2  1 ms.
 n\th\ stage, right front passenger.                             ms.
Frontal air bag deployment, n\th\      Yes or No..............  N/A....................  Yes or No.
 stage disposal, driver (y/n).
Frontal air bag deployment, n\th\      Yes or No..............  N/A....................  Yes or No.
 stage disposal, right front
 passenger (y/n).
Side air bag deployment, time to       0 to 250 ms............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2  1 ms.
 deploy, driver.                                                 ms.
Side air bag deployment, time to       0 to 250 ms............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2  1 ms.
 deploy, right front passenger.                                  ms.
Side curtain/tube air bag deployment,  0 to 250 ms............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2  1 ms.
 time to deploy, driver side.                                    ms.
Side curtain/tube air bag deployment,  0 to 250 ms............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2  1 ms.
 time to deploy, right side.                                     ms.
Pretensioner deployment, time to       0 to 250 ms............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2  1 ms.
 fire, driver.                                                   ms.
Pretensioner deployment, time to       0 to 250 ms............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2  1 ms.
 fire, right front passenger.                                    ms.
Seat track position switch, foremost,  Yes or No..............  N/A....................  Yes or No.
 status, driver.
Seat track position switch, foremost,  Yes or No..............  N/A....................  Yes or No.
 status, right front passenger.
Occupant size driver occupant 5\th\    Yes or No..............  N/A....................  Yes or No.
 female size (y/n).
Occupant position size right front     Yes or No..............  N/A....................  Yes or No.
 passenger child (y/n).
Occupant position classification,      Yes or No..............  N/A....................  Yes or No.
 driver oop (y/n).
Occupant position classification,      Yes or No..............  N/A....................  Yes or No.
 right front passenger oop (y/n).
Multi-event, number of events (1, 2).  1 or 2.................  N/A....................  1 or 2.
Time from event 1 to 2...............  0 to 5.0 sec...........  0.1 sec................  0.1 sec.
Complete file recorded (y/n).........  Yes or No..............  N/A....................  Yes or No.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Acceleration Time-History data and format: the longitudinal, 
lateral, and normal acceleration time-history data, as applicable, must 
be filtered either during the recording phase or during the data 
downloading phase to include:
    (1) The Time Step (TS) that is the inverse of the sampling frequency 
of the acceleration data and which has units of seconds;
    (2) The number of the first point (NFP), which is an integer that 
when multiplied by the TS equals the time relative to time zero of the 
first acceleration data point;
    (3) The number of the last point (NLP), which is an integer that 
when multiplied by the TS equals the time relative to time zero of the 
last acceleration data point; and

[[Page 233]]

    (4) NLP--NFP + 1 acceleration values sequentially beginning with the 
acceleration at time NFP * TS and continue sampling the acceleration at 
TS increments in time until the time NLP * TS is reached.

[73 FR 2183, Jan. 14, 2008]

    Effective Date Note: At 76 FR 47488, Aug. 5, 2011, Sec. 563.8 was 
amended by revising Table III in paragraph (a), effective October 4, 
2011. For the convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as 
follows:


<R05>
Sec. 563.8  Data format.

    (a) * * *

                                     Table III--Reported Data Element Format
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
             Data element                   Minimum range             Accuracy \1\              Resolution
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lateral acceleration.................  At option of             At option of             At option of
                                        manufacturer.            manufacturer.            manufacturer.
Longitudinal acceleration............  At option of             At option of             At option of
                                        manufacturer.            manufacturer.            manufacturer.
Normal Acceleration..................  At option of             At option of             At option of
                                        manufacturer.            manufacturer.            manufacturer.
Longitudinal delta-V.................  -100 km/h to + 100 km/h  <plus-minus<ls-thn-      1 km/h.
                                                                 eq>10%.
Lateral delta-V......................  -100 km/h to +100 km/h.  <plus-minus<ls-thn-      1 km/h.
                                                                 eq>10%.
Maximum delta-V, longitudinal........  -100 km/h to +100 km/h.  <plus-minus<ls-thn-      1 km/h.
                                                                 eq>10%.
Maximum delta-V, lateral.............  -100 km/h to +100 km/h.  <plus-minus<ls-thn-      1 km/h.
                                                                 eq>10%.
Time, maximum delta-V, longitudinal..  0-300 ms, or 0-End of    <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3  2.5 ms.
                                        Event Time plus 30 ms,   ms.
                                        whichever is shorter.
Time, maximum delta-V, lateral.......  0-300 ms, or 0--End of   <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3  2.5 ms.
                                        Event Time plus 30 ms,   ms.
                                        whichever is shorter.
Time, maximum delta-V, resultant.....  0-300 ms, or 0--End of   <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3  2.5 ms.
                                        Event Time plus 30 ms,   ms.
                                        whichever is shorter.
Vehicle Roll Angle...................  -1080 deg to +1080 deg.  <plus-minus<ls-thn-      10 deg.
                                                                 eq>10%.
Speed, vehicle indicated.............  0 km/h to 200 km/h.....  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1  1 km/h.
                                                                 km/h.
Engine throttle, percent full          0 to 100%..............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-      1%.
 (accelerator pedal percent full).                               eq>5%.
Engine rpm...........................  0 to 10,000 rpm........  <plus-minus<ls-thn-      100 rpm.
                                                                 eq>100 rpm.
Service brake........................  On or Off..............  N/A....................  On or Off.
ABS activity.........................  On or Off..............  N/A....................  On or Off.
Stability control....................  On, Off, or Engaged....  N/A....................  On, Off, or Engaged.
Steering input.......................  <plus-minus<ls-thn-      <plus-minus<ls-thn-      1%.
                                        eq>100%.                 eq>5%.
Ignition cycle, crash................  0 to 60,000............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1  1 cycle.
                                                                 cycle.
Ignition cycle, download.............  0 to 60,000............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1  1 cycle.
                                                                 cycle.
Safety belt status, driver...........  On or Off..............  N/A....................  On or Off.
Safety belt status, right front        On or Off..............  N/A....................  On or Off.
 passenger.
Frontal air bag warning lamp.........  On or Off..............  N/A....................  On or Off.
Frontal air bag suppression switch     On, Off, or Auto.......  N/A....................  On, Off, or Auto.
 status, right front passenger.
Frontal air bag deployment, time to    0 to 250 ms............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2  1 ms.
 deploy/first stage, driver.                                     ms.
Frontal air bag deployment, time to    0 to 250 ms............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2  1 ms.
 deploy/first stage, right front                                 ms.
 passenger.
Frontal air bag deployment, time to    0 to 250 ms............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2  1 ms.
 nth stage, driver.                                              ms.
Frontal air bag deployment, time to    0 to 250 ms............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2  1 ms.
 nth stage, right front passenger.                               ms.
Frontal air bag deployment, nth stage  Yes or No..............  N/A....................  Yes or No.
 disposal, driver.
Frontal air bag deployment, nth stage  Yes or No..............  N/A....................  Yes or No.
 disposal, right front passenger.
Side air bag deployment, time to       0 to 250 ms............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2  1 ms.
 deploy, driver.                                                 ms.
Side air bag deployment, time to       0 to 250 ms............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2  1 ms.
 deploy, right front passenger.                                  ms.
Side curtain/tube air bag deployment,  0 to 250 ms............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2  1 ms.
 time to deploy, driver side.                                    ms.
Side curtain/tube air bag deployment,  0 to 250 ms............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2  1 ms.
 time to deploy, right side.                                     ms.

[[Page 234]]

 
Pretensioner deployment, time to       0 to 250 ms............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2  1 ms.
 fire, driver.                                                   ms.
Pretensioner deployment, time to       0 to 250 ms............  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2  1 ms.
 fire, right front passenger.                                    ms.
Seat track position switch, foremost,  Yes or No..............  N/A....................  Yes or No.
 status, driver.
Seat track position switch, foremost,  Yes or No..............  N/A....................  Yes or No.
 status, right front passenger.
Occupant size classification, driver.  5th percentile female    N/A....................  Yes or No.
                                        or larger.
Occupant size classification, right    Child..................  N/A....................  Yes or No.
 front passenger.
Occupant position classification,      Out of position........  N/A....................  Yes or No.
 driver.
Occupant position classification,      Out of position........  N/A....................  Yes or No.
 right front passenger.
Multi-event, number of event.........  1 or 2.................  N/A....................  1 or 2.
Time from event 1 to 2...............  0 to 5.0 sec...........  0.1 sec................  0.1 sec.
Complete file recorded...............  Yes or No..............  N/A....................  Yes or No.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Accuracy requirement only applies within the range of the physical sensor. If measurements captured by a
  sensor exceed the design range of the sensor, the reported element must indicate when the measurement first
  exceeded the design range of the sensor.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 563.9  Data capture.

    The EDR must capture and record the data elements for events in 
accordance with the following conditions and circumstances:
    (a) In a frontal or side air bag deployment crash, capture and 
record the current deployment data, up to two events. The memory for 
each air bag deployment event must be locked to prevent any future 
overwriting of these data.
    (b) In a deployment event that involves another type of deployable 
restraint (e.g., pretensioners, knee bolsters, pedestrian protection, 
etc.), or in a non-deployment event that meets the trigger threshold, 
capture and record the current non-deployment data, up to two events, 
subject to the following conditions:
    (1) If an EDR non-volatile memory buffer void of previous-event data 
is available, the current non-deployment event data is recorded in the 
buffer.
    (2) If an EDR non-volatile memory buffer void of previous-event data 
is not available, the manufacturer may choose either to overwrite the 
previous non-deployment event data with the current non-deployment event 
data, or not to record the current non-deployment event data.
    (3) EDR buffers containing previous deployment-event data must not 
be overwritten by the current non-deployment event data.

[73 FR 2184, Jan. 14, 2008]

    Effective Date Note: At 76 FR 47489, Aug. 5, 2011, Sec. 563.9 was 
revised, effective October 4, 2011. For the convenience of the user, the 
revised text is set forth as follows:


<R05>
Sec. 563.9  Data capture.

    The EDR must capture and record the data elements for events in 
accordance with the following conditions and circumstances:
    (a) In a frontal air bag deployment crash, capture and record the 
current deployment data. In a side or side curtain/tube air bag 
deployment crash, where lateral delta-V is recorded by the EDR, capture 
and record the current deployment data. The memory for the air bag 
deployment event must be locked to prevent any future overwriting of the 
data.
    (b) In an event that does not meet the criteria in Sec. 563.9(a), 
capture and record the current event data, up to two events, subject to 
the following conditions:
    (1) If an EDR non-volatile memory buffer void of previous-event data 
is available, the current event data is recorded in the buffer.
    (2) If an EDR non-volatile memory buffer void of previous-event data 
is not available, the manufacturer may choose to either overwrite any 
previous event data that does not deploy an air bag with the current 
event data, or to not record the current event data.

[[Page 235]]

    (3) EDR buffers containing previous frontal, side, or side curtain/
tube air bag deployment-event data must not be overwritten by the 
current event data.


<R05>
Sec. 563.10  Crash test performance and survivability.

    (a) Each vehicle subject to the requirements of S5, S14.5, S15, or 
S17 of 49 CFR 571.208, Occupant crash protection, must comply with the 
requirements in subpart (c) of this section when tested according to S8, 
S16, and S18 of 49 CFR 571.208.
    (b) Each vehicle subject to the requirements of 49 CFR 571.214, Side 
impact protection, that meets a trigger threshold or has a frontal air 
bag deployment, must comply with the requirements of subpart (c) of this 
section when tested according to the conditions specified in 49 CFR 
571.214 for a moving deformable barrier test.
    (c) The data elements required by Sec. 563.7, except for the 
``Engine throttle, percent full,'' ``engine RPM,'' and ``service brake, 
on/off,'' must be recorded in the format specified by Sec. 563.8, exist 
at the completion of the crash test, and be retrievable by the 
methodology specified by the vehicle manufacturer under Sec. 563.12 for 
not less than 10 days after the test, and the complete data recorded 
element must read ``yes'' after the test.


<R05>
Sec. 563.11  Information in owner's manual.

    (a) The owner's manual in each vehicle covered under this regulation 
must provide the following statement in English:

    This vehicle is equipped with an event data recorder (EDR). The main 
purpose of an EDR is to record, in certain crash or near crash-like 
situations, such as an air bag deployment or hitting a road obstacle, 
data that will assist in understanding how a vehicle's systems 
performed. The EDR is designed to record data related to vehicle 
dynamics and safety systems for a short period of time, typically 30 
seconds or less. The EDR in this vehicle is designed to record such data 
as:
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> How various systems in your vehicle were 
operating;
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Whether or not the driver and passenger safety 
belts were buckled/fastened;
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> How far (if at all) the driver was depressing the 
accelerator and/or brake pedal; and,
    <bullet<ls-thn-eq> How fast the vehicle was traveling.
    These data can help provide a better understanding of the 
circumstances in which crashes and injuries occur. NOTE: EDR data are 
recorded by your vehicle only if a non-trivial crash situation occurs; 
no data are recorded by the EDR under normal driving conditions and no 
personal data (e.g., name, gender, age, and crash location) are 
recorded. However, other parties, such as law enforcement, could combine 
the EDR data with the type of personally identifying data routinely 
acquired during a crash investigation.
    To read data recorded by an EDR, special equipment is required, and 
access to the vehicle or the EDR is needed. In addition to the vehicle 
manufacturer, other parties, such as law enforcement, that have the 
special equipment, can read the information if they have access to the 
vehicle or the EDR.

    (b) The owner's manual may include additional information about the 
form, function, and capabilities of the EDR, in supplement to the 
required statement in Sec. 563.11(a).


<R05>
Sec. 563.12  Data retrieval tools.

    Each manufacturer of a motor vehicle equipped with an EDR shall 
ensure by licensing agreement or other means that a tool(s) is 
commercially available that is capable of accessing and retrieving the 
data stored in the EDR that are required by this part. The tool(s) shall 
be commercially available not later than 90 days after the first sale of 
the motor vehicle for purposes other than resale.


<R03>
PART 564_REPLACEABLE LIGHT SOURCE INFORMATION (Eff. until 12-01-12)--

Table of Contents



Sec.
564.1 Scope.
564.2 Purposes.
564.3 Applicability.
564.4 Definitions.
564.5 Information filing; agency processing of filings.

Appendix A to Part 564--Information To Be Submitted for Replaceable 
          Light Sources
Appendix B to Part 564--Information To Be Submitted for Long Life 
          Replaceable Light Sources of Limited Definition

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 30111, 30115, 30117, 30166; delegation of 
authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 58 FR 3860, Jan. 12, 1993, unless otherwise noted.

[[Page 236]]


    Effective Date Note: At 72 FR 68266, Dec. 4, 2007, part 564 was 
revised, effective January 15, 1981. effective September 1, 2008. At 73 
FR 50730, August 28, 2008, the revision was delayed until Dec. 1, 2009. 
At 74 FR 58214, Nov. 12, 2009, the revision was further delayed until 
December 1, 2012. For the convenience of the user, the new part 564 
follows the text of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 564.1  Scope.

    This part requires the submission of dimensional, electrical 
specification, and marking/designation information, as specified in 
appendix A and appendix B of this part, for original equipment 
replaceable light sources used in motor vehicle headlighting systems.

[61 FR 20500, May 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 564.2  Purposes.

    The purposes of this part are achieved through its Appendices:
    (a) The purposes of appendix A of this part are to ensure
    (1) The availability to replacement light source manufacturers of 
the manufacturing specifications of original equipment light sources so 
that replacement light sources are interchangeable with original 
equipment light sources and provide equivalent performance, and
    (2) That redesigned or newly developed light sources are designated 
as distinct, different, and noninterchangeable with previously existing 
light sources.
    (b) The purposes of appendix B of this part are to ensure
    (1) That original equipment light sources are replaceable and that 
replacement light sources provide equivalent performance, and
    (2) That redesignated or newly developed light sources are 
designated as distinct, different, and noninterchangeable with 
previously existing light sources.

[61 FR 20500, May 7, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 564.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to replaceable light sources used as original 
equipment in motor vehicle headlighting systems.

[60 FR 14228, Mar. 16, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 564.4  Definitions.

    All terms defined in the Act and the regulations and standards 
issued under its authority are used as defined therein.


<R05>
Sec. 564.5  Information filing; agency processing of filings.

    (a) Each manufacturer of a motor vehicle, original equipment 
headlamp, or original equipment headlamp replaceable light source, which 
intends to manufacture a replaceable light source as original equipment 
or to incorporate a replaceable light source in its headlamps or motor 
vehicles, shall furnish the information specified in appendix A. If the 
rated laboratory life of the light source is not less than 2,000 hours, 
the manufacturer shall furnish the information specified in either 
appendix A or appendix B of this part. Information shall be furnished 
to: Associate Administrator for Safety Performance Standards, National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW, 
Washington, D.C. 20590. Attention: Part 564--Replaceable Light Source 
Information (unless the agency has already filed such information in 
Docket No. NHTSA 98-3397).
    (b) The manufacturer shall submit such information not later than 60 
days before it intends to begin the manufacture of the replaceable light 
source to which the information applies, or to incorporate the light 
source into a headlamp or motor vehicle of its manufacture. Each 
submission shall consist of one original set of information and 10 
legible reproduced copies, all on 8\1/2\ by 11-inch paper.
    (c) The Associate Administrator promptly reviews each submission and 
informs the manufacturer not later than 30 days after its receipt 
whether the submission has been accepted. Upon acceptance, the Associate 
Administrator files the information in Docket No. NHTSA 98-3397. The 
Associate Administrator does not accept any submission that does not 
contain all the information specified in appendix A or appendix B of 
this part, or whose accompanying information indicates that any new 
light source which is the subject of a submission is interchangeable 
with any replaceable light source for which the agency has previously 
filed

[[Page 237]]

information in Docket No. NHTSA 98-3397.
    (d) A manufacturer may request modification of a light source for 
which information has previously been filed in Docket No. NHTSA 98-3397, 
and the submission shall be processed in the manner provided by Sec. 
564.5(c). A request for modification shall contain the following:
    (1) All the information specified in appendix A or appendix B of 
this part that is relevant to the modification requested,
    (2) The reason for the requested modification,
    (3) A statement that use of the light source as modified will not 
create a noncompliance with any requirement of Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standard No. 108 (49 CFR 571.108) when used to replace an unmodified 
light source in a headlamp certified by its manufacturer as conforming 
to all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards, together with 
reasons in support of the statement; and
    (4) Information demonstrating that the modification would not 
adversely affect interchangeability with the original light source.
    After review of the request for modification, the Associate 
Administrator may seek further information either from the manufacturer 
or through a notice published in the Federal Register requesting comment 
on whether a modified light source incorporating the changes requested 
will create a noncompliance with Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 108 
when substituted for an unmodified light source. If the Associate 
Administrator seeks comment public comment on a submission, (s)he shall 
publish a further notice stating whether (s)he has accepted or rejected 
the submission. If a submission is accepted, the Associate Administrator 
files the information in Docket No. NHTSA 98-3397. If a submission is 
rejected, a manufacturer may submit information with respect to it, as 
provided in paragraph 564.5(a), for consideration as a new light source 
after such changes as will ensure that it is not interchangeable with 
the light source for which modification was originally requested.
    (e) Information submitted under this section is made available by 
NHTSA for public inspection as soon as practicable after its receipt, 
but not later than the date on which a vehicle equipped with a new or 
revised replaceable light source is offered for sale.

[60 FR 14228, Mar. 16, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 20500, May 7, 1996; 63 
FR 42587, Aug. 10, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. Appendix A to Part 564--Information To Be Submitted for Replaceable 

                              Light Sources

 I. Filament or Discharge Arc Position Dimensions and Tolerances Using 
    Either Direct Filament or Discharge Arc Dimensions or the Three 
          Dimensional Filament or Discharge Arc Tolerance Box.

    A. Lower beam filament dimensions or filament tolerance box 
dimensions and relation of these to the bulb base reference plane and 
centerline.
    1. Axial location of the filament centerline or the filament 
tolerance box relative to the bulb base reference plane.
    2. Vertical location of the filament centerline or the filament 
tolerance box relative to the bulb base centerline.
    3. Transverse location of the filament centerline or the filament 
tolerance box relative to the bulb base centerline.
    4. Filament tolerance box dimensions, if used.
    B. Upper beam filament dimensions or the filament tolerance box 
dimensions, and relation of these to the bulb base reference plane and 
centerline.
    1. Axial location of the filament centerline or the filament 
tolerance box relative to the bulb base reference plane.
    2. Vertical location of the filament centerline or the filament 
tolerance box relative to the bulb base centerline.
    3. Transverse location of the filament centerline or the filament 
tolerance box relative to the bulb base centerline.
    4. Filament tolerance box dimensions, if used.
    C. If the replaceable light source has both a lower beam and an 
upper beam filament, the dimensional relationship between the two 
filament centerlines or the filament tolerance boxes may be provided 
instead of referencing the upper beam filament centerline or filament 
tolerance box to the bulb base centerline or reference plane.
    D. For a light source using excited gas mixtures as a filament, 
necessary fiducial information and specifications including electrode 
position dimensions and tolerance information that provide similar 
location and characteristics information required by

[[Page 238]]

paragraphs A, B, and C of this section I for light sources using a 
resistive type filament.

   II. Dimensions Pertaining to Filament Capsule and Capsule Supports

    A. Maximum length from bulb base reference plane to tip of filament 
capsule.
    B. Maximum radial distances from bulb base centerline to periphery 
of filament capsule and/or supports.
    C. Location of black cap relative to low beam filament centerline, 
filament tolerance box or other to-be-specified reference.
    D. Size, length, shape, or other pertinent features and dimensions 
for providing undistorted walls for the filament capsule.

       III. Bulb Base Interchangeability Dimensions and Tolerance

    A. Angular locations, diameters, key/keyway sizes, and any other 
interchangeability dimensions for indexing the bulb base in the bulb 
holder.
    B. Diameter, width, depth, and surface finish of seal groove, 
surface, or other pertinent sealing features.
    C. Diameter of the bulb base at the interface of the base and its 
perpendicular reference surface.
    D. Dimensions of features related to retention of the bulb base in 
the bulb holder such as tabs, keys, keyways, surfaces, etc.

       IV. Bulb Holder Interchangeability Dimensions and Tolerance

    A. Mating angular locations, diameters, key/keyway sizes, and any 
other interchangeability dimensions for indexing the bulb base in the 
bulb holder.
    B. Mating diameter, width, depth, and surface finish of seal groove, 
surface, or other pertinent sealing features.
    C. Mating diameter of the bulb holder at the interface of the bulb 
base aperture and its perpendicular reference surface.
    D. Mating dimensions of features related to retention of the bulb 
base in the bulb holder such as tabs, keys, keyways, surfaces, etc.

 V. Wiring Harness Connector to Bulb Base Interchangeability Dimensions 
                             and Tolerances

    A. Maximum depth of harness connector insertion into bulb base.
    B. Location of electrical pins in bulb base.
    C. Dimensions of electrical pins in bulb base--length, diameter, 
width, thickness and etc.
    D. Fit of harness connector into bulb base providing all necessary 
dimensions, key/keyway controls, and dimensions, tapers etc.
    E. Dimensions and location of locking features for wiring harness 
connector to bulb base.
    F. Identification of upper beam, lower beam, and common terminals.

 VI. Seal Specifications (if replaceable light source is intended to be 
                        of a sealed base design)

    A. Type.
    B. Material.
    C. Dimensions.

     VII. Electrical Specifications for Each Filament at 12.8 Volts

    A. Maximum power (in watts).
    B. Luminous Flux with tolerance (in lumens) with black cap if so 
equipped, measured in accordance with the document: Illuminating 
Engineering Society of North America, LM-45; IES Approved Method for 
Electrical and Photometric Measurements of General Service Incandescent 
Filament Lamps (April 1980).

     VIII. Bulb Markings/Designation-- ANSI Number, ECE Identifier, 
     Manufacturer's Part Number, Individually or in Any Combination

  IX. All other information, dimensions or performance specifications 
    necessary for interchangeability, replaceability, or system test 
purposes not listed in sections I through VIII. If a ballast is required 
  for operation, a complete listing of the requirements and parameters 
between the light source and ballast, and ballast and the vehicle shall 
                            also be provided.

[58 FR 3860, Jan. 12, 1993, as amended at 61 FR 20500, 20501, May 7, 
1996]


<R05>
 Sec. Appendix B to Part 564--Information To Be Submitted for Long Life 

             Replaceable Light Sources of Limited Definition

 I. Filament or Discharge Arc Position Dimensions and Tolerances Using 
    Either Direct Filament or Discharge Arc Dimensions or the Three 
            Dimensional Filament Discharge Arc Tolerance Box.

    A. Lower beam filament or discharge arc dimensions or filament or 
discharge arc tolerance box dimensions and relation of these to the bulb 
base reference plane and centerline.
    1. Axial location of the filament or discharge arc centerline or the 
filament or discharge arc tolerance box relative to the bulb base 
reference plane.
    2. Vertical location of the filament or discharge arc centerline or 
the filament or discharge arc tolerance box relative to the bulb base 
centerline.
    3. Transverse location of the filament or discharge arc centerline 
or the filament or discharge arc tolerance box relative to the bulb base 
centerline.
    4. Filament or discharge arc tolerance box dimensions, if used.

[[Page 239]]

    B. Upper beam filament or discharge arc dimensions or the filament 
or discharge arc tolerance box dimensions and relation of these to the 
bulb base reference plane and centerline.
    1. Axial location of the filament or discharge arc centerline or the 
filament or discharge arc tolerance box relative to the bulb base 
reference plane.
    2. Vertical location of the filament or discharge arc centerline or 
the filament or discharge arc tolerance box relative to the bulb base 
centerline.
    3. Transverse location of the filament or discharge arc centerline 
or the filament or discharge arc tolerance box relative to the bulb base 
centerline.
    4. Filament or discharge arc tolerance box dimensions, if used.
    C. If the replaceable light source has both a lower beam and upper 
beam filament or discharge arc, the dimensional relationship between the 
two filament or discharge arc centerlines or the filament or discharge 
arc tolerance boxes may be provided instead of referencing the upper 
beam filament or discharge arc centerline or filament or discharge arc 
tolerance box to the bulb base centerline or reference plane.
    D. For a light source using excited gas mixtures as a filament, 
necessary fiducial information and specifications including electrode 
position dimensions, and tolerance information that provide similar 
location and characteristics information required by paragraphs A, B, 
and C of this section I for light sources using a resistive type 
filament.

       II. Bulb Base Interchangeability Dimensions and Tolerance.

    A. Angular locations, diameters, key/keyway sizes, and any other 
interchangeability dimensions for indexing the bulb base in the bulb 
holder.
    B. Diameter, width, depth, and surface finish of seal groove, 
surface, or other pertinent sealing features.
    C. Diameter of the bulb base at the interface of the base and its 
perpendicular reference surface.
    D. Dimensions of features related to retention of the bulb base in 
the bulb holder such as tabs, keys, keyways, surface, etc.

     III. Bulb Holder Interchangeability Dimensions and Tolerances.

    A. Mating angular locations, diameters, key/keyway sizes, any other 
interchangeability dimensions for indexing the bulb base in the bulb 
holder.
    B. Mating diameter, width, depth, and surface, or other pertinent 
sealing features.
    C. Mating diameter of the bulb holder at the interface of the bulb 
base aperture and its perpendicular reference surface.
    D. Mating dimensions of features related to retention of the bulb 
base in the bulb holder such as tabs, keys, keyways, surface, or any 
other characteristics necessary for mating dimensions.

IV. Electrical Specifications for Each Light Source that Operates With a 
     Ballast and Rated Life of the Light Source/Ballast Combination.

    A. Maximum power (in watts).
    B. Luminous Flux (in lumens).
    C. Rated laboratory life of the light source/ballast combination 
(not less than 2,000 hours).

V. Applicable to Light Sources that Operate With a Source Voltage Other 
 Than 12.8 Volts Direct Current, and When a Proprietary Ballast Must Be 
                       Used With the Light Source.

    A. Manufacturer's part number for the ballast.
    B. Any other characteristics necessary for system operation.

      VI. Bulb Markings/Designation-- ANSI Number, ECE Identifier, 
      Manufacturer's Part Number, Individual or in Any Combination.

VII. All other identification, dimensions or performance specifications 
 necessary for replaceability or systems test not listed in sections I 
                               through VI.

[61 FR 20500, May 7, 1996]

    Effective Date Notes: At 72 FR 68266, Dec. 4, 2007, part 564 was 
revised, effective Sept. 1, 2008. At 73 FR 50730, Aug. 28, 2008, the 
revision was delayed until Dec. 1, 2009. At 74 FR 58214, Nov. 12, 2009, 
the revision was further delayed until Dec. 1, 2012. For the convenience 
of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:


<R03>
PART 564_REPLACEABLE LIGHT SOURCE AND SEALED BEAM HEADLAMP INFORMATION (Eff. 

12-01-12)

Sec.
564.1 Scope.
564.2 Purposes.
564.3 Applicability.
564.4 Definitions.
564.5 Information filing; agency processing of filings.

Appendix A to Part 564--Information to be Submitted for Replaceable 
          Light Sources
Appendix B to Part 564--Information to be Submitted for Long Life 
          Replaceable Light Sources of Limited Definition
Appendix C to Part 564--Information Applicable to Standardized Sealed 
          Beam Headlamp Units


[[Page 240]]


    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 30111, 30115, 30117, 30166; delegation of 
authority at 49 CFR 1.50.


<R05>
Sec. 564.1  Scope.

    This part requires the submission of dimensional, electrical 
specification, and marking/designation information as specified in 
Appendices A and B of this part, for original equipment replaceable 
light sources used in motor vehicle headlighting systems. This part also 
serves as a repository for design information as specified in appendix C 
of this part, for original equipment and replacement standardized sealed 
beam units used in motor vehicle headlighting systems.


<R05>
Sec. 564.2  Purposes.

    The purposes of this part are achieved through its Appendices:
    (a) The purposes of appendix A of this part are to ensure:
    (1) The availability to replacement light source manufacturers of 
the manufacturing specifications of original equipment light sources so 
that replacement light sources are interchangeable with original 
equipment light sources and provide equivalent performance, and
    (2) That redesigned or newly developed light sources are designated 
as distinct, different, and noninterchangeable with previously existing 
light sources.
    (b) The purposes of appendix B of this part are to ensure:
    (1) That original equipment light sources are replaceable and that 
replacement light sources provide equivalent performance, and
    (2) That redesigned or newly developed light sources are designated 
as distinct, different, and noninterchangeable with previously existing 
light sources.
    (c) The purpose of appendix C of this part is to ensure the 
availability to original equipment and replacement sealed beam headlamp 
manufacturers of the manufacturing specifications of standardized sealed 
beam headlamp units used on motor vehicles so that all sealed beam 
headlamp units of a specific type are interchangeable with all other 
units of that same type and provide equivalent performance.


<R05>
Sec. 564.3  Applicability.

    This part applies to replaceable light sources used as original 
equipment, and standardized sealed beam headlamp units used as original 
equipment and replacement equipment in motor vehicle headlighting 
systems.


<R05>
Sec. 564.4  Definitions.

    All terms defined in the Act and the regulations and standards 
issued under its authority are used as defined therein.


<R05>
Sec. 564.5  Information filing; agency processing of filings.

    (a) Each manufacturer of a motor vehicle, original equipment 
headlamp, or original equipment headlamp replaceable light source, which 
intends to manufacture a replaceable light source as original equipment 
or to incorporate a replaceable light source in its headlamps or motor 
vehicles, shall furnish the information specified in appendix A. If the 
rated laboratory life of the light source is not less than 2,000 hours, 
the manufacturer shall furnish the information specified in either 
appendix A or appendix B of this part. Information shall be furnished 
to: Associate Administrator for Rulemaking, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE., West Building, 
Washington, DC 20590 Attention: Part 564-Replaceable Light Source 
Information (unless the Agency has already filed such information in 
Docket No. NHTSA 98-3397).
    (b) The manufacturer shall submit such information not later than 60 
days before it intends to begin manufacture of the replaceable light 
source to which the information applies, or to incorporate the light 
source into a headlamp, or to incorporate the light source into a motor 
vehicle of its manufacture. Each submission shall consist of one 
original set of information and ten legible reproduced copies, all on 
8\1/2\ by 11-inch paper.
    (c) The Associate Administrator promptly reviews each submission and 
informs the manufacturer not later than 30 days after its receipt 
whether the submission has been accepted. Upon acceptance, the Associate 
Administrator files the information in Docket No. NHTSA 98-3397. The 
Associate Administrator does not accept any submission that does not 
contain all the information specified in appendix A or appendix B of 
this part, or whose accompanying information indicates that any new 
light source which is the subject of a submission is interchangeable 
with any replaceable light source for which the agency has previously 
filed information in Docket No. NHTSA 98-3397.
    (d) A manufacturer may request modification of a light source for 
which information has previously been filed in Docket No. NHTSA 98-3397, 
and the submission shall be processed in the manner provided by Sec. 
564.5(c). A request for modification shall contain the following:
    (1) All the information specified in appendix A or appendix B of 
this part that is relevant to the modification requested,
    (2) The reason for the requested modification,
    (3) A statement that the use of the light source as modified will 
not create a noncompliance with any requirement of Federal Motor Vehicle 
Safety Standard No. 108 (49

[[Page 241]]

CFR 571.108) when used to replace an unmodified light source in a 
headlamp certified by its manufacturer as conforming to all applicable 
Federal motor vehicle safety standards, together with reasons in support 
of the statement; and
    (4) Information demonstrating that the modification would not 
adversely affect interchangeability with the original light source.
    After review of the request for modification, the Associate 
Administrator may seek further information either from the manufacturer 
or through a notice published in the Federal Register requesting comment 
on whether a modified light source incorporating the changes requested 
will create a noncompliance with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 
No. 108 when substituted for an unmodified light source. If the 
Associate Administrator seeks public comment on a submission (s)he shall 
publish a notice stating whether (s)he has accepted or rejected the 
submission. If a submission is accepted, the Associate Administrator 
files the information in Docket No. NHTSA 98-3397. If a submission is 
rejected, a manufacturer may submit information with respect to it, as 
provides in paragraph 564.5(a), for consideration as a new light source 
after such changes as will insure that it is not interchangeable with 
the light source for which modification was originally requested.
    (e) Information submitted under this section is made available by 
NHTSA for public inspection as soon as practicable after its receipt, 
but not later than the date on which a vehicle equipped with a new or 
revised replaceable light source is offered for sale.


<R05>
Sec. Appendix A to Part 564--Information to be Submitted for Replaceable 

                              Light Sources

 I. Filament or Discharge Arc Position Dimensions and Tolerances Using 
    Either Direct Filament or Discharge Arc Dimensions or the Three 
           Dimensional Filament or Discharge Arc Tolerance Box

    A. Lower beam filament dimensions or filament tolerance box 
dimensions and relation of these to the bulb base reference plane and 
centerline.
    1. Axial location of the filament centerline or the filament 
tolerance box relative to the bulb base reference plane.
    2. Vertical location of the filament centerline or the filament 
tolerance box relative to the bulb base centerline.
    3. Transverse location of the filament centerline or the filament 
tolerance box relative to the bulb base centerline.
    4. Filament tolerance box dimensions, if used.
    B. Upper beam filament dimensions or the filament tolerance box 
dimensions, and relation of these to the bulb base reference plane and 
centerline.
    1. Axial location of the filament centerline or the filament 
tolerance box relative to the bulb base reference plane.
    2. Vertical location of the filament centerline or the filament 
tolerance box relative to the bulb base centerline.
    3. Transverse location of the filament centerline or the filament 
tolerance box relative to the bulb base centerline.
    4. Filament tolerance box dimensions, if used.
    C. If the replaceable light source has both a lower beam and an 
upper beam filament, the dimensional relationship between the two 
filament centerlines or the filament tolerance boxes may be provided 
instead of referencing the upper beam filament centerline or filament 
tolerance box to the bulb base centerline or reference plane.
    D. For a light source using excited gas mixtures as a filament, 
necessary fiducial information and specifications including electrode 
position dimensions and tolerance information that provide similar 
location and characteristics information required by paragraphs A, B, 
and C of this section I for light sources using a resistive type 
filament.

   II. Dimensions Pertaining to Filament Capsule and Capsule Supports

    A. Maximum length from bulb base reference plane to tip of filament 
capsule.
    B. Maximum radial distances from bulb base centerline to periphery 
of filament capsule and/or supports.
    C. Location of black cap relative to low beam filament centerline, 
filament tolerance box or other to-be-specified reference.
    D. Size, length, shape, or other pertinent features and dimensions 
for providing undistorted walls for the filament capsule.

       III. Bulb Base Interchangeability Dimensions and Tolerance

    A. Angular locations, diameters, key/keyway sizes, and any other 
interchangeability dimensions for indexing the bulb base in the bulb 
holder.
    B. Diameter, width, depth, and surface finish of seal groove, 
surface, or other pertinent sealing features.
    C. Diameter of the bulb base at the interface of the base and its 
perpendicular reference surface.
    D. Dimensions of features related to retention of the bulb base in 
the bulb holder such as tabs, keys, keyways, surfaces, etc.

       IV. Bulb Holder Interchangeability Dimensions and Tolerance

    A. Mating angular locations, diameters, key/keyway sizes, and any 
other interchangeability dimensions for indexing the bulb base in the 
bulb holder.

[[Page 242]]

    B. Mating diameter, width, depth, and surface finish of seal groove, 
surface, or other pertinent sealing features.
    C. Mating diameter of the bulb holder at the interface of the bulb 
base aperture and its perpendicular reference surface.
    D. Mating dimensions of features related to retention of the bulb 
base in the bulb holder such as tabs, keys, keyways, surfaces, etc.

 V. Wiring Harness Connector to Bulb Base Interchangeability Dimensions 
                             and Tolerances

    A. Maximum depth of harness connector insertion into bulb base.
    B. Location of electrical pins in bulb base.
    C. Dimensions of electrical pins in bulb base--length, diameter, 
width, thickness and etc.
    D. Fit of harness connector into bulb base providing all necessary 
dimensions, key/keyway controls, and dimensions, tapers etc.
    E. Dimensions and location of locking features for wiring harness 
connector to bulb base.
    F. Identification of upper beam, lower beam, and common terminals.

 VI. Seal Specifications (if Replaceable Light Source is Intended to be 
                        of a Sealed Base Design)

    A. Type.
    B. Material.
    C. Dimensions.

     VII. Electrical Specifications for Each Filament at 12.8 Volts

    A. Maximum power (in watts).
    B. Luminous Flux with tolerance (in lumens) with black cap if so 
equipped, measured in accordance with the document: Illuminating 
Engineering Society of North America, LM-45; IES Approved Method for 
Electrical and Photometric Measurements of General Service Incandescent 
Filament Lamps (April 1980). This incorporation by reference was 
approved by the Director of the Federal Register in accordance with 5 
U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. Copies may be obtained from the 
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, 345 East 47th St., 
New York, NY 10017. Copies may be inspected at the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, Technical Information Services, 1200 New 
Jersey Avenue, Washington, DC 20590, or at the National Archives and 
Records Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of 
this material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://
www.archives.gov/federal-- register/code--of-- federal regulations/ibr--
locations.html.

     VIII. Bulb Markings/Designation--ANSI NUMBER, ECE IDENTIFIER, 
     MANUFACTURER'S PART NUMBER, INDIVIDUALLY OR IN ANY COMBINATION

  IX. All Other Information, Dimensions or Performance Specifications 
    Necessary for Interchangeability, Replaceability, or System Test 
             Purposes not Listed in Sections I Through VIII

    IF A BALLAST IS REQUIRED FOR OPERATION, A COMPLETE LISTING OF THE 
REQUIREMENTS AND PARAMETERS BETWEEN THE LIGHT SOURCE AND BALLAST, AND 
BALLAST AND THE VEHICLE SHALL ALSO BE PROVIDED.


<R05>
 Sec. Appendix B to Part 564--Information to be Submitted for Long Life 

             Replaceable Light Sources of Limited Definition

 I. Filament or Discharge Arc Position Dimensions and Tolerances Using 
    Either Direct Filament or Discharge Arc Dimensions or the Three 
            Dimensional Filament Discharge Arc Tolerance Box

    A. Lower beam filament or discharge arc dimensions or filament or 
discharge arc tolerance box dimensions and relation of these to the bulb 
base reference plane and centerline.
    1. Axial location of the filament or discharge arc centerline or the 
filament or discharge arc tolerance box relative to the bulb base 
reference plane.
    2. Vertical location of the filament or discharge arc centerline or 
the filament or discharge arc tolerance box relative to the bulb base 
centerline.
    3. Transverse location of the filament or discharge arc centerline 
or the filament or discharge arc tolerance box relative to the bulb base 
centerline.
    4. Filament or discharge arc tolerance box dimensions, if used.
    B. Upper beam filament or discharge arc dimensions or the filament 
or discharge arc tolerance box dimensions and relation of these to the 
bulb base reference plane and centerline.
    1. Axial location of the filament or discharge arc centerline or the 
filament or discharge arc tolerance box relative to the bulb base 
reference plane.
    2. Vertical location of the filament or discharge arc centerline or 
the filament or discharge arc tolerance box relative to the bulb base 
centerline.
    3. Transverse location of the filament or discharge arc centerline 
or the filament or discharge arc tolerance box relative to the bulb base 
centerline.
    4. Filament or discharge arc tolerance box dimensions, if used.

[[Page 243]]

    C. If the replaceable light source has both a lower beam and upper 
beam filament or discharge arc, the dimensional relationship between the 
two filament or discharge arc centerlines or the filament or discharge 
arc tolerance boxes may be provided instead of referencing the upper 
beam filament or discharge arc centerline or filament or discharge arc 
tolerance box to the bulb base centerline or reference plane.
    D. For a light source using excited gas mixtures as a filament, 
necessary fiducial information and specifications including electrode 
position dimensions, and tolerance information that provide similar 
location and characteristics information required by paragraphs A, B, 
and C of this section I for light sources using a resistive type 
filament.

        II. Bulb Base Interchangeability Dimensions and Tolerance

    A. Angular locations, diameters, key/keyway sizes, and any other 
interchangeability dimensions for indexing the bulb base in the bulb 
holder.
    B. Diameter, width, depth, and surface finish of seal groove, 
surface, or other pertinent sealing features.
    C. Diameter of the bulb base at the interface of the base and its 
perpendicular reference surface.
    D. Dimensions of features related to retention of the bulb base in 
the bulb holder such as tabs, keys, keyways, surface, etc.

      III. Bulb Holder Interchangeability Dimensions and Tolerances

    A. Mating angular locations, diameters, key/keyway sizes, any other 
interchangeability dimensions for indexing the bulb base in the bulb 
holder.
    B. Mating diameter, width, depth, and surface, or other pertinent 
sealing features.
    C. Mating diameter of the bulb holder at the interface of the bulb 
base aperture and its perpendicular reference surface.
    D. Mating dimensions of features related to retention of the bulb 
base in the bulb holder such as tabs, keys, keyways, surface, or any 
other characteristics necessary for mating dimensions.

IV. Electrical Specifications for Each Light Source That Operates With a 
     Ballast and Rated Life of the Light Source/Ballast Combination

    A. Maximum power (in watts).
    B. Luminous Flux (in lumens).
    C. Rated laboratory life of the light source/ballast combination 
(not less than 2,000 hours).

V. Applicable to Light Sources That Operate With a Source Voltage Other 
 Than 12.8 Volts Direct Current, and When a Proprietary Ballast Must Be 
                       Used With the Light Source

    A. Manufacturer's part number for the ballast.
    B. Any other characteristics necessary for system operation.

      VI. Bulb Markings/Designation--ANSI NUMBER, ECE IDENTIFIER, 
      MANUFACTURER'S PART NUMBER, INDIVIDUAL OR IN ANY COMBINATION

VII. All Other Identification, Dimensions or Performance Specifications 
 Necessary for Replaceability or Systems Test Not Listed in Sections I 
                               Through VI


<R05>
  Sec. Appendix C to Part 564--Information Applicable to Standardized 

                       Sealed Beam Headlamp Units

  I. Dimensional Information Specific to a Type of Standardized Sealed 
                               Beam Unit.

    A. Dimensions marked ``I'', indicating interchangeability, for which 
conformance is mandatory.
    B. All other dimensions which are for design purposes.

   II. Dimensional Information Applicable to the Use of Nonadjustable 
                 Headlamp Aiming Device Locating Plates

III. Dimensional Information Applicable to Mounting Features, Including 
   Mounting Rings and Lamp Bodies, Specific to a Type of Standardized 
                            Sealed Beam Unit

    A. Dimensions marked ``I'', indicating interchangeability, for which 
conformance is mandatory.
    B. All other dimensions which are for design purposes.

   Incorporated Figures [References from 49 CFR 571.108, Oct. 1, 2006]

LF Headlamp Dimensional Information [Figure 11]
UF Headlamp Dimensional Information [Figure 12]
LF/UF Mounting Features [Figure 13]
LF/UF Mounting Ring [Figure 14]
Type G & H Headlamp Dimensional Information [Figure 18]
Type G & H Headlamp Mounting Information [Figure 21]
Type 1A1 Headlamp Dimensional Information [SAE J1383 APR85, Figure 11]
Type 2A1 Headlamp Dimensional Information [SAE J1383 APR85, Figure 10]
Type 2B1 Headlamp Dimensional Information [SAE J1383 APR85, Figure 13]
Type 1C1 Headlamp Dimensional Information [SAE J1383 APR85, Figure 7]

[[Page 244]]

Type 2C1 Headlamp Dimensional Information [SAE J1383 APR85, Figure 8]
Type 2D1 Headlamp Dimensional Information [SAE J1383 APR85, Figure 5]
Type 2E1 Headlamp Dimensional Information [SAE J1383 APR85, Figure 15]
Types 1A1, 2A1, and 2E1 Headlamp Mounting Ring/Lamp Body Dimensional 
Information [SAE J1383 APR85, Figure 12]
Type 2B1 Headlamp Mounting Ring/Lamp Body Dimensional Information [SAE 
J1383 APR85, Figure 14]
Types 1C1and 2C1 Headlamp Mounting Ring/Lamp Body Dimensional 
Information [SAE J1383 APR85, Figure 9]
Type 2D1 Headlamp Mounting Ring/Lamp Body Dimensional Information [SAE 
J1383 APR85, Figure 6]


<R03>
PART 565_VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (VIN) REQUIREMENTS--Table of Contents



               Subpart A_General Applicability of Subparts

Sec.
565.1 Purpose and scope.
565.2 Application.

                       Subpart B_VIN Requirements

565.10 Purpose and scope.
565.11 Applicability.
565.12 Definitions.
565.13 General requirements.
565.14 Motor vehicles imported into the United States.
565.15 Content requirements.
565.16 Reporting requirements.

   Subpart C_Alternative VIN Requirements In Effect for Limited Period

565.20 Purpose and scope.
565.21 Applicability.
565.22 Definitions.
565.23 General requirements.
565.24 Motor vehicles imported into the United States.
565.25 Content requirements.
565.26 Reporting requirements.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 30111, 30115, 30117, 30141, 30146, 30166, 
and 30168; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 73 FR 23379, Apr. 30, 2008, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
               Subpart A_General Applicability of Subparts


<R05>
Sec. 565.1  Purpose and scope.

    This part specifies the format, content and physical requirements 
for a vehicle identification number (VIN) system and its installation to 
simplify vehicle identification information retrieval and to increase 
the accuracy and efficiency of vehicle recall campaigns.


<R05>
Sec. 565.2  Application.

    (a)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, 
subpart B of this part 565 applies to passenger cars, multipurpose 
passenger vehicles, trucks, buses, trailers (including trailer kits), 
incomplete vehicles, low speed vehicles, and motorcycles manufactured on 
or after October 27, 2008 whose VINs have a letter ``A'' or ``B'' in the 
10th position, and to passenger cars, multipurpose passenger vehicles, 
trucks, buses, trailers (including trailer kits), incomplete vehicles, 
low speed vehicles, and motorcycles manufactured on or after April 30, 
2009. Vehicles imported into the United States under 49 CFR 591.5(f), 
other than by the corporation responsible for the assembly of that 
vehicle or a subsidiary of such a corporation, are excluded from 
requirements of Sec. Sec. 565.13(b), 565.13(c), 565.13(g), 565.13(h), 
565.14 and 565.15.
    (2) All motor vehicles identified as model year 2009 or earlier 
vehicles by their manufacturer must comply with subpart C of this part 
565.
    (b) Subpart B of this part 565 applies to vehicles manufactured on 
or after April 30, 2008 and before April 30, 2009, whose vehicle 
identification number (VIN) does not have a letter ``A'' or ``B'' in the 
10th position of the VIN and that are not identified as model year 2009 
or earlier vehicles by their manufacturer.

[73 FR 28370, May 16, 2008]


<R04>
                       Subpart B_VIN Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 565.10  Purpose and scope.

    This part specifies the format, content and physical requirements 
for a vehicle identification number (VIN) system and its installation to 
simplify vehicle identification information retrieval and to increase 
the accuracy and efficiency of vehicle recall campaigns.

[[Page 245]]


<R05>
Sec. 565.11  Applicability.

    See subpart A of this part 565 regarding the general applicability 
of this subpart. This part applies to passenger cars, multipurpose 
passenger vehicles, trucks, buses, trailers (including trailer kits), 
incomplete vehicles, low speed vehicles, and motorcycles manufactured on 
or after October 27, 2008 whose VINs have a letter ``A'' or ``B'' in the 
10th position, and to passenger cars, multipurpose passenger vehicles, 
trucks, buses, trailers (including trailer kits), incomplete vehicles, 
low speed vehicles, and motorcycles manufactured on or after April 30 
2009 that are not identified by their manufacturer as model year 2009 or 
earlier vehicles. Vehicles imported into the United States under 49 CFR 
591.5(f), other than by the corporation responsible for the assembly of 
that vehicle or a subsidiary of such a corporation, are excluded from 
requirements of Sec. Sec. 565.13(b), 565.13(c), 565.13(g), 565.13(h), 
565.14 and Sec. 565.15.

[73 FR 23379, Apr. 30, 2008, as amended at 73 FR 28371, May 16, 2008]


<R05>
Sec. 565.12  Definitions.

    (a) Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards Definitions. Unless 
otherwise indicated, all terms used in this part that are defined in 49 
CFR 571.3 are used as defined in 49 CFR 571.3.
    (b) Body type means the general configuration or shape of a vehicle 
distinguished by such characteristics as the number of doors or windows, 
cargo-carrying features and the roofline (e.g., sedan, fastback, 
hatchback).
    (c) Check digit means a single number or the letter X used to verify 
the accuracy of the transcription of the vehicle identification number.
    (d) Engine type means a power source with defined characteristics 
such as fuel utilized, number of cylinders, displacement, and net brake 
horsepower. The specific manufacturer and make shall be represented if 
the engine powers a passenger car or a multipurpose passenger vehicle, 
or truck with a gross vehicle weight rating of 4536 kg (10,000 lb) or 
less.
    (e) High-volume manufacturer, for purposes of this part, means a 
manufacturer of 1,000 or more vehicles of a given type each year.
    (f) Incomplete vehicle means an assemblage consisting, as a minimum, 
of frame and chassis structure, power train, steering system, suspension 
system and braking system, to the extent that those systems are to be 
part of the completed vehicle, that requires further manufacturing 
operations, other than the addition of readily attachable components, 
such as mirrors or tire and rim assemblies, or minor finishing 
operations such as painting, to become a completed vehicle.
    (g) Line means a name that a manufacturer applies to a family of 
vehicles within a make which have a degree of commonality in 
construction, such as body, chassis or cab type.
    (h) Low-volume manufacturer, for purposes of this part, means a 
manufacturer of fewer than 1,000 vehicles of a given type each year.
    (i) Make means a name that a manufacturer applies to a group of 
vehicles or engines.
    (j) Manufacturer means a person--
    (1) Manufacturing or assembling motor vehicles or motor vehicle 
equipment; or
    (2) Importing motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment for resale.
    (k) Manufacturer identifier means the first three digits of a VIN of 
a vehicle manufactured by a high-volume manufacturer, and the first 
three digits of a VIN and the twelfth through fourteenth digits of a VIN 
of a vehicle manufactured by a low-volume manufacturer.
    (l) Model means a name that a manufacturer applies to a family of 
vehicles of the same type, make, line, series and body type.
    (m) Model year means the year used to designate a discrete vehicle 
model, irrespective of the calendar year in which the vehicle was 
actually produced, provided that the production period does not exceed 
24 months.
    (n) Plant of manufacture means the plant where the manufacturer 
affixes the VIN.
    (o) Series means a name that a manufacturer applies to a subdivision 
of a ``line'' denoting price, size or weight identification and that is 
used by the manufacturer for marketing purposes.
    (p) Trailer kit means a trailer that is fabricated and delivered in 
complete

[[Page 246]]

but unassembled form and that is designed to be assembled without 
special machinery or tools.
    (q) Type means a class of vehicle distinguished by common traits, 
including design and purpose. Passenger cars, multipurpose passenger 
vehicles, trucks, buses, trailers, incomplete vehicles, low speed 
vehicles, and motorcycles are separate types.
    (r) VIN means a series of Arabic numbers and Roman letters that is 
assigned to a motor vehicle for identification purposes.


<R05>
Sec. 565.13  General requirements.

    (a) Each vehicle manufactured in one stage shall have a VIN that is 
assigned by the manufacturer. Each vehicle manufactured in more than one 
stage shall have a VIN assigned by the incomplete vehicle manufacturer. 
Vehicle alterers, as specified in 49 CFR 567.7, shall utilize the VIN 
assigned by the original manufacturer of the vehicle.
    (b) Each VIN shall consist of seventeen (17) characters.
    (c) A check digit shall be part of each VIN. The check digit shall 
appear in position nine (9) of the VIN, on the vehicle and on any 
transfer documents containing the VIN prepared by the manufacturer to be 
given to the first owner for purposes other than resale.
    (d) The VINs of any two vehicles subject to the Federal motor 
vehicle safety standards and manufactured within a 60-year period 
beginning with the 1980 model year shall not be identical.
    (e) The VIN of each vehicle shall appear clearly and indelibly upon 
either a part of the vehicle, other than the glazing, that is not 
designed to be removed except for repair or upon a separate plate or 
label that is permanently affixed to such a part.
    (f) The VIN for passenger cars, multipurpose passenger vehicles, low 
speed vehicles, and trucks of 4536 kg or less GVWR shall be located 
inside the passenger compartment. It shall be readable, without moving 
any part of the vehicle, through the vehicle glazing under daylight 
lighting conditions by an observer having 20/20 vision (Snellen) whose 
eye-point is located outside the vehicle adjacent to the left windshield 
pillar. Each character in the VIN subject to this paragraph shall have a 
minimum height of 4 mm.
    (g) Each character in each VIN shall be one of the letters in the 
set: [ABCDEFGHJKLMNPRSTUVWXYZ] or a numeral in the set: [0123456789] 
assigned according to the method given in Sec. 565.15.
    (h) All spaces provided for in the VIN must be occupied by a 
character specified in paragraph (g) of this section.
    (i) The type face utilized for each VIN shall consist of capital, 
sanserif characters.

[73 FR 23379, Apr. 30, 2008, as amended at 74 FR 67977, Dec. 22, 2009]


<R05>
Sec. 565.14  Motor vehicles imported into the United States.

    (a) Importers shall utilize the VIN assigned by the original 
manufacturer of the motor vehicle.
    (b) All passenger cars, multipurpose passenger vehicles, low speed 
vehicles and trucks of 4536 kg or less GVWR certified by a Registered 
Importer under 49 CFR part 592 whose VINs do not comply with part 565.13 
and 565.14 shall have a plate or label that contains the following 
statement, in characters that have a minimum height of 4 mm and the 
identification number assigned by the vehicle's original manufacturer 
inserted in the blank: SUBSTITUTE FOR U.S. VIN: ---------- SEE 49 CFR 
PART 565. The plate or label shall conform to Sec. 565.13 (h) and (i). 
The plate or label shall be permanently affixed inside the passenger 
compartment. The plate or label shall be readable, without moving any 
part of the vehicle, through the vehicle glazing under daylight 
conditions by an observer having 20/20 vision (Snellen) whose eye-point 
is located outside the vehicle adjacent to the left windshield pillar. 
It shall be located in such a manner as not to cover, obscure, or 
overlay any part of any identification number affixed by the original 
manufacturer. Motor vehicles conforming to Canada Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standard 115 are exempt from this paragraph.


<R05>
Sec. 565.15  Content requirements.

    (a) The first section shall consist of three characters that occupy 
positions one through three (1-3) in the VIN. This section shall 
uniquely identify the

[[Page 247]]

manufacturer and type of the motor vehicle if the manufacturer is a 
high-volume manufacturer. If the manufacturer is a low-volume 
manufacturer, positions one through three (1-3) along with positions 
twelve through fourteen (12-14) in the VIN shall uniquely identify the 
manufacturer and type of the motor vehicle. These characters are 
assigned in accordance with Sec. 565.16(a). A ``9'' shall be placed in 
the third position of the VIN if the manufacturer identifier is six 
characters. A ``9'' in the third position always indicates the presence 
of a six-character manufacturer identifier. The National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration offers access to manufacturer identifier 
assignments via its search engine at the following Internet Web site: 
http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov/cars/rules/manufacture.
    (b) The second section shall consist of five characters, which 
occupy positions four through eight (4-8) in the VIN. This section shall 
uniquely identify the attributes of the vehicle as specified in Table I. 
For passenger cars, and for multipurpose passenger vehicles and trucks 
with a gross vehicle weight rating of 4536 kg (10,000 lb) or less, the 
fourth character (position 7) of this section shall be alphabetic. The 
characters utilized and their placement within the section may be 
determined by the manufacturer, but the specified attributes must be 
decipherable with information supplied by the manufacturer in accordance 
with Sec. 565.16(c). In submitting the required information to NHTSA 
relating gross vehicle weight rating, the designations in Table II shall 
be used. The use of these designations within the VIN itself is not 
required. Tables I and II follow:

          Table I--Type of Vehicle and Information Decipherable
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Passenger car: Make, line, series, body type, engine type, and all
 restraint devices and their location.
Multipurpose passenger vehicle: Make, line, series, body type, engine
 type, gross vehicle weight rating, and for multipurpose passenger
 vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 4536kg (10,000
 lb) or less all restraint devices and their location.
Truck: Make, model or line, series, chassis, cab type, engine type,
 brake system, gross vehicle weight rating, and for trucks with a gross
 vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 4536 kg (10,000 lb) or less all
 restraint devices and their location.
Bus: Make, model or line, series, body type, engine type, and brake
 system.
Trailer, including trailer kits and incomplete trailer: Make, type of
 trailer, body type, length and axle configuration.
Motorcycle: Make, type of motorcycle, line, engine type, and net brake
 horsepower.
Incomplete vehicle other than a trailer: Make, model or line, series,
 cab type, engine type, and brake system.
Low speed vehicle: Make, engine type, brake system, restraint system
 type, body type, and gross vehicle weight rating.
Note to Table I: Engine net brake horsepower when encoded in the VIN
 shall differ by no more than 10 percent from the actual net brake
 horsepower; shall in the case of motorcycle with an actual net brake
 horsepower of 2 or less, be not more than 2; and shall be greater than
 2 in the case of a motorcycle with an actual brake horsepower greater
 than 2.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


              Table II--Gross Vehicle Weight Rating Classes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Class A--Not greater than 1360 kg. (3,000 lbs.)
Class B--Greater than 1360 kg. to 1814 kg. (3,001-4,000 lbs.)
Class C--Greater than 1814 kg. to 2268 kg. (4,001-5,000 lbs.)
Class D--Greater than 2268 kg. to 2722 kg. (5,001-6,000 lbs.)
Class E--Greater than 2722 kg. to 3175 kg. (6,001-7,000 lbs.)
Class F--Greater than 3175 kg. to 3629 kg. (7,001-8,000 lbs.)
Class G--Greater than 3629 kg. to 4082 kg. (8,001-9,000 lbs.)
Class H--Greater than 4082 kg. to 4536 kg. (9,001-10,000 lbs.)
Class 3--Greater than 4536 kg. to 6350 kg. (10,001-14,000 lbs.)
Class 4--Greater than 6350 kg. to 7257 kg. (14,001-16,000 lbs.)
Class 5--Greater than 7257 kg. to 8845 kg. (16,001-19,500 lbs.)
Class 6--Greater than 8845 kg. to 11793 kg. (19,501-26,000 lbs.)

[[Page 248]]

 
Class 7--Greater than 11793 kg. to 14968 kg.(26,001-33,000 lbs.)
Class 8--Greater than 14968 kg. (33,001 lbs. and over)
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) The third section shall consist of one character, which occupies 
position nine (9) in the VIN. This section shall be the check digit 
whose purpose is to provide a means for verifying the accuracy of any 
VIN transcription. After all other characters in VIN have been 
determined by the manufacturer, the check digit shall be calculated by 
carrying out the mathematical computation specified in paragraphs (c) 
(1) through (4) of this section.
    (1) Assign to each number in the VIN its actual mathematical value 
and assign to each letter the value specified for it in Table III, as 
follows:

                       Table III--Assigned Values
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
A = 1
B = 2
C = 3
D = 4
E = 5
F = 6
G = 7
H = 8
J = 1
K = 2
L = 3
M = 4
N = 5
P = 7
R = 9
S = 2
T = 3
U = 4
V = 5
W = 6
X = 7
Y = 8
Z = 9
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (2) Multiply the assigned value for each character in the VIN by the 
position weight factor specified in Table IV, as follows:

                Table IV--VIN Position and Weight Factor
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1st....................................................                8
2d.....................................................                7
3d.....................................................                6
4th....................................................                5
5th....................................................                4
6th....................................................                3
7th....................................................                2
8th....................................................               10
9th....................................................    (check digit)
10th...................................................                9
11th...................................................                8
12th...................................................                7
13th...................................................                6
14th...................................................                5
15th...................................................                4
16th...................................................                3
17th...................................................                2
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (3) Add the resulting products and divide the total by 11.
    (4) The check digit is based on either the Fractional Remainder or 
the Decimal Equivalent Remainder as reflected in Table V. All Decimal 
Equivalent Remainders in Table V are rounded to the nearest thousandth. 
The check digit, zero through nine (0-9) or the letter ``X'' shall 
appear in VIN position nine (9).

[[Page 249]]



                                                       Table V--Ninth Position Check Digit Values
                                                           [Rounded to the nearest thousandth]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fractional Remainder......................................   0     1/11     2/11     3/11     4/11     5/11     6/11     7/11     8/11     9/11    10/11
Decimal Equivalent Remainder..............................   0    0.091    0.182    0.273    0.364    0.455    0.545    0.634    0.727    0.818    0.909
Check Digit...............................................   0        1        2        3        4        5        6        7        8        9        X
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 250]]

    (5) A sample check digit calculation is shown in Table VI as 
follows:

[[Page 251]]



                                                         Table VI--Calculation of a Check Digit
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Vin Position.....................      1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9     10     11     12     13     14     15     16     17
Sample VIN.......................      1      G      4      A      H      5      9      H  .....      5      G      1      1      8      3      4      1
Assigned Value...................      1      7      4      1      8      5      9      8  .....      5      7      1      1      8      3      4      1
Weight Factor....................      8      7      6      5      4      3      2     10      0      9      8      7      6      5      4      3      2
Multiply Assigned value times          8     49     24      5     32     15     18     80      0     45     56      7      6     40     12     12      2
 weight factor...................
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Add products: 8+49+24+5+32+15+18+80+0+45+56+7+6+40+12+12+2 = 411.
Divide by 11: 411/11 = 37 4/11 or 37.3636.
If the fourth digit is 5 or greater, round up. If the fourth digit is 4 or smaller, round down.
In the example above, the remainder is 4/11 or 0.364 when rounded up.
Looking up the remainder in Table V--Ninth Position Check Digit Values indicates that ``4'' is the check digit to be inserted in position nine (9) of
  the VIN for this sample digit calculation.


[[Page 252]]

    (d) The fourth section shall consist of eight characters, which 
occupy positions ten through seventeen (10-17) of the VIN. The last five 
(5) characters of this section shall be numeric for passenger cars and 
for multipurpose passenger vehicles and trucks with a gross vehicle 
weight rating of 4536 kg. (10,000 lbs.) or less, and the last four (4) 
characters shall be numeric for all other vehicles.
    (1) The first character of the fourth section shall represent the 
vehicle model year. The year shall be designated as indicated in Table 
VII as follows:

                      Table VII--Year Codes for VIN
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                               Year                                 Code
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2005.............................................................      5
2006.............................................................      6
2007.............................................................      7
2008.............................................................      8
2009.............................................................      9
2010.............................................................      A
2011.............................................................      B
2012.............................................................      C
2013.............................................................      D
2014.............................................................      E
2015.............................................................      F
2016.............................................................      G
2017.............................................................      H
2018.............................................................      J
2019.............................................................      K
2020.............................................................      L
2021.............................................................      M
2022.............................................................      N
2023.............................................................      P
2024.............................................................      R
2025.............................................................      S
2026.............................................................      T
2027.............................................................      V
2028.............................................................      W
2029.............................................................      X
2030.............................................................      Y
2031.............................................................      1
2032.............................................................      2
2033.............................................................      3
2034.............................................................      4
2035.............................................................      5
2036.............................................................      6
2037.............................................................      7
2038.............................................................      8
2039.............................................................      9
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note to Table VII: For passenger cars, and for multipurpose passenger
  vehicles and trucks with a gross vehicle weight rating of 4536 kg
  (10,000 lb) or less, if position 7 is numeric, the Model Year in
  position 10 of the VIN refers to a year in the range 1980-2009. If
  position 7 is alphabetic, the Model Year in Position 10 of the VIN
  refers to a year in the range 2010-2039.

    (2) The second character of the fourth section shall represent the 
plant of manufacture.
    (3) The third through the eighth characters of the fourth section 
(positions 12 through 17) shall represent the number sequentially 
assigned by the manufacturer in the production process if the 
manufacturer is a high-volume manufacturer. If a manufacturer is a low-
volume manufacturer, the third, fourth, and fifth characters of the 
fourth section (positions 12, 13, and 14), combined with the three 
characters of the first section (positions 1, 2, and 3), shall uniquely 
identify the manufacturer and type of the motor vehicle and the sixth, 
seventh, and eighth characters of the fourth section (positions 15, 16, 
and 17) shall represent the number sequentially assigned by the 
manufacturer in the production process.


<R05>
Sec. 565.16  Reporting requirements.

    The information collection requirements contained in this part have 
been approved by the Office of Management and Budget under the 
provisions of the Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq) and 
have been assigned OMB Control Number 2127-0510.
    (a) The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) has 
contracted with the SAE International to coordinate the assignment of 
manufacturer identifiers to manufacturers in the United States. 
Manufacturer identifiers will be supplied by SAE at no charge. All 
requests for assignments of manufacturer identifiers should be forwarded 
directly to: SAE International, 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, 
Pennsylvania, 15096, Attention: WMI Coordinator (telephone: 724-776-
4841). Any requests for identifiers submitted to NHTSA will be forwarded 
to SAE. Manufacturers may request a specific identifier or may request 
only assignment of an identifier(s). SAE will review requests for 
specific identifiers to determine that they do not conflict with an 
identifier already assigned or block of identifiers already reserved. 
SAE will confirm the assignments in writing to the requester. Once 
confirmed by SAE, the identifier need not be resubmitted to NHTSA.
    (b) Manufacturers of vehicles subject to this part shall submit, 
either directly or through an agent, the unique identifier for each make 
and type of vehicle it manufactures at least 60 days before affixing the 
first VIN using the identifier. Manufacturers whose unique identifier 
appears in the fourth section

[[Page 253]]

of the VIN shall also submit the three characters of the first section 
that constitutes a part of their identifier.
    (c) Manufacturers of vehicles subject to the requirements of this 
part shall submit to NHTSA the information necessary to decipher the 
characters contained in its VINs. Amendments to this information shall 
be submitted to the agency for VINs containing an amended coding. The 
agency will not routinely provide written approvals of these 
submissions, but will contact the manufacturer should any corrections to 
these submissions be necessary.
    (d) The information required under paragraph (c) of this section 
shall be submitted at least 60 days prior to offering for sale the first 
vehicle identified by a VIN containing that information, or if 
information concerning vehicle characteristics sufficient to specify the 
VIN code is unavailable to the manufacturer by that date, then within 
one week after that information first becomes available. The information 
shall be addressed to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE, Washington, DC 20590, 
Attention: VIN Coordinator.


<R04>
   Subpart C_Alternative VIN Requirements In Effect for Limited Period


<R05>
Sec. 565.20  Purpose and scope.

    This part specifies the format, content and physical requirements 
for a vehicle identification number (VIN) system and its installation to 
simplify vehicle identification information retrieval and to increase 
the accuracy and efficiency of vehicle recall campaigns.


<R05>
Sec. 565.21  Applicability.

    See subpart A of this part 565 regarding the applicability of this 
subpart. This part applies to passenger cars, multipurpose passenger 
vehicles, trucks, buses, trailers (including trailer kits), incomplete 
vehicles, and motorcycles. Vehicles imported into the United States 
under 49 CFR 591.5(f), other than by the corporation responsible for the 
assembly of that vehicle or a subsidiary of such a corporation, are 
excluded from requirements of Sec. 565.23(b), Sec. Sec. 565.23(c), 
565.23(g), 565.23(h), 565.24 and 565.25.

[73 FR 23379, Apr. 30, 2008, as amended at 73 FR 28371, May 16, 2008]


<R05>
Sec. 565.22  Definitions.

    (a) Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards Definitions. Unless 
otherwise indicated, all terms used in this part that are defined in 49 
CFR 571.3 are used as defined in 49 CFR 571.3.
    (b) Body type means the general configuration or shape of a vehicle 
distinguished by such characteristics as the number of doors or windows, 
cargo-carrying features and the roofline (e.g., sedan, fastback, 
hatchback).
    (c) Check digit means a single number or the letter X used to verify 
the accuracy of the transcription of the vehicle identification number.
    (d) Engine type means a power source with defined characteristics 
such as fuel utilized, number of cylinders, displacement, and net brake 
horsepower. The specific manufacturer and make shall be represented if 
the engine powers a passenger car or a multipurpose passenger vehicle, 
or truck with a gross vehicle weight rating of 4536 kg. (10,000 lbs.) or 
less.
    (e) Incomplete vehicle means an assemblage consisting, as a minimum, 
of frame and chassis structure, power train, steering system, suspension 
system and braking system, to the extent that those systems are to be 
part of the completed vehicle, that requires further manufacturing 
operations, other than the addition of readily attachable components, 
such as mirrors or tire and rim assemblies, or minor finishing 
operations such as painting, to become a completed vehicle.
    (f) Line means a name that a manufacturer applies to a family of 
vehicles within a make which have a degree of commonality in 
construction, such as body, chassis or cab type.
    (g) Make means a name that a manufacturer applies to a group of 
vehicles or engines.
    (h) Manufacturer means a person--
    (1) Manufacturing or assembling motor vehicles or motor vehicle 
equipment; or
    (2) Importing motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment for resale.

[[Page 254]]

    (i) Model means a name that a manufacturer applies to a family of 
vehicles of the same type, make, line, series and body type.
    (j) Model Year means the year used to designate a discrete vehicle 
model, irrespective of the calendar year in which the vehicle was 
actually produced, provided that the production period does not exceed 
24 months.
    (k) Plant of manufacture means the plant where the manufacturer 
affixes the VIN.
    (l) Series means a name that a manufacturer applies to a subdivision 
of a ``line'' denoting price, size or weight identification and that is 
used by the manufacturer for marketing purposes.
    (m) Trailer kit means a trailer that is fabricated and delivered in 
complete but unassembled form and that is designed to be assembled 
without special machinery or tools.
    (n) Type means a class of vehicle distinguished by common traits, 
including design and purpose. Passenger cars, multipurpose passenger 
vehicles, trucks, buses, trailers, incomplete vehicles and motorcycles 
are separate types.
    (o) VIN means a series of Arabic numbers and Roman letters that is 
assigned to a motor vehicle for identification purposes.


<R05>
Sec. 565.23  General requirements.

    (a) Each vehicle manufactured in one stage shall have a VIN that is 
assigned by the manufacturer. Each vehicle manufactured in more than one 
stage shall have a VIN assigned by the incomplete vehicle manufacturer. 
Vehicle alterers, as specified in 49 CFR 567.7, shall utilize the VIN 
assigned by the original manufacturer of the vehicle.
    (b) Each VIN shall consist of seventeen (17) characters.
    (c) A check digit shall be part of each VIN. The check digit shall 
appear in position nine (9) of the VIN, on the vehicle and on any 
transfer documents containing the VIN prepared by the manufacturer to be 
given to the first owner for purposes other than resale.
    (d) The VINs of any two vehicles manufactured within a 30-year 
period shall not be identical.
    (e) The VIN of each vehicle shall appear clearly and indelibly upon 
either a part of the vehicle, other than the glazing, that is not 
designed to be removed except for repair or upon a separate plate or 
label that is permanently affixed to such a part.
    (f) The VIN for passenger cars, multipurpose passenger vehicles and 
trucks of 4536 kg or less GVWR shall be located inside the passenger 
compartment. It shall be readable, without moving any part of the 
vehicle, through the vehicle glazing under daylight lighting conditions 
by an observer having 20/20 vision (Snellen) whose eye-point is located 
outside the vehicle adjacent to the left windshield pillar. Each 
character in the VIN subject to this paragraph shall have a minimum 
height of 4 mm.
    (g) Each character in each VIN shall be one of the letters in the 
set: [ABCDEFGHJKLMNPRSTUVWXYZ] or a numeral in the set: [0123456789] 
assigned according to the method given in Sec. 565.25.
    (h) All spaces provided for in the VIN must be occupied by a 
character specified in paragraph (g) of this section.
    (i) The type face utilized for each VIN shall consist of capital, 
sanserif characters.

[73 FR 23379, Apr. 30, 2008, as amended at 74 FR 67977, Dec. 22, 2009]


<R05>
Sec. 565.24  Motor vehicles imported into the United States.

    (a) Importers shall utilize the VIN assigned by the original 
manufacturer of the motor vehicle.
    (b) A passenger car certified by a Registered Importer under 49 CFR 
part 592 shall have a plate or label that contains the following 
statement, in characters with a minimum height of 4 mm, with the 
identification number assigned by the original manufacturer provided in 
the blank: SUBSTITUTE FOR U.S. VIN:------SEE PART 565. The plate or 
label shall conform to Sec. 565.23 (h) and (i). The plate or label 
shall be permanently affixed inside the passenger compartment. The plate 
or label shall be readable, without moving any part of the vehicle, 
through the vehicle glazing under daylight lighting conditions by an 
observer having 20/20

[[Page 255]]

vision (Snellen) whose eye-point is located outside the vehicle adjacent 
to the left windshield pillar. It shall be located in such a manner as 
not to cover, obscure, or overlay any part of any identification number 
affixed by the original manufacturer. Passenger cars conforming to 
Canadian Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 115 are exempt from this 
paragraph.


<R05>
Sec. 565.25  Content requirements.

    The VIN shall consist of four sections of characters which shall be 
grouped accordingly:
    (a) The first section shall consist of three characters that occupy 
positions one through three (1-3) in the VIN. This section shall 
uniquely identify the manufacturer, make and type of the motor vehicle 
if its manufacturer produces 500 or more motor vehicles of its type 
annually. If the manufacturer produces less than 500 motor vehicles of 
its type annually, these characters along with the third, fourth and 
fifth characters of the fourth section shall uniquely identify the 
manufacturer, make and type of the motor vehicle. These characters are 
assigned in accordance with Sec. 565.26(a).
    (b) The second section shall consist of five characters, which 
occupy positions four through eight (4-8) in the VIN. This section shall 
uniquely identify the attributes of the vehicle as specified in Table 
VIII. For passenger cars, and for multipurpose passenger vehicles and 
trucks with a gross vehicle weight rating of 4536 kg (10,000 lb) or 
less, the first and second characters shall be alphabetic and the third 
and fourth characters shall be numeric. The fifth character may be 
either alphabetic or numeric. The characters utilized and their 
placement within the section may be determined by the manufacturer, but 
the specified attributes must be decipherable with information supplied 
by the manufacturer in accordance with Sec. 565.26(c). In submitting 
the required information to NHTSA relating to gross vehicle weight 
rating, the designations in Table IX shall be used. The use of these 
designations within the VIN itself is not required. Tables VIII and IX 
follow:

        Table VIII--Type of Vehicle and Information Decipherable
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Passenger car: Line, series, body type, engine type and restraint system
 type.
Multipurpose passenger vehicle: Line, series, body type, engine type,
 gross vehicle weight rating.
Truck: Model or line, series, chassis, cab type, engine type, brake
 system and gross vehicle weight rating.
Bus: Model or line, series, body type, engine type, and brake system.
Trailer, including trailer kits and incomplete trailer: Type of trailer,
 body type, length and axle configuration.
Motorcycle: Type of motorcycle, line, engine type, and net brake
 horsepower.
Incomplete Vehicle other than a trailer: Model or line, series, cab
 type, engine type and brake system.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note to Table VIII: Engine net brake horsepower when encoded in the VIN
  shall differ by no more than 10 percent from the actual net brake
  horsepower; shall in the case of motorcycle with an actual net brake
  horsepower of 2 or less, be not more than 2; and shall be greater than
  2 in the case of a motorcycle with an actual brake horsepower greater
  than 2.


              Table IX--Gross Vehicle Weight Rating Classes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Class A--Not greater than 1360 kg. (3,000 lbs.)
Class B--Greater than 1360 kg. to 1814 kg. (3,001-4,000 lbs.)
Class C--Greater than 1814 kg. to 2268 kg. (4,001-5,000 lbs.)
Class D--Greater than 2268 kg. to 2722 kg. (5,001-6,000 lbs.)
Class E--Greater than 2722 kg. to 3175 kg. (6,001-7,000 lbs.)
Class F--Greater than 3175 kg. to 3629 kg. (7,001-8,000 lbs.)
Class G--Greater than 3629 kg. to 4082 kg. (8,001-9,000 lbs.)
Class H--Greater than 4082 kg. to 4536 kg. (9,001-10,000 lbs.)

[[Page 256]]

 
Class 3--Greater than 4536 kg. to 6350 kg. (10,001-14,000 lbs.)
Class 4--Greater than 6350 kg. to 7257 kg. (14,001-16,000 lbs.)
Class 5--Greater than 7257 kg. to 8845 kg. (16,001-19,500 lbs.)
Class 6--Greater than 8845 kg. to 11793 kg. (19,501-26,000 lbs.)
Class 7--Greater than 11793 kg. to 14968 kg.(26,001-33,000 lbs.)
Class 8--Greater than 14968 kg. (33,001 lbs. and over).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) The third section shall consist of one character, which occupies 
position nine (9) in the VIN. This section shall be the check digit 
whose purpose is to provide a means for verifying the accuracy of any 
VIN transcription. After all other characters in VIN have been 
determined by the manufacturer, the check digit shall be calculated by 
carrying out the mathematical computation specified in paragraphs (c) 
(1) through (4) of this section.
    (1) Assign to each number in the VIN its actual mathematical value 
and assign to each letter the value specified for it in Table X, as 
follows:

                        Table X--Assigned Values
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
A = 1
B = 2
C = 3
D = 4
E = 5
F = 6
G = 7
H = 8
J = 1
K = 2
L = 3
M = 4
N = 5
P = 7
R = 9
S = 2
T = 3
U = 4
V = 5
W = 6
X = 7
Y = 8
Z = 9
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (2) Multiply the assigned value for each character in the VIN by the 
position weight factor specified in Table XI, as follows:

                Table XI--VIN Position and Weight Factor
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1st.....................................................               8
2d......................................................               7
3d......................................................               6
4th.....................................................               5
5th.....................................................               4
6th.....................................................               3
7th.....................................................               2
8th.....................................................              10
9th.....................................................   (check digit)
10th....................................................               9
11th....................................................               8
12th....................................................               7
13th....................................................               6
14th....................................................               5
15th....................................................               4
16th....................................................               3
17th....................................................               2
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (3) Add the resulting products and divide the total by 11.
    (4) The numerical remainder is the check digit. If the remainder is 
10 the letter ``X'' shall be used to designate the check digit. The 
correct numeric remainder, zero through nine (0-9) or the letter ``X,'' 
shall appear in VIN position nine (9).
    (5) A sample check digit calculation is shown in Table XII as 
follows:

[[Page 257]]



                                                         Table XII--Calculation of a Check Digit
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
VIN Position 12.............      1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9     10     11     12     13     14     15     16     17
Sample VIN..................      1      G      4      A      H      5      9      H    ...      5      G      1      1      8      3      4      1
Assigned Value..............      1      7      4      1      8      5      9      8    ...      5      7      1      1      8      3      4      1
Weight Factor...............      8      7      6      5      4      3      2     10      0      9      8      7      6      5      4      3      2
Multiply Assigned value           8     49     24      5     32     15     18     80      0     45     56      7      6     40     12     12     2
 times......................
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Add products: 8+49+24+5+32+15+18+80+0+45+56+7+6+40+12+12+2 = 411.
Divide by 11: 411/11 = 37 4/11.
The remainder is 4; this is the check digit to be inserted in position nine (9) of the VIN.


[[Page 258]]

    (d) The fourth section shall consist of eight characters, which 
occupy positions ten through seventeen (10-17) of the VIN. The last five 
(5) characters of this section shall be numeric for passenger cars and 
for multipurpose passenger vehicles and trucks with a gross vehicle 
weight rating of 4536 kg. (10,000 lbs.) or less, and the last four (4) 
characters shall be numeric for all other vehicles.
    (1) The first character of the fourth section shall represent the 
vehicle model year. The year shall be designated as indicated in Table 
XIII as follows:

                     Table XIII--Year Codes for VIN
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                               Year                                 Code
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1980.............................................................      A
1981.............................................................      B
1982.............................................................      C
1983.............................................................      D
1984.............................................................      E
1985.............................................................      F
1986.............................................................      G
1987.............................................................      H
1988.............................................................      J
1989.............................................................      K
1990.............................................................      L
1991.............................................................      M
1992.............................................................      N
1993.............................................................      P
1994.............................................................      R
1995.............................................................      S
1996.............................................................      T
1997.............................................................      V
1998.............................................................      W
1999.............................................................      X
2000.............................................................      Y
2001.............................................................      1
2002.............................................................      2
2003.............................................................      3
2004.............................................................      4
2005.............................................................      5
2006.............................................................      6
2007.............................................................      7
2008.............................................................      8
2009.............................................................      9
2010.............................................................      A
2011.............................................................      B
2012.............................................................      C
2013.............................................................      D
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (2) The second character of the fourth section shall represent the 
plant of manufacture.
    (3) The third through the eighth characters of the fourth section 
shall represent the number sequentially assigned by the manufacturer in 
the production process if the manufacturer produces 500 or more vehicles 
of its type annually. If the manufacturer produces less than 500 motor 
vehicles of its type annually, the third, fourth and fifth characters of 
the fourth section, combined with the three characters of the first 
section, shall uniquely identify the manufacturer, make and type of the 
motor vehicle and the sixth, seventh, and eighth characters of the 
fourth section shall represent the number sequentially assigned by the 
manufacturer in the production process.


<R05>
Sec. 565.26  Reporting requirements.

    The information collection requirements contained in this part have 
been approved by the Office of Management and Budget under the 
provisions of the Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.) and 
have been assigned OMB Control Number 2127-0510.
    (a) The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) has 
contracted with the SAE International (SAE) to coordinate the assignment 
of manufacturer identifiers. Manufacturer identifiers will be supplied 
by SAE at no charge. All requests for assignments of manufacturer 
identifiers should be forwarded directly to: SAE International, 400 
Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, Pennsylvania 15096, Attention: WMI 
Coordinator. Any requests for identifiers submitted to NHTSA will be 
forwarded to SAE. Manufacturers may request a specific identifier or may 
request only assignment of an identifier(s). SAE will review requests 
for specific identifiers to determine that they do not conflict with an 
identifier already assigned or block of identifiers already reserved. 
SAE will confirm the assignments in writing to the requester. Once 
confirmed by SAE, the identifier need not be resubmitted to NHTSA.
    (b) Manufacturers of vehicles subject to this part shall submit, 
either directly or through an agent, the unique identifier for each make 
and type of vehicle it manufactures at least 60 days before affixing the 
first VIN using the identifier. Manufacturers whose unique identifier 
appears in the fourth section of the VIN shall also submit the three 
characters of the first section that constitutes a part of their 
identifier.
    (c) Manufacturers of vehicles subject to the requirements of this 
part shall submit to NHTSA the information necessary to decipher the 
characters contained in its VINs. Amendments to this

[[Page 259]]

information shall be submitted to the agency for VINs containing an 
amended coding. The agency will not routinely provide written approvals 
of these submissions, but will contact the manufacturer should any 
corrections to these submissions be necessary.
    (d) The information required under paragraph (c) of this section 
shall be submitted at least 60 days prior to offering for sale the first 
vehicle identified by a VIN containing that information, or if 
information concerning vehicle characteristics sufficient to specify the 
VIN code is unavailable to the manufacturer by that date, then within 
one week after that information first becomes available. The information 
shall be addressed to: Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE., Washington, DC 20590, 
Attention: VIN Coordinator.


<R03>
PART 566_MANUFACTURER IDENTIFICATION--Table of Contents



Sec.
566.1 Scope.
566.2 Purpose.
566.3 Application.
566.4 Definitions.
566.5 Requirements.
566.6 Submittal of information.

    Authority: Secs. 112 and 119, National Traffic and Motor Vehicle 
Safety Act (15 U.S.C. 1401 and 1407); delegation of authority at 49 CFR 
1.50.


<R05>
Sec. 566.1  Scope.

    This part requires manufacturers of motor vehicles, and of motor 
vehicle equipment to which a motor vehicle safety standard applies, to 
submit identifying information and a description of the items they 
produce.

[36 FR 20978, Nov. 2, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 566.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to facilitate the regulation of 
manufacturers under the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act, 
and to aid in establishing a code numbering system for all regulated 
manufacturers.

[36 FR 20978, Nov. 2, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 566.3  Application.

    This part applies to all manufacturers of motor vehicles, and to 
manufacturers of motor vehicle equipment, other than tires, to which a 
motor vehicle safety standard applies (hereafter referred to as 
``covered equipment'').

[36 FR 22063, Nov. 19, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 566.4  Definitions.

    All terms defined in the Act and the rules and standards issued 
under its authority are used as defined therein. Specifically, 
incomplete vehicle, intermediate manufacturer, and final-stage 
manufacturer are used as defined in Part 568--Vehicles Manufactured in 
Two or More Stages.

(Authority: 15 U.S.C. 1392, 1397)

[37 FR 1364, Jan. 28, 1972]


<R05>
Sec. 566.5  Requirements.

    Each manufacturer of motor vehicles, and each manufacturer of 
covered equipment, shall furnish the information specified in paragraphs 
(a) through (c) of this section to: Administrator, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 
20590.
    (a) Full individual, partnership, or corporate name of the 
manufacturer.
    (b) Residence address of the manufacturer and State of incorporation 
if applicable.
    (c) Description of each type of motor vehicle or of covered 
equipment manufactured by the manufacturer, including, for motor 
vehicles, the approximate ranges of gross vehicle weight ratings for 
each type.
    (1) Except as noted below, the description may be of general types, 
such as ``passenger cars'' or ``brake fluid.''
    (2) In the case of multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and 
trailers, the description shall be specific enough also to indicate the 
types of use for which the vehicles are intended, such as ``tank 
trailer,'' ``motor home,'' or ``cargo van.''
    (3) In the case of motor vehicles produced in two or more stages, if 
the manufacturer is an incomplete vehicle manufacturer, the description 
shall so state and include a description indicating the stage of 
completion of the

[[Page 260]]

vehicle and, where known, the types of use for which the vehicle is 
intended.

    Example: ``Incomplete vehicle manufacturer--Chassis-cab intended for 
completion as van-type truck.''


If the manufacturer is an intermediate manufacturer, or a final stage 
manufacturer, the description shall so state and include a brief 
description of the work performed.

    Example: ``Multipurpose passenger vehicles: Motor homes with GVWR 
from 8,000 to 12,000 pounds. Final-stage manufacturer--add body to bare 
chassis.''

(15 U.S.C. 1392, 1397)

[36 FR 20978, Nov. 2, 1971, as amended at 37 FR 1364, Jan. 28, 1972]


<R05>
Sec. 566.6  Submittal of information.

    Each manufacturer required to submit information under Sec. 566.5 
shall submit the information not later than February 1, 1972. After that 
date, each person who begins to manufacture a type of motor vehicle or 
covered equipment for which he has not submitted the required 
information shall submit the information specified in paragraphs (a) 
through (c) of Sec. 566.5 not later than 30 days after he begins 
manufacture. Each manufacturer who has submitted required information 
shall keep his entry current, accurate and complete by submitting 
revised information not later than 30 days after the relevant changes in 
his business occur.

[36 FR 20978, Nov. 2, 1971, as amended at 53 FR 20119, June 2, 1988]


<R03>
PART 567_CERTIFICATION--Table of Contents



Sec.
567.1 Purpose.
567.2 Application.
567.3 Definitions.
567.4 Requirements for manufacturers of motor vehicles.
567.5 Requirements for manufacturers of vehicles manufactured in two or 
          more stages.
567.6 Requirements for persons who do not alter certified vehicles or do 
          so with readily attachable components.
567.7 Requirements for persons who alter certified vehicles.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 30111, 30115, 30117, 30166, 32502, 32504, 
33101-33104, 33108, and 33109; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 70 FR 7430, Feb. 14, 2005, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 567.1  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to specify the content and location of, 
and other requirements for, the certification label to be affixed to 
motor vehicles as required by the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle 
Safety Act, as amended (the Vehicle Safety Act) (49 U.S.C. 30115) and 
the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, as amended (the Cost 
Savings Act), (49 U.S.C. 30254 and 33109), to address certification-
related duties and liabilities, and to provide the consumer with 
information to assist him or her in determining which of the Federal 
Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (part 571 of this chapter), Bumper 
Standards (part 581 of this chapter), and Federal Theft Prevention 
Standards (part 541 of this chapter), are applicable to the vehicle.


<R05>
Sec. 567.2  Application.

    (a) This part applies to manufacturers including alterers of motor 
vehicles to which one or more standards are applicable.
    (b) In the case of imported motor vehicles that do not have the 
label required by 49 CFR 567.4, Registered Importers of vehicles 
admitted into the United States under 49 U.S.C. 30141-30147 and 49 CFR 
part 591 must affix a label as required by 49 CFR 567.4, after the 
vehicle has been brought into conformity with the applicable Safety, 
Bumper and Theft Prevention Standards.


<R05>
Sec. 567.3  Definitions.

    All terms that are defined in the Act and the rules and standards 
issued under its authority are used as defined therein. The term 
``bumper'' has the meaning assigned to it in Title I of the Cost Savings 
Act and the rules and standards issued under its authority.
    Addendum means the document described in Sec. 568.5 of this 
chapter.
    Altered vehicle means a completed vehicle previously certified in 
accordance with Sec. 567.4 or Sec. 567.5 that has been altered other 
than by the addition, substitution, or removal of readily attachable 
components, such as mirrors or tire and rim assemblies, or by minor

[[Page 261]]

finishing operations such as painting, before the first purchase of the 
vehicle other than for resale, in such a manner as may affect the 
conformity of the vehicle with one or more Federal Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standard(s) or the validity of the vehicle's stated weight ratings or 
vehicle type classification.
    Alterer means a person who alters by addition, substitution, or 
removal of components (other than readily attachable components) a 
certified vehicle before the first purchase of the vehicle other than 
for resale.
    Chassis-cab means an incomplete vehicle, with a completed occupant 
compartment, that requires only the addition of cargo-carrying, work-
performing, or load-bearing components to perform its intended 
functions.
    Completed vehicle means a vehicle that requires no further 
manufacturing operations to perform its intended function.
    Final-stage manufacturer means a person who performs such 
manufacturing operations on an incomplete vehicle that it becomes a 
completed vehicle.
    Incomplete trailer means a vehicle that is capable of being drawn 
and that consists, at a minimum, of a chassis (including the frame) 
structure and suspension system but needs further manufacturing 
operations performed on it to become a completed vehicle.
    Incomplete vehicle means
    (1) An assemblage consisting, at a minimum, of chassis (including 
the frame) structure, power train, steering system, suspension system, 
and braking system, in the state that those systems are to be part of 
the completed vehicle, but requires further manufacturing operations to 
become a completed vehicle; or
    (2) An incomplete trailer.
    Incomplete vehicle document or IVD means the document described in 
49 CFR 568.4(a) and (b).
    Incomplete vehicle manufacturer means a person who manufactures an 
incomplete vehicle by assembling components none of which, taken 
separately, constitute an incomplete vehicle.
    Intermediate manufacturer means a person, other than the incomplete 
vehicle manufacturer or the final-stage manufacturer, who performs 
manufacturing operations on a vehicle manufactured in two or more 
stages.


<R05>
Sec. 567.4  Requirements for manufacturers of motor vehicles.

    (a) Each manufacturer of motor vehicles (except vehicles 
manufactured in two or more stages) shall affix to each vehicle a label, 
of the type and in the manner described below, containing the statements 
specified in paragraph (g) of this section.
    (b) The label shall be riveted or permanently affixed in such a 
manner that it cannot be removed without destroying or defacing it.
    (c) Except for trailers and motorcycles, the label shall be affixed 
to either the hinge pillar, door-latch post, or the door edge that meets 
the door-latch post, next to the driver's seating position, or if none 
of these locations is practicable, to the left side of the instrument 
panel. If that location is also not practicable, the label shall be 
affixed to the inward-facing surface of the door next to the driver's 
seating position. If none of the preceding locations is practicable, 
notification of that fact, together with drawings or photographs showing 
a suggested alternate location in the same general area, shall be 
submitted for approval to the Administrator, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, Washington, D.C. 20590. The location of the label 
shall be such that it is easily readable without moving any part of the 
vehicle except an outer door.
    (d) The label for trailers shall be affixed to a location on the 
forward half of the left side, such that it is easily readable from 
outside the vehicle without moving any part of the vehicle.
    (e) The label for motorcycles shall be affixed to a permanent member 
of the vehicle as close as is practicable to the intersection of the 
steering post with the handle bars, in a location such that it is easily 
readable without moving any part of the vehicle except the steering 
system.
    (f) The lettering on the label shall be of a color that contrasts 
with the background of the label.
    (g) The label shall contain the following statements, in the English 
language, lettered in block capitals and numerals not less than three 
thirty-

[[Page 262]]

seconds of an inch high, in the order shown:
    (1) Name of manufacturer: Except as provided in paragraphs 
(g)(1)(i), (ii) and (iii) of this section, the full corporate or 
individual name of the actual assembler of the vehicle shall be spelled 
out, except that such abbreviations as ``Co.'' or ``Inc.'' and their 
foreign equivalents, and the first and middle initials of individuals, 
may be used. The name of the manufacturer shall be preceded by the words 
``Manufactured By'' or ``Mfd By.'' In the case of imported vehicles to 
which the label required by this section is affixed by the Registered 
Importer, the name of the Registered Importer shall also be placed on 
the label in the manner described in this paragraph, directly below the 
name of the actual assembler.
    (i) If a vehicle is assembled by a corporation that is controlled by 
another corporation that assumes responsibility for conformity with the 
standards, the name of the controlling corporation may be used.
    (ii) If a vehicle is fabricated and delivered in complete but 
unassembled form, such that it is designed to be assembled without 
special machinery or tools, the fabricator of the vehicle may affix the 
label and name itself as the manufacturer for the purposes of this 
section.
    (iii) If a trailer is sold by a person who is not its manufacturer, 
but who is engaged in the manufacture of trailers and assumes legal 
responsibility for all duties and liabilities imposed by the Act with 
respect to that trailer, the name of that person may appear on the label 
as the manufacturer. In such a case the name shall be preceded by the 
words ``Responsible Manufacturer'' or ``Resp Mfr.''
    (2) Month and year of manufacture: This shall be the time during 
which work was completed at the place of main assembly of the vehicle. 
It may be spelled out, as ``June 2000'', or expressed in numerals, as 
``6/00''.
    (3) ``Gross Vehicle Weight Rating'' or ``GVWR'' followed by the 
appropriate value in pounds, which shall not be less than the sum of the 
unloaded vehicle weight, rated cargo load, and 150 pounds times the 
number of the vehicle's designated seating positions. However, for 
school buses the minimum occupant weight allowance shall be 120 pounds 
per passenger and 150 pounds for the driver.
    (4) ``Gross Axle Weight Rating'' or ``GAWR,'' followed by the 
appropriate value in pounds, for each axle, identified in order from 
front to rear (e.g., front, first intermediate, second intermediate, 
rear). The ratings for any consecutive axles having identical gross axle 
weight ratings when equipped with tires having the same tire size 
designation may, at the option of the manufacturer, be stated as a 
single value, with the label indicating to which axles the ratings 
apply.

Examples of combined ratings:
GAWR:

    (a) All axles--2,400 kg (5,290 lb) with LT245/75R16(E) tires.
    (b) Front--5,215 kg (11,500 lb) with 295/75R22.5(G) tires.
    First intermediate to rear--9,070 kg (20,000 lb) with 295/75R22.5(G) 
tires.

    (5) One of the following statements, as appropriate:
    (i) For passenger cars, the statement: ``This vehicle conforms to 
all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety, bumper, and theft 
prevention standards in effect on the date of manufacture shown above.'' 
The expression ``U.S.'' or ``U.S.A.'' may be inserted before the word 
``Federal''.
    (ii) In the case of multipurpose passenger vehicles (MPVs) and 
trucks with a GVWR of 6,000 pounds or less, the statement: ``This 
vehicle conforms to all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety and 
theft prevention standards in effect on the date of manufacture shown 
above.'' The expression ``U.S.'' or ``U.S.A.'' may be inserted before 
the (word ``Federal'').
    (iii) In the case of multipurpose passenger vehicles (MPVs) and 
trucks with a GVWR of over 6,000 pounds, the statement: ``This vehicle 
conforms to all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards in 
effect on the date of manufacture shown above.'' The expression ``U.S.'' 
or ``U.S.A.'' may be inserted before the word ``Federal''.
    (6) Vehicle identification number.
    (7) The type classification of the vehicle as defined in Sec. 571.3 
of this chapter (e.g., truck, MPV, bus, trailer).

[[Page 263]]

    (h) Multiple GVWR-GAWR ratings. (1) (For passenger cars only) In 
cases in which different tire sizes are offered as a customer option, a 
manufacturer may at its option list more than one set of values for GVWR 
and GAWR, to meet the requirements of paragraphs (g) (3) and (4) of this 
section. If the label shows more than one set of weight rating values, 
each value shall be followed by the phrase ``with --tires,'' inserting 
the proper tire size designations. A manufacturer may, at its option, 
list one or more tire sizes where only one set of weight ratings is 
provided.

    Example: Passenger Car
    GVWR: 4,400 lb with P195/65R15 tires; 4,800 lb with P205/75R15 
tires.
    GAWR: Front--2,000 lb with P195/65R15 tires at 24 psi; 2,200 lb with 
P205/75R15 tires at 24 psi. Rear--2,400 lb with P195/65R15 tires at 28 
psi; 2,600 lb with P205/75R15 tires at 28 psi.

    (2) (For multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, buses, trailers, 
and motorcycles) The manufacturer may, at its option, list more than one 
GVWR-GAWR-tire-rim combination on the label, as long as the listing 
contains the tire-rim combination installed as original equipment on the 
vehicle by the manufacturer and conforms in content and format to the 
requirements for tire-rim-inflation information set forth in Standard 
Nos. 110, 120, 129 and 139 (Sec. Sec. 571.110, 571.120, 571.129 and 
571.139 of this chapter).
    (3) At the option of the manufacturer, additional GVWR-GAWR ratings 
for operation of the vehicle at reduced speeds may be listed at the 
bottom of the certification label following any information that is 
required to be listed.
    (i) [Reserved]
    (j) A manufacturer may, at its option, provide information 
concerning which tables in the document that accompanies the vehicle 
pursuant to Sec. 575.6(a) of this chapter apply to the vehicle. This 
information may not precede or interrupt the information required by 
paragraph (g) of this section.
    (k) In the case of passenger cars imported into the United States 
under 49 CFR 591.5(f) to which the label required by this section has 
not been affixed by the original assembler of the passenger car, a label 
meeting the requirements of this paragraph shall be affixed before the 
vehicle is imported into the United States, if the car is from a line 
listed in appendix A of 49 CFR part 541. This label shall be in addition 
to, and not in place of, the label required by paragraphs (a) through 
(j), inclusive, of this section.
    (1) The label shall be riveted or permanently affixed in such a 
manner that it cannot be removed without destroying or defacing it.
    (2) The label shall be affixed to either the hinge pillar, door-
latch post, or the door edge that meets the door-latch post, next to the 
driver's seating position, or, if none of these locations is 
practicable, to the left side of the instrument panel. If that location 
is also not practicable, the label shall be affixed to the inward-facing 
surface of the door next to the driver's seating position. The location 
of the label shall be such that it is easily readable without moving any 
part of the vehicle except an outer door.
    (3) The lettering on the label shall be of a color that contrasts 
with the background of the label.
    (4) The label shall contain the following statements, in the English 
language, lettered in block capitals and numerals not less than three 
thirty-seconds of an inch high, in the order shown:
    (i) Model year (if applicable) or year of manufacture and line of 
the vehicle, as reported by the manufacturer that produced or assembled 
the vehicle. ``Model year'' is used as defined in Sec. 593.4 of this 
chapter. ``Line'' is used as defined in Sec. 541.4 of this chapter.
    (ii) Name of the importer. The full corporate or individual name of 
the importer of the vehicle shall be spelled out, except that such 
abbreviations as ``Co.'' or ``Inc.'' and their foreign equivalents and 
the middle initial of individuals, may be used. The name of the importer 
shall be preceded by the words ``Imported By''.
    (iii) The statement: ``This vehicle conforms to the applicable 
Federal motor vehicle theft prevention standard in effect on the date of 
manufacture.''
    (l)(1) In the case of a passenger car imported into the United 
States under 49 CFR 591.5(f) which does not have a

[[Page 264]]

vehicle identification number that complies with 49 CFR 565.4 (b), (c), 
and (g) at the time of importation, the Registered Importer shall 
permanently affix a label to the vehicle in such a manner that, unless 
the label is riveted, it cannot be removed without being destroyed or 
defaced. The label shall be in addition to the label required by 
paragraph (a) of this section, and shall be affixed to the vehicle in a 
location specified in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (2) The label shall contain the following statement, in the English 
language, lettered in block capitals and numerals not less than 4 mm 
high, with the location on the vehicle of the original manufacturer's 
identification number provided in the blank: ORIGINAL MANUFACTURER'S 
IDENTIFICATION NUMBER SUBSTITUTING FOR U.S. VIN IS LOCATED ------.

[70 FR 7430, Feb. 14, 2005, as amended at 76 FR 53078, Aug. 25, 2011]


<R05>
Sec. 567.5  Requirements for manufacturers of vehicles manufactured in two or 

more stages.

    (a) Location of information labels for incomplete vehicles. Each 
incomplete vehicle manufacturer or intermediate vehicle manufacturer 
shall permanently affix a label to each incomplete vehicle, in the 
location and form specified in Sec. 567.4, and in a manner that does 
not obscure other labels. If the locations specified in 49 CFR 567.4(c) 
are not practicable, the label may be provided as part of the IVD 
package so that it can be permanently affixed in the acceptable 
locations provided for in that subsection when the vehicle is 
sufficiently manufactured to allow placement in accordance therewith.
    (b) Incomplete vehicle manufacturers. (1) Except as provided in 
paragraph (f) of this section and notwithstanding the certification of a 
final-stage manufacturer under 49 CFR 567.5(d)(2)(v), each manufacturer 
of an incomplete vehicle assumes legal responsibility for all 
certification-related duties and liabilities under the Vehicle Safety 
Act with respect to:
    (i) Components and systems it installs or supplies for installation 
on the incomplete vehicle, unless changed by a subsequent manufacturer;
    (ii) The vehicle as further manufactured or completed by an 
intermediate or final-stage manufacturer, to the extent that the vehicle 
is completed in accordance with the IVD; and
    (iii) The accuracy of the information contained in the IVD.
    (2) Except as provided in paragraph (f) of this section, each 
incomplete vehicle manufacturer shall affix an information label to each 
incomplete vehicle that contains the following statements:
    (i) Name of incomplete vehicle manufacturer preceded by the words 
``incomplete vehicle MANUFACTURED BY'' or ``incomplete vehicle MFD BY''.
    (ii) Month and year of manufacture of the incomplete vehicle. This 
may be spelled out, as in ``JUNE 2000'', or expressed in numerals, as in 
``6/00''. No preface is required.
    (iii) ``Gross Vehicle Weight Rating'' or ``GVWR'' followed by the 
appropriate value in kilograms and (pounds), which shall not be less 
than the sum of the unloaded vehicle weight, rated cargo load, and 150 
pounds times the number of the vehicle's designated seating positions, 
if known. However, for school buses the minimum occupant weight 
allowance shall be 120 pounds per passenger and 150 pounds for the 
driver.
    (iv) ``Gross Axle Weight Rating'' or ``GAWR,'' followed by the 
appropriate value in kilograms and (pounds) for each axle, identified in 
order from front to rear (e.g., front, first intermediate, second 
intermediate, rear). The ratings for any consecutive axles having 
identical gross axle weight ratings when equipped with tires having the 
same tire size designation may be stated as a single value, with the 
label indicating to which axles the ratings apply.
    (v) Vehicle Identification Number.
    (c) Intermediate manufacturers. (1) Except as provided in paragraphs 
(f) and (g) of this section and notwithstanding the certification of a 
final-stage manufacturer under Sec. 567.5(d)(2)(v), each intermediate 
manufacturer of a vehicle manufactured in two or more stages assumes 
legal responsibility for all certification-related duties and 
liabilities under the Vehicle Safety Act with respect to:

[[Page 265]]

    (i) Components and systems it installs or supplies for installation 
on the incomplete vehicle, unless changed by a subsequent manufacturer;
    (ii) The vehicle as further manufactured or completed by an 
intermediate or final-stage manufacturer, to the extent that the vehicle 
is completed in accordance with the addendum to the IVD furnished by the 
intermediate vehicle manufacturer;
    (iii) Any work done by the intermediate manufacturer on the 
incomplete vehicle that was not performed in accordance with the IVD or 
an addendum of a prior intermediate manufacturer; and
    (iv) The accuracy of the information in any addendum to the IVD 
furnished by the intermediate vehicle manufacturer.
    (2) Except as provided in paragraphs (f) and (g) of this section, 
each intermediate manufacturer of an incomplete vehicle shall affix an 
information label, in a manner that does not obscure the labels applied 
by previous stage manufacturers, to each incomplete vehicle, which 
contains the following statements:
    (i) Name of intermediate manufacturer, preceded by the words 
``INTERMEDIATE MANUFACTURE BY'' or ``INTERMEDIATE MFR''.
    (ii) Month and year in which the intermediate manufacturer performed 
its last manufacturing operation on the incomplete vehicle. This may be 
spelled out, as ``JUNE 2000'', or expressed as numerals, as ``6/00''. No 
preface is required.
    (iii) ``Gross Vehicle Weight Rating'' or ``GVWR'', followed by the 
appropriate value in kilograms and (pounds), if different from that 
identified by the incomplete vehicle manufacturer.
    (iv) ``Gross Axle Weight Rating'' or ``GAWR'' followed by the 
appropriate value in kilograms and (pounds), if different from that 
identified by the incomplete vehicle manufacturer.
    (v) Vehicle identification number.
    (d) Final-stage manufacturers. (1) Except as provided in paragraphs 
(f) and (g) of this section, each final-stage manufacturer of a vehicle 
manufactured in two or more stages assumes legal responsibility for all 
certification-related duties and liabilities under the Vehicle Safety 
Act, except to the extent that the incomplete vehicle manufacturer or an 
intermediate manufacturer has provided equipment subject to a safety 
standard or expressly assumed responsibility for standards related to 
systems and components it supplied and except to the extent that the 
final-stage manufacturer completed the vehicle in accordance with the 
prior manufacturers' IVD or any addendum furnished pursuant to 49 CFR 
part 568, as to the Federal motor vehicle safety standards fully 
addressed therein.
    (2) Except as provided in paragraphs (f) and (g) of this section, 
each final-stage manufacturer shall affix a certification label to each 
vehicle, in a manner that does not obscure the labels applied by 
previous stage manufacturers, and that contains the following 
statements:
    (i) Name of final-stage manufacturer, preceded by the words 
``MANUFACTURED BY'' or ``MFD BY''.
    (ii) Month and year in which final-stage manufacture is completed. 
This may be spelled out, as in ``JUNE 2000'', or expressed in numerals, 
as in ``6/00''. No preface is required.
    (iii) ``Gross Vehicle Weight Rating'' or ``GVWR'' followed by the 
appropriate value in kilograms and (pounds), which shall not be less 
than the sum of the unloaded vehicle weight, rated cargo load, and 150 
pounds times the number of the vehicle's designated seating positions. 
However, for school buses the minimum occupant weight allowance shall be 
120 pounds per passenger and 150 pounds for the driver.
    (iv) ``GROSS AXLE WEIGHT RATING'' or ``GAWR'', followed by the 
appropriate value in kilograms and (pounds) for each axle, identified in 
order from front to rear (e.g., front, first intermediate, second 
intermediate, rear). The ratings for any consecutive axles having 
identical gross axle weight ratings when equipped with tires having the 
same tire size designation may be stated as a single value, with the 
label indicating to which axles the ratings apply.

    Examples of combined ratings: (a) All axles--2,400 kg (5,290 lb) 
with LT245/75R16(E) tires;
    (b) Front--5,215 kg (11,500 lb) with 295/75R22.5(G) tires;

[[Page 266]]

    (c) First intermediate to rear--9,070 kg (20,000 lb) with 295/
75R22.5(G) tires.

    (v)(A) One of the following alternative certification statements:
    (1) ``This vehicle conforms to all applicable Federal Motor Vehicle 
Safety Standards, [and Bumper and Theft Prevention Standards, if 
applicable] in effect in (month, year).''
    (2) ``This vehicle has been completed in accordance with the prior 
manufacturers' IVD, where applicable. This vehicle conforms to all 
applicable Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards, [and Bumper and Theft 
Prevention Standards, if applicable] in effect in (month, year).''
    (3) ``This vehicle has been completed in accordance with the prior 
manufacturers' IVD, where applicable, except for [insert FMVSS(s)]. This 
vehicle conforms to all applicable Federal Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standards, [and Bumper and Theft Prevention Standards if applicable] in 
effect in (month, year).''
    (B) The date shown in the statement required in paragraph 
(d)(2)(v)(A) of this section shall not be earlier than the manufacturing 
date provided by the incomplete or intermediate stage manufacturer and 
not later than the date of completion of the final-stage manufacture.
    (C) Notwithstanding the certification statements in paragraph 
(d)(2)(v)(A) of this section, the legal responsibilities and liabilities 
for certification under the Vehicle Safety Act shall be allocated among 
the vehicle manufacturers as provided in 567.5(b)(1), (c)(1), and 
(d)(1), and 49 CFR 568.4(a)(9).
    (vi) Vehicle identification number.
    (vii) The type classification of the vehicle as defined in 49 CFR 
571.3 (e.g., truck, MPV, bus, trailer).
    (e) More than one set of figures for GVWR and GAWR, and one or more 
tire sizes, may be listed in satisfaction of the requirements of 
paragraphs (d)(2)(iii) and (iv) of this section, as provided in Sec. 
567.4(h).
    (f) If an incomplete vehicle manufacturer assumes legal 
responsibility for all duties and liabilities for certification under 
the Vehicle Safety Act, with respect to the vehicle as finally 
manufactured, the incomplete vehicle manufacturer shall ensure that a 
label is affixed to the final vehicle in conformity with paragraph (d) 
of this section, except that the name of the incomplete vehicle 
manufacturer shall appear instead of the name of the final-stage 
manufacturer after the words ``MANUFACTURED BY'' or ``MFD BY'' required 
by paragraph (d)(2)(i) of this section.
    (g) If an intermediate manufacturer of a vehicle assumes legal 
responsibility for all duties and liabilities for certification under 
the Vehicle Safety Act, with respect to the vehicle as finally 
manufactured, the intermediate manufacturer shall ensure that a label is 
affixed to the final vehicle in conformity with paragraph (d) of this 
section, except that the name of the intermediate manufacturer shall 
appear instead of the name of the final-stage manufacturer after the 
words ``MANUFACTURED BY'' or ``MFD BY'' required by paragraph (f) of 
this section.


<R05>
Sec. 567.6  Requirements for persons who do not alter certified vehicles or do 

so with readily attachable components.

    A person who does not alter a motor vehicle or who alters such a 
vehicle only by the addition, substitution, or removal of readily 
attachable components such as mirrors or tires and rim assemblies, or 
minor finishing operations such as painting, in such a manner that the 
vehicle's stated weight ratings are still valid, need not affix a label 
to the vehicle, but shall allow a manufacturer's label that conforms to 
the requirements of this part to remain affixed to the vehicle. If such 
a person is a distributor of the motor vehicle, allowing the 
manufacturer's label to remain affixed to the vehicle shall satisfy the 
distributor's certification requirements under the Vehicle Safety Act.


<R05>
Sec. 567.7  Requirements for persons who alter certified vehicles.

    (a) With respect to the vehicle alterations it performs, an alterer:
    (1) Has a duty to determine continued conformity of the altered 
vehicle with applicable Federal motor vehicle safety, Bumper, and Theft 
Prevention standards, and

[[Page 267]]

    (2) Assumes legal responsibility for all duties and liabilities for 
certification under the Vehicle Safety Act.
    (b) The vehicle manufacturer's certification label and any 
information labels shall remain affixed to the vehicle and the alterer 
shall affix to the vehicle an additional label in the manner and 
location specified in Sec. 567.4, in a manner that does not obscure any 
previously applied labels, and containing the following information:
    (1) The statement: ``This vehicle was altered by (individual or 
corporate name) in (month and year in which alterations were completed) 
and as altered it conforms to all applicable Federal Motor Vehicle 
Safety, Bumper and Theft Prevention Standards affected by the alteration 
and in effect in (month, year).'' The second date shall be no earlier 
than the date of manufacture of the certified vehicle (as specified on 
the certification label), and no later than the date alterations were 
completed.
    (2) If the gross vehicle weight rating or any of the gross axle 
weight ratings of the vehicle as altered are different from those shown 
on the original certification label, the modified values shall be 
provided in the form specified in Sec. 567.4(g)(3) and (4).
    (3) If the vehicle as altered has a different type classification 
from that shown on the original certification label, the type as 
modified shall be provided.


<R03>
PART 568_VEHICLES MANUFACTURED IN TWO OR MORE STAGES_ALL INCOMPLETE, 

INTERMEDIATE AND FINAL-STAGE MANUFACTURERS OF VEHICLES MANUFACTURED IN TWO OR 

MORE STAGES--Table of Contents



Sec.
568.1 Purpose and scope.
568.2 Application.
568.3 Definitions.
568.4 Requirements for incomplete vehicle manufacturers.
568.5 Requirements for intermediate manufacturers.
568.6 Requirements for final-stage manufacturers.
568.7 Requirements for manufacturers who assume legal responsibility for 
          a vehicle.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 30111, 30115, 30117, 30166 delegation of 
authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Source: 70 FR 7434, Feb. 14, 2005, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 568.1  Purpose and scope.

    The purpose of this part is to prescribe the method by which 
manufacturers of vehicles manufactured in two or more stages shall 
ensure conformity of those vehicles with the Federal motor vehicle 
safety standards (``standards'') and other regulations issued under the 
National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act, as amended (49 U.S.C. 
Sec. 30115) and the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, as 
amended (49 U.S.C. 32504 and 33108(c)).


<R05>
Sec. 568.2  Application.

    This part applies to incomplete vehicle manufacturers, intermediate 
manufacturers, and final-stage manufacturers of vehicles manufactured in 
two or more stages.


<R05>
Sec. 568.3  Definitions.

    All terms that are defined in the Act and the rules and standards 
issued under its authority are used as defined therein. The term 
``bumper'' has the meaning assigned to it in Title I of the Cost Savings 
Act and the rules and standards issued under its authority. The 
definitions contained in 49 CFR part 567 apply to this part.


<R05>
Sec. 568.4  Requirements for incomplete vehicle manufacturers.

    (a) The incomplete vehicle manufacturer shall furnish for each 
incomplete vehicle, at or before the time of delivery, an incomplete 
vehicle document (``IVD'') that contains the following statements, in 
the order shown, and all other information required by this part to be 
included therein:
    (1) Name and mailing address of the incomplete vehicle manufacturer.
    (2) Month and year during which the incomplete vehicle manufacturer 
performed its last manufacturing operation on the incomplete vehicle.
    (3) Identification of the incomplete vehicle(s) to which the 
document applies. The identification shall be by vehicle identification 
number (VIN) or groups of VINs to permit a person to

[[Page 268]]

ascertain positively that a document applies to a particular incomplete 
vehicle after the document has been removed from the vehicle.
    (4) Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of the completed vehicle for 
which the incomplete vehicle is intended.
    (5) Gross axle weight rating (GAWR) for each axle of the completed 
vehicle for which the incomplete vehicle is intended, listed and 
identified in order from front to rear (e.g., front, first intermediate, 
second intermediate, rear). The ratings for any consecutive axles having 
identical gross axle weight ratings when equipped with tires having the 
same tire size designation may, at the option of the incomplete vehicle 
manufacturer, be stated as a single value, with the label indicating to 
which axles the ratings apply.

    Examples of combined ratings: (a) All axles--2,400 kg (5,290 lb) 
with LT245/75R16(E) tires;
    (b) Front--5,215 kg (11,500 lb) with 295/75R22.5(G) tires.
    (c) First intermediate to rear--9,070 kg (20,000 lb) with 295/
75R22.5(G) tires.

    (6) Listing of the vehicle types as defined in 49 CFR 571.3 (e.g., 
truck, MPV, bus, trailer) into which the incomplete vehicle may 
appropriately be manufactured.
    (7) Listing, by number, of each standard, in effect at the time of 
manufacture of the incomplete vehicle, that applies to any of the 
vehicle types listed in paragraph (a)(6) of this section, followed in 
each case by one of the following three types of statement, as 
applicable:
    (i) Type 1--A statement that the vehicle when completed will conform 
to the standard if no alterations are made in identified components of 
the incomplete vehicle.

    Example: 104-This vehicle when completed will conform to FMVSS No. 
104, Windshield Wiping and Washing Systems, if no alterations are made 
in the windshield wiper components.

    (ii) Type 2--A statement of specific conditions of final manufacture 
under which the manufacturer specifies that the completed vehicle will 
conform to the standard.

    Example: 121--This vehicle when completed will conform to FMVSS No. 
121, Air Brake Systems, if it does not exceed any of the gross axle 
weight ratings, if the center of gravity at GVWR is not higher than nine 
feet above the ground, and if no alterations are made in any brake 
system component.

    (iii) Type 3--A statement that conformity with the standard cannot 
be determined based upon the components supplied on the incomplete 
vehicle, and that the incomplete vehicle manufacturer makes no 
representation as to conformity with the standard.
    (8) Each document shall contain a table of contents or chart 
summarizing all the standards applicable to the vehicle pursuant to 49 
CFR 568.4(a)(7).
    (9) A certification that the statements contained in the incomplete 
vehicle document are accurate as of the date of manufacture of the 
incomplete vehicle and can be used and relied on by any intermediate 
and/or final-stage manufacturer as a basis for certification.
    (b) To the extent the IVD expressly incorporates by reference body 
builder or other design and engineering guidance (Reference Material), 
the incomplete vehicle manufacturer shall make such Reference Material 
readily available to subsequent manufacturers. Reference Materials 
incorporated by reference in the IVD shall be deemed to be part of the 
IVD.
    (c) The IVD shall be attached to the incomplete vehicle in such a 
manner that it will not be inadvertently detached, or alternatively, it 
may be sent directly to a final-stage manufacturer, intermediate 
manufacturer or purchaser for purposes other than resale to whom the 
incomplete vehicle is delivered. The Reference Material in paragraph (b) 
of this section need not be attached to each vehicle.

[70 FR 7434, Feb. 14, 2005, as amended at 71 FR 28197, May 15, 2006]


<R05>
Sec. 568.5  Requirements for intermediate manufacturers.

    Each intermediate manufacturer of a vehicle manufactured in two or 
more stages shall furnish to the final-stage manufacturer the document 
required by 49 CFR 568.4 in the manner specified in that section. If any 
of the changes in the vehicle made by the intermediate manufacturer 
affects the validity of

[[Page 269]]

the statements in the IVD, that manufacturer shall furnish an addendum 
to the IVD that contains its name and mailing address and an indication 
of all changes that should be made in the IVD to reflect changes that it 
made to the vehicle. The addendum shall contain a certification by the 
intermediate manufacturer that the statements contained in the addendum 
are accurate as of the date of manufacture by the intermediate 
manufacturer and can be used and relied on by any subsequent 
intermediate manufacturer(s) and the final-stage manufacturer as a basis 
for certification.


<R05>
Sec. 568.6  Requirements for final-stage manufacturers.

    Each final-stage manufacturer shall complete the vehicle in such a 
manner that it conforms to the applicable standards in effect on the 
date selected by the final-stage manufacturer, including the date of 
manufacture of the incomplete vehicle, the date of final completion, or 
a date between those two dates. This requirement shall, however, be 
superseded by any conflicting provisions of a standard that applies by 
its terms to vehicles manufactured in two or more stages.


<R05>
Sec. 568.7  Requirements for manufacturers who assume legal responsibility for 

a vehicle.

    (a) If an incomplete vehicle manufacturer assumes legal 
responsibility for all duties and liabilities imposed on manufacturers 
by the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act, as amended (49 
U.S.C. chapter 301) (hereafter referred to as the Act), with respect to 
a vehicle as finally manufactured, the requirements of Sec. Sec. 568.4, 
568.5 and 568.6 do not apply to that vehicle. In such a case, the 
incomplete vehicle manufacturer shall ensure that a label is affixed to 
the final vehicle in conformity with 49 CFR 567.5(f).
    (b) If an intermediate manufacturer of a vehicle assumes legal 
responsibility for all duties and liabilities imposed on manufacturers 
by the Vehicle Safety Act, with respect to the vehicle as finally 
manufactured, Sec. Sec. 568.5 and 568.6 do not apply to that vehicle. 
In such a case, the intermediate manufacturer shall ensure that a label 
is affixed to the final vehicle in conformity with 49 CFR 567.5(g). The 
assumption of responsibility by an intermediate manufacturer does not, 
however, change the requirements for incomplete vehicle manufacturers in 
Sec. 568.4.


<R03>
PART 569_REGROOVED TIRES--Table of Contents



Sec.
569.1 Purpose and scope.
569.3 Definitions.
569.5 Applicability.
569.7 Requirements.
569.9 Labeling of regroovable tires.

    Authority: Secs. 119, 204, 80 Stat. 728, 729 (15 U.S.C. 1407, 1424); 
and Secretary's delegation of authority, 49 CFR 1.4(c).


<R05>
Sec. 569.1  Purpose and scope.

    This part sets forth the conditions under which regrooved and 
regroovable tires manufactured or regrooved after the effective date of 
the regulation may be sold, offered for sale, introduced for sale or 
delivered for introduction into interstate commerce.

[42 FR 21613, Apr. 28, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 569.3  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory definitions. All terms used in this part that are 
defined in section 102 of the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety 
Act of 1966 (15 U.S.C. 1391) are used as defined in the Act.
    (b) Motor Vehicle Safety Standard definitions. Unless otherwise 
indicated, all terms used in this part that are defined in the Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standards, part 571, of this subchapter (hereinafter 
``The Standards''), are used as defined therein without regard to the 
applicability of a standard in which a definition is contained.
    (c) Regroovable tire means a tire, either original tread or retread, 
designed and constructed with sufficient tread material to permit 
renewal of the tread pattern or the generation of a new tread pattern in 
a manner which conforms to this part.
    (d) Regrooved tire means a tire, either original tread or retread, 
on which the tread pattern has been renewed or a new tread has been 
produced by cutting into the tread of a worn tire to a depth

[[Page 270]]

equal to or deeper than the molded original groove depth.

[34 FR 1150, Jan. 24, 1969. Redesignated at 35 FR 5118, Mar. 26, 1970]


<R05>
Sec. 569.5  Applicability.

    (a) General. Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, 
this part applies to all motor vehicle regrooved or regroovable tires 
manufactured or regrooved after the effective date of the regulation.
    (b) Export. This part does not apply to regrooved or regroovable 
tires intended solely for export and so labeled or tagged.

[34 FR 1150, Jan. 24, 1969. Redesignated at 35 FR 5118, Mar. 26, 1970]


<R05>
Sec. 569.7  Requirements.

    (a) Regrooved tires. (1) Except as permitted by paragraph (a)(2) of 
this section, no person shall sell, offer for sale, or introduce or 
deliver for introduction into interstate commerce regrooved tires 
produced by removing rubber from the surface of a worn tire tread to 
generate a new tread pattern. Any person who regrooves tires and leases 
them to owners or operators of motor vehicles and any person who 
regrooves his own tires for use on motor vehicles is considered to be a 
person delivering for introduction into interstate commerce within the 
meaning of this part.
    (2) A regrooved tire may be sold, offered for sale, or introduced 
for sale or delivered for introduction into interstate commerce only if 
it conforms to each of the following requirements:
    (i) The tire being regrooved shall be a regroovable tire;
    (ii) After regrooving, cord material below the grooves shall have a 
protective covering of tread material at least \3/32\-inch thick;
    (iii) After regrooving, the new grooves generated into the tread 
material and any residual original molded tread groove which is at or 
below the new regrooved depth shall have a minimum of 90 linear inches 
of tread edges per linear foot of the circumference;
    (iv) After regrooving, the new groove width generated into the tread 
material shall be a minimum of \3/16\-inch and a maximum of \5/16\-inch;
    (v) After regrooving, all new grooves cut into the tread shall 
provide unobstructed fluid escape passages; and
    (vi) After regrooving, the tire shall not contain any of the 
following defects, as determined by a visual examination of the tire 
either mounted on the rim, or dismounted, whichever is applicable:
    (A) Cracking which extends to the fabric,
    (B) Groove cracks or wear extending to the fabric, or
    (C) Evidence of ply, tread, or sidewall separation;
    (vii) If the tire is siped by cutting the tread surface without 
removing rubber, the tire cord material shall not be damaged as a result 
of the siping process, and no sipe shall be deeper than the original or 
retread groove depth.
    (b) Siped regroovable tires. No person shall sell, offer for sale, 
or introduce for sale or deliver for introduction into interstate 
commerce a regroovable tire that has been siped by cutting the tread 
surface without removing rubber if the tire cord material is damaged as 
a result of the siping process, or if the tire is siped deeper than the 
original or retread groove depth.

[39 FR 15039, Apr. 30, 1974, as amended at 42 FR 21613, Apr. 28, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 569.9  Labeling of regroovable tires.

    (a) Regroovable tires. After August 30, 1969, each tire designed and 
constructed for regrooving shall be labeled on both sidewalls with the 
word ``Regroovable'' molded on or into the tire in raised or recessed 
letters 0.025 to 0.040 inch. The word ``Regroovable'' shall be in 
letters 0.38 to 0.50 inch in height and not less than 4 inches and not 
more than 6 inches in length. The lettering shall be located in the 
sidewall of the tire between the maximum section width and the bead in 
an area which will not be obstructed by the rim flange.

[34 FR 1150, Jan. 24, 1969; 34 FR 1830, Feb. 7, 1969]

[[Page 271]]


<R03>
PART 570_VEHICLE IN USE INSPECTION STANDARDS--Table of Contents



          Subpart A_Vehicles With GVWR of 10,000 Pounds or Less

Sec.
570.1 Scope.
570.2 Purpose.
570.3 Applicability.
570.4 Definitions.
570.5 Service brake system.
570.6 Brake power unit.
570.7 Steering systems.
570.8 Suspension systems.
570.9 Tires.
570.10 Wheel assemblies.

         Subpart B_Vehicles With GVWR of More Than 10,000 Pounds

570.51 Scope.
570.52 Purpose.
570.53 Applicability.
570.54 Definitions.
570.55 Hydraulic brake system.
570.56 Vacuum brake assist unit and vacuum brake system.
570.57 Air brake system and air-over-hydraulic brake subsystem.
570.58 Electric brake system.
570.59 Service brake system.
570.60 Steering system.
570.61 Suspension system.
570.62 Tires.
570.63 Wheel assemblies.

    Authority: Secs. 103, 108, 119, Pub. L. 89-563, 80 Stat. 718 (15 
U.S.C. 1392, 1397, 1407); delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.


<R04>
          Subpart A_Vehicles With GVWR of 10,000 Pounds or Less

    Source: 38 FR 23950, Sept. 5, 1973, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 570.1  Scope.

    This part specifies standards and procedures for inspection of 
hydraulic service brake systems, steering and suspension systems, and 
tire and wheel assemblies of motor vehicles in use.


<R05>
Sec. 570.2  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to establish criteria for the inspection 
of motor vehicles by State inspection systems, in order to reduce death 
and injuries attributable to failure or inadequate performance of motor 
vehicle systems.


<R05>
Sec. 570.3  Applicability.

    This part does not in itself impose requirements on any person. It 
is intended to be implemented by States through the highway safety 
program standards issued under the Highway Safety Act (23 U.S.C. 402) 
with respect to inspection of motor vehicles with gross vehicle weight 
rating of 10,000 pounds or less, except motorcycles or trailers.


<R05>
Sec. 570.4  Definitions.

    Unless otherwise indicated, all terms used in this part that are 
defined in 49 CFR part 571, Motor Vehicle Safety Standards, are used as 
defined in that part.


<R05>
Sec. 570.5  Service brake system.

    Unless otherwise noted, the force to be applied during inspection 
procedures to power-assisted and full-power brake systems is 25 lb, and 
to all other systems, 50 lb.
    (a) Failure indicator. The brake system failure indicator lamp, if 
part of a vehicle's original equipment, shall be operable. (This lamp is 
required by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 105, 49 CFR 
571.105, on every new passenger car manufactured on or after January 1, 
1968, and on other types of motor vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1975.)
    (1) Inspection procedure. Apply the parking brake and turn the 
ignition to start, or verify lamp operation by other means indicated by 
the vehicle manufacturer that the brake system failure indicator lamp is 
operable.
    (b) Brake system integrity. The brake system shall demonstrate 
integrity as indicated by no perceptible decrease in pedal height under 
a 125 pound force applied to the brake pedal or by no illumination of 
the brake system failure indicator lamp. The brake system shall 
withstand the application of force to the pedal without failure of any 
line or other part.
    (1) Inspection procedures. With the engine running on vehicles 
equipped with power brake systems, and the ignition turned to ``on'' in 
other vehicles, apply a force of 125 pounds to the brake pedal and hold 
for 10 seconds. Note any decrease in pedal height, and whether the lamp 
illuminates.

[[Page 272]]

    (c) Brake pedal reserve. When the brake pedal is fully depressed, 
the distance that the pedal has traveled from its free position shall be 
not greater than 80 percent of the total distance from its free position 
to the floorboard or other object that restricts pedal travel.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Measure the distance (A) from the free 
pedal position to the floorboard or other object that restricts brake 
pedal travel. Depress the brake pedal, and with the force applied 
measure the distance (B) from the depressed pedal position to the 
floorboard or other object that restricts pedal travel.

Determine the percentage as

[(A-B)/A]x100.


The engine must be operating when power-assisted brakes are checked. The 
pedal reserve check is not required for vehicles equipped with full 
power (central hydraulic) brake systems, or to vehicles with brake 
systems designed to operate with greater than 80 percent pedal travel.
    (d) Service brake performance. Compliance with one of the following 
performance criteria will satisfy the requirements of this section. 
Verify that tire inflation pressure is within the limits recommended by 
vehicle manufacturer before conducting either of the following tests.
    (1) Roller-type or drive-on platform tests. The force applied by the 
brake on a front wheel or a rear wheel shall not differ by more than 20 
percent from the force applied by the brake on the other front wheel or 
the other rear wheel respectively.
    (i) Inspection procedure. The vehicle shall be tested on a drive-on 
platform, or a roller-type brake analyzer with the capability of 
measuring equalization. The test shall be conducted in accordance with 
the test equipment manufacturer's specifications. Note the left to right 
brake force variance.
    (2) Road test. The service brake system shall stop the vehicle in a 
distance of 25 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per hour without 
leaving a 12-foot-wide lane.
    (i) Inspection procedure. The road test shall be conducted on a 
level (not to exceed plus or minus one percent grade) dry, smooth, hard-
surfaced road that is free from loose material, oil, or grease. The 
service brakes shall be applied at a vehicle speed of 20 miles per hour 
and the vehicle shall be brought to a stop as specified. Measure the 
distance required to stop.
    (e) Brake hoses and assemblies. Brake hoses shall not be mounted so 
as to contact the vehicle body or chassis. Hoses shall not be cracked, 
chafed, or flattened. Protective devices, such as ``rub rings,'' shall 
not be considered part of the hose or tubing.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually, inspecting front brake 
hoses through all wheel positions from full left to full right for 
conditions indicated.
    Note: To inspect for paragraphs (f), (g), and (h) of this section, 
remove at a minimum one front wheel and one rear wheel.
    (f) Disc and drum condition. If the drum is embossed with a maximum 
safe diameter dimension or the rotor is embossed with a minimum safety 
thickness dimension, the drum or disc shall be within the appropriate 
specifications. These dimensions will be found on motor vehicles 
manufactured since January 1, 1971, and may be found on vehicles 
manufactured for several years prior to that time. If the drums and 
discs are not embossed, the drums and discs shall be within the 
manufacturer's specifications.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for condition indicated, 
measuring as necessary.
    (g) Friction materials. On each brake the thickness of the lining or 
pad shall not be less than one thirty-second of an inch over the rivet 
heads, or the brake shoe on bonded linings or pads. Brake linings and 
pads shall not have cracks or breaks that extend to rivet holes except 
minor cracks that do not impair attachment. Drum brake linings shall be 
securely attached to brake shoes. Disc brake pads shall be securely 
attached to shoe plates.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for conditions indicated, 
and measure height of rubbing surface of lining over rivet heads. 
Measure bonded lining thickness over shoe surface at the thinnest point 
on the lining or pad.
    (h) Structural and mechanical parts. Backing plates and caliper 
assemblies

[[Page 273]]

shall not be deformed or cracked. System parts shall not be broken, 
misaligned, missing, binding, or show evidence of severe wear. Automatic 
adjusters and other parts shall be assembled and installed correctly.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for conditions indicated.

[38 FR 23950, Sept. 5, 1973; 38 FR 25685, Sept. 14, 1973, as amended at 
39 FR 12868, Apr. 9, 1974; 39 FR 17321, May 15, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 570.6  Brake power unit.

    (a) Vacuum hoses shall not be collapsed, abraded, broken, improperly 
mounted, or audibly leaking. With residual vacuum exhausted and a 
constant 25 pound force on the brake pedal, the pedal shall fall 
slightly when the engine is started, demonstrating integrity of the 
power assist system. This test is not applicable to vehicles equipped 
with full power brake system as the service brake performance test shall 
be considered adequate test of system performance.
    (1) Inspection procedure. With engine running, examine hoses 
visually and aurally for conditions indicated. Stop engine and apply 
service brakes several times to destroy vacuum in system. Depress brake 
pedal with 25 pounds of force and while maintaining that force, start 
the engine. If brake pedal does not fall slightly under force when the 
engine starts, there is a malfunction in the power assist system.


<R05>
Sec. 570.7  Steering systems.

    (a) System play. Lash or free play in the steering system shall not 
exceed values shown in Table 1.
    (1) Inspection procedure. With the engine on and the wheels in the 
straight ahead position, turn the steering wheel in one direction until 
there is a perceptible movement of a front wheel. If a point on the 
steering wheel rim moves more than the value shown in Table 1 before 
perceptible return movement of the wheel under observation, there is 
excessive lash or free play in the steering system.

                Table 1--Steering System Free Play Values
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Lash
              Steering wheel diameter (inches)                 (inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
16 or less..................................................           2
18..........................................................      2\1/4\
20..........................................................      2\1/2\
22..........................................................      2\3/4\
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Linkage play. Free play in the steering linkage shall not exceed 
one-quarter of an inch.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Elevate the front end of the vehicle to 
load the ball joints. Insure that wheel bearings are correctly adjusted. 
Grasp the front and rear of a tire and attempt to turn the tire and 
wheel assembly left and right. If the free movement at the front or rear 
tread of the tire exceeds one-quarter inch there is excessive steering 
linkage play.
    (c) Free turning. Steering wheels shall turn freely through the 
limit of travel in both directions.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Turn off steering wheel through the limit 
of travel in both directions. Feel for binding or jamming in the 
steering gear mechanism.
    (d) Alignment. Toe-in and toe-out measurements shall not be greater 
than 1.5 times the value listed in the vehicle manufacturer's service 
specification for alignment setting.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Verify that toe-in or toe-out is not 
greater than 1.5 times the values listed in the vehicle manufacturer's 
service specification for alignment settings as measured by a bar-type 
scuff gauge or other toe-in measuring device. Values to convert toe-in 
readings in inches to scuff gauge readings in ft/mi side-slip for 
different wheel sizes are provided in Table I. Tire diameters used in 
computing scuff gauge readings are based on the average maximum tire 
dimensions of grown tires in service for typical wheel and tire 
assemblies.

[[Page 274]]



                                           Table I--Toe-in Settings From Vehicle MFR's Service Specifications
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       Nominal                             Readings in feet per mile sideslip
                                                        tire   -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Wheel size (inches)                  diameter   \1/16\              \3/16\              \5/16\              \7/16\              \9/16\
                                                      (inches)     in     \1/8\ in     in     \1/4\ in     in     \3/8\ in     in     \1/2\ in     in
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
13..................................................      25.2      13.1      26.2      39.3      52.4      65.5      78.6      91.7     104.8     117.9
14..................................................      26.4      12.5      25.0      37.5      50.0      62.5      75.0      87.5     100.0     112.5
15..................................................      28.5      11.5      23.0      34.5      46.0      57.5      69.0      80.5      92.0     103.5
16..................................................      35.6       9.3      18.6      27.9      37.2      46.5      55.8      65.1      74.4      83.7
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (e) Power steering system. The power steering system shall not have 
cracked or slipping belts, or insufficient fluid in the reservoir.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine fluid reservoir and pump belts for 
conditions indicated.

[38 FR 23950, Sept. 5, 1973, as amended at 39 FR 12868, Apr. 9, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 570.8  Suspension systems.

    (a) Suspension condition. Ball joint seals shall not be cut or 
cracked. Structural parts shall not be bent or damaged. Stabilizer bars 
shall be connected. Springs shall not be broken, or extended above the 
vehicle manufacturer's design height. Spacers, if installed, shall be 
installed on both front springs, both rear springs, or on all four 
springs. Shock absorber mountings, shackles, and U-bolts shall be 
securely attached. Rubber bushings shall not be cracked, extruded out 
from or missing from suspension joints. Radius rods shall not be missing 
or damaged.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine front and rear end suspension 
parts for conditions indicated.
    (b) Shock absorber condition. There shall be no oil on the shock 
absorber housing attributable to leakage by the seal, and the vehicle 
shall not continue free rocking motion for more than two cycles.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine shock absorbers for oil leaking 
from within, then with vehicle on a level surface, push down on one end 
of vehicle and release. Note number of cycles of free rocking motion. 
Repeat procedure at other end of vehicle.

[38 FR 23950, Sept. 5, 1973, as amended at 44 FR 68470, Nov. 29, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 570.9  Tires.

    (a) Tread depth. The tread on each tire shall be not less than two 
thirty-seconds of an inch deep.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Passenger car tires have tread depth 
indicators that become exposed when tread depth is less than two thirty-
seconds of an inch. Inspect for indicators in any two adjacent major 
grooves at three locations spaced approximately equally around the 
outside of the tire. For vehicles other than passenger cars, it may be 
necessary to measure tread depth with a tread gauge.
    (b) Type. Vehicle shall be equipped with tires on the same axle that 
are matched in tire size designation, construction, and profile.
    (1) Inspection procedures. Examine visually. A major mismatch in 
tire size designation, construction, and profile between tires on the 
same axle, or a major deviation from the size as recommended by the 
manufacturer (e.g., as indicated on the glove box placard on 1968 and 
later passenger cars) are causes for rejection.
    (c) General condition. Tires shall be free from chunking, bumps, 
knots, or bulges evidencing cord, ply, or tread separation from the 
casing or other adjacent materials.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for conditions indicated.
    (d) Damage. Tire cords or belting materials shall not be exposed, 
either to the naked eye or when cuts or abrasions on the tire are 
probed.
    (1) Inspection procedures. Examine visually for conditions 
indicated, using a blunt instrument if necessary to probe cuts or 
abrasions.

[38 FR 23950, Sept. 5, 1973, as amended at 39 FR 12868, Apr. 9, 1974; 39 
FR 19781, June 4, 1974]

[[Page 275]]


<R05>
Sec. 570.10  Wheel assemblies.

    (a) Wheel integrity. A tire rim, wheel disc, or spider shall have no 
visible cracks, elongated bolt holes, or indication of repair by 
welding.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for conditions indicated.
    (b) Deformation. The lateral and radial runout of each rim bead area 
shall not exceed one-eighth of an inch of total indicated runout.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Using a runout indicator gauge, and a 
suitable stand, measure lateral and radial runout of rim bead through 
one full wheel revolution and note runout in excess of one-eighth of an 
inch.
    (c) Mounting. All wheel nuts and bolts shall be in place and tight.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Check wheel retention for conditions 
indicated.

[38 FR 23950, Sept. 5, 1973, as amended at 39 FR 12868, Apr. 9, 1974]


<R04>
         Subpart B_Vehicles With GVWR of More Than 10,000 Pounds

    Source: 39 FR 26027, July 16, 1974, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 570.51  Scope.

    This part specifies standards and procedures for the inspection of 
brake, steering and suspension systems, and tire and wheel assemblies, 
of motor vehicles in use with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 
10,000 pounds.


<R05>
Sec. 570.52  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to establish criteria for the inspection 
of motor vehicles through State inspection programs, in order to reduce 
deaths and injuries attributable to failure or inadequate performance of 
the motor vehicle systems covered by this part.


<R05>
Sec. 570.53  Applicability.

    This part does not in itself impose requirements on any person. It 
is intended to be implemented by States through the highway safety 
program standards issued under the Highway Safety Act (23 U.S.C. 402) 
with respect to inspection of motor vehicles with gross vehicle weight 
rating greater than 10,000 pounds, except mobile structure trailers.

[39 FR 28980, Aug. 13, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 570.54  Definitions.

    Unless otherwise indicated, all terms used in this part that are 
defined in part 571 of this chapter, Motor Vehicle Safety Standards, are 
used as defined in that part.
    Air-over-hydraulic brake subsystem means a subsystem of the air 
brake that uses compressed air to transmit a force from the driver 
control to a hydraulic brake system to actuate the service brakes.
    Electric brake system means a system that uses electric current to 
actuate the service brake.
    Vacuum brake system means a system that uses a vacuum and 
atmospheric pressure for transmitting a force from the driver control to 
the service brake, but does not include a system that uses vacuum only 
to assist the driver in applying muscular force to hydraulic or 
mechanical components.


<R05>
Sec. 570.55  Hydraulic brake system.

    The following requirements apply to vehicles with hydraulic brake 
systems.
    (a) Brake system failure indicator. The hydraulic brake system 
failure indicator lamp, if part of a vehicle's original equipment, shall 
be operable.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Apply the parking brake and turn the 
ignition to start to verify that the brake system failure indicator lamp 
is operable, or verify by other means recommended by the vehicle 
manufacturer.
    (b) Brake system integrity. The hydraulic brake system shall 
demonstrate integrity as indicated by no perceptible decrease in pedal 
height under a 125-pound force applied to the brake pedal and by no 
illumination of the brake system failure indicator lamp. The brake 
system shall withstand the application of force to the pedal without 
failure of any tube, hose or other part.
    (1) Inspection procedure. With the engine running in vehicles 
equipped with power brake systems and the ignition turned to ``on'' in 
other vehicles, apply a force of 125 pounds to the brake pedal and hold 
for 10 seconds. Note any additional decrease in pedal height after the 
initial decrease, and whether the

[[Page 276]]

brake system failure indicator lamp illuminates.
    (c) Brake pedal reserve. When the brake pedal is depressed with a 
force of 50 pounds, the distance that the pedal has traveled from its 
free position shall be not greater than 80 percent of the total distance 
from its free position to the floorboard or other object that restricts 
pedal travel. The brake pedal reserve test is not required for vehicles 
with brake systems designed by the original vehicle, manufacturer to 
operate with greater than 80 percent pedal travel.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Measure the distance (i) from the free 
pedal position to the floor board or other object that restricts brake 
pedal travel. Depress the brake pedal, and with the force applied 
measure the distance (ii) from the depressed pedal position to the floor 
board or other object that restricts pedal travel. Determine the pedal 
travel percentage as

[(A - B) / A] x 100


The engine must be operating when power-assisted brakes are checked.
    (d) Brake hoses, master cylinder, tubes and tube assemblies. 
Hydraulic brake hoses shall not be mounted so as to contact the vehicle 
body or chassis. Hoses shall not be cracked, chafed, or flattened. Brake 
tubes shall not be flattened or restricted. Brake hoses and tubes shall 
be attached or supported to prevent damage by vibration or abrasion. 
Master cylinder shall not show signs of leakage. Hose or tube protective 
rings or devices shall not be considered part of the hose or tubing.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually brake master cylinder, 
hoses and tubes, including front brake hoses, through all wheel 
positions from full left turn to full right turn for conditions 
indicated.

[39 FR 26027, July 16, 1974, as amended at 40 FR 5160, Feb. 4, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 570.56  Vacuum brake assist unit and vacuum brake system.

    The following requirements apply to vehicles with vacuum brake 
assist units and vacuum brake systems.
    (a) Vacuum brake assist unit integrity. The vacuum brake assist unit 
shall demonstrate integrity as indicated by a decrease in pedal height 
when the engine is started and a constant 50-pound force is maintained 
on the pedal.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Stop the engine and apply service brake 
several times to destroy vacuum in system. Depress the brake pedal with 
50 pounds of force and while maintaining that force, start the engine. 
If the brake pedal does not move slightly under force when the engine 
starts, there is a malfunction in the power assist unit.
    (b) Low-vacuum indicator. If the vehicle has a low-vacuum indicator, 
the indicator activation level shall not be less than 8 inches of 
mercury.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Run the engine to evacuate the system 
fully. Shut off the engine and slowly reduce the vacuum in the system by 
moderate brake applications until the vehicle vacuum gauge reads 8 
inches of mercury. Observe the functioning of the low-vacuum indicator.
    (c) Vacuum brake system integrity. (1) The vacuum brake system shall 
demonstrate integrity by meeting the following requirements:
    (i) The vacuum brake system shall provide vacuum reserve to permit 
one service brake application with a brake pedal force of 50 pounds 
after the engine is turned off without actuating the low vacuum 
indicator.
    (ii) Trailer vacuum brakes shall operate in conjunction with the 
truck or truck tractor brake pedal.
    (2) Inspection procedure. (i) Check the trailer vacuum system by 
coupling trailer(s) to truck or truck tractor and opening trailer 
shutoff valves. Start the engine and after allowing approximately 1 
minute to build up the vacuum, apply and release the brake pedal. In the 
case of trailer brakes equipped with brake chamber rods, observe the 
chamber rod movement. Run the engine to re-establish maximum vacuum, 
then shut off the engine and apply the brakes with a 50-pound force on 
the brake pedal. Note the brake application and check for low-vacuum 
indicator activation.
    (ii) For a combination vehicle equipped with breakaway protection 
and no reservoir on the towing vehicle supply line, close the supply 
line shutoff valve and disconnect the supply line. Apply a 50-pound 
force to the

[[Page 277]]

brake pedal on the towing vehicle and release. Trailer brakes should 
remain in the applied position.
    (d) Vacuum system hoses, tubes and connections. Vacuum hoses, tubes 
and connections shall be in place and properly supported. Vacuum hoses 
shall not be collapsed, cracked or abraded.
    (1) Inspection procedure. With the engine running, examine hoses and 
tubes for the conditions indicated and note broken or missing clamps.


<R05>
Sec. 570.57  Air brake system and air-over-hydraulic brake subsystem.

    The following requirements apply to vehicles with air brake and air-
over-hydraulic brake systems. Trailer(s) must be coupled to a truck or 
truck-tractor for the purpose of this inspection, except as noted.
    (a) Air brake system integrity. The air brake system shall 
demonstrate integrity by meeting the following requirements:
    (1) With the vehicle in a stationary position, compressed air 
reserve shall be sufficient to permit one full service brake 
application, after the engine is stopped and with the system fully 
charged, without lowering reservoir pressure more than 20 percent below 
the initial reading.
    (2) The air brake system compressor shall increase the air pressure 
in the reservoir(s) from the level developed after the test prescribed 
in Sec. 570.57(a)(1) to the initial pressure noted before the full 
brake application, with the engine running at the manufacturer's maximum 
recommended number of revolutions per minute with the compressor 
governor in the cut-off position, in not more than 30 seconds for 
vehicles manufactured prior to March 1, 1975. For vehicles, manufactured 
on or after March 1, 1975, the time allowed for air pressure buildup 
shall not exceed 45 seconds.
    (3) The warning device (visual or audible) connected to the brake 
system air pressure source shall be activated when air pressure is 
lowered to an activating level that is not less than 50 psi. For 
vehicles manufactured to conform to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standard No. 121, the low-pressure indicator shall be activated when air 
pressure is lowered to an activating level that is not less than 60 psi.
    (4) The governor cut-in pressure shall be not lower than 80 psi, and 
the cut-out pressure shall be not higher than 135 psi, unless other 
values are recommended by the vehicle manufacturer.
    (5) Air brake pressure shall not drop more than 2 psi in 1 minute 
for single vehicles or more than 3 psi in 1 minute for combination 
vehicles, with the engine stopped and service brakes released. There may 
be an additional 1 psi drop per minute for each additional towed 
vehicle.
    (6) With the reservoir(s) fully charged, air pressure shall not drop 
more than 3 psi in 1 minute for single vehicles or more than 4 psi in 1 
minute for combination vehicles, with the engine stopped and service 
brakes fully applied. There may be an additional 1 psi drop per minute 
for each additional towed vehicle.
    (7) The compressor drive belt shall not be badly worn or frayed and 
belt-tension shall be sufficient to prevent slippage.

Inspection procedure. With the air system charged, open the drain cocks 
in the service and supply reservoir on the truck or truck-tractor. Note 
the pressure at which the visual or audible warning device connected to 
the low-pressure indicator is activated. Close the drain cocks, and, 
with the trailer(s) uncoupled, check air pressure buildup at the 
manufacturer's recommended engine speed. Observe the time required to 
raise the air pressure from 85 to 100 psi. Continue running the engine 
until the governor cuts out and note the pressure. Reduce engine speed 
to idle, couple the trailer(s), if applicable, and make a series of 
brake applications. Note the pressure at which the governor cuts in. 
Increased engine speed to fast idle and charge the system to its 
governed pressure. Stop the engine and record the pressure drop in psi 
per minute with brakes released and with brakes fully applied.
    (b) Air brake system hoses, tubes and connections. Air system tubes, 
hoses and connections shall not be restricted, cracked or improperly 
supported, and the air hose shall not be abraded.

[[Page 278]]

    (1) Inspection procedure. Stop the engine and examine air hoses, 
tubes and connections visually for conditions specified.
    (c) Air-over-hydraulic brake subsystem integrity. The air-over-
hydraulic brake subsystem shall demonstrate integrity by meeting the 
following requirements:
    (1) The air brake system compressor shall increase the air pressure 
in the reservoir(s) from the level developed after the test prescribed 
in Sec. 570.57(a)(1) to the initial pressure noted before the full 
brake application, with the engine running at the manufacturer's 
recommended number of revolutions per minute and the compressor governor 
in the cut-out position, in not more than 30 seconds for vehicles 
manufactured prior to March 1, 1975. For vehicles manufactured on or 
after March 1, 1975, the time for air pressure build up shall not exceed 
45 seconds.
    (2) The warning device (visual or audible) connected to the brake 
system air pressure source shall be activated when the air pressure is 
lowered to not less than 50 psi.
    (3) The governor cut-in pressure shall be not lower than 80 psi, and 
the cut-out pressure shall not be higher than 135 psi, unless other 
values are recommended by the vehicle manufacturer.
    (4) Air brake pressure shall not drop more than 2 psi in 1 minute 
for single vehicles or more than 3 psi in 1 minute for combination 
vehicles, with the engine stopped and service brakes released. Allow a 
1-psi drop per minute for each additional towed vehicle.
    (5) With the reservoir(s) fully charged, air pressure shall not drop 
more than 3 psi in 1 minute for single vehicles or more than 4 psi in 1 
minute for combination vehicles, with the engine stopped and service 
brakes fully applied. Allow a 1-psi pressure drop in 1 minute for each 
additional towed vehicle.
    (6) The compressor drive belt shall not be badly worn or frayed and 
belt tension shall be sufficient to prevent slippage.

Inspection procedure. With the air system charged, open the drain cocks 
in the service and supply reservoir on the truck or truck-tractor. Note 
the pressure at which the visual or audible warning device connected to 
the low pressure indicator is activated. Close the drain cocks and, with 
the trailers uncoupled, check air pressure buildup at the manufacturer's 
recommended engine speed. Observe the time required to raise the air 
pressure from 85 to 100 psi. Continue running the engine until the 
governor cuts out and note the pressure. Reduce engine speed to idle, 
couple trailers, and make a series of brake applications. Note the 
pressure at which the governor cuts in. Increase engine speed to fast 
idle and charge the system to its governed pressure. Stop the engine and 
record the pressure drop in psi per minute with brakes released and with 
brakes fully applied.
    (d) Air-over-hydraulic brake subsystem hoses, master cylinder, tubes 
and connections. System tubes, hoses and connections shall not be 
cracked or improperly supported, the air and hydraulic hoses shall not 
be abraded and the master cylinder shall not show signs of leakage.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Stop the engine and examine air and 
hydraulic brake hoses, brake master cylinder, tubes and connections 
visually for conditions specified.

[39 FR 26027, July 16, 1974, as amended at 40 FR 5160, Feb. 4, 1975; 41 
FR 13924, Apr. 1, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 570.58  Electric brake system.

    (a) Electric brake system integrity. The average brake amperage 
value shall be not more than 20 percent above, and not less than 30 
percent below, the brake manufacturer's maximum current rating. In 
progressing from zero to maximum, the ammeter indication shall show no 
fluctuation evidencing a short circuit or other interruption of current.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Insert a low range (0 to 25 amperes for 
most 2- and 4-brake systems and 0 to 40 amperes for a 6-brake system) 
d.c. ammeter into the brake circuit between the controller and the 
brakes. With the controller in the ``off'' position, the ammeter should 
read zero. Gradually apply the controller to the ``full on'' position 
for a brief period (not to exceed 1 minute) and observe the maximum 
ammeter reading. Gradually return the

[[Page 279]]

controller to ``full off'' and observe return to zero amperes. Divide 
the maximum ammeter reading by the number of brakes and determine the 
brake amperage value.
    (b) Electric brake wiring condition. Electric brake wiring shall not 
be frayed. Wiring clips or brackets shall not be broken or missing. 
Terminal connections shall be clean. Conductor wire gauge shall not be 
below the brake manufacturer's minimum recommendation.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for conditions specified.


<R05>
Sec. 570.59  Service brake system.

    (a) Service brake performance. Compliance with any one of the 
following performance criteria will satisfy the requirements of this 
section. Verify that tire inflation pressure is within the limits 
recommended by the vehicle manufacturer before conducting either of the 
following tests.
    (1) Roller-type or drive-on platform tests. The force applied by the 
brake on a front wheel or a rear wheel shall not differ by more than 25 
percent from the force applied by the brake on the other front wheel or 
the other rear wheel respectively.
    (i) Inspection procedure. The vehicle shall be tested on a drive-on 
platform, or a roller-type brake analyzer with the capability of 
measuring equalization. The test shall be conducted in accordance with 
the test equipment manufacturer's specifications. Note the brake force 
variance.
    (2) Road test. The service brake system shall stop single unit 
vehicles, except truck-tractors, in a distance of not more than 35 feet, 
or combination vehicles and truck-tractors in a distance of not more 
than 40 feet, from a speed of 20 mph, without leaving a 12-foot-wide 
lane.
    (i) Inspection procedure. The road test shall be conducted on a 
level (not to exceed plus or minus 1 percent grade), dry, smooth, hard-
surfaced road that is free from loose material, oil or grease. The 
service brakes shall be applied at a vehicle speed of 20 mph and the 
vehicle shall be brought to a stop as specified. Measure the distance 
required to stop.

    Note: Inspect for paragraphs (b), (c) and (d) of this section on 
vehicles equipped with brake inspection ports or access openings, and 
when removal of wheel is not required.

    (b) Disc and drum condition. If the drum is embossed with a maximum 
safe diameter dimension or the rotor is embossed with a minimum safe 
thickness dimension, the drum or disc shall be within the appropriate 
specifications. These dimensions will generally be found on motor 
vehicles manufactured since January 1, 1971, and may be found on 
vehicles manufactured for several years prior to that time. If the drums 
and discs are not embossed, they shall be within the manufacturer's 
specifications.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for the condition 
indicated, measuring as necessary.
    (c) Friction materials. On each brake, the thickness of the lining 
or pad shall not be less than one thirty-second of an inch over the 
fastener, or one-sixteenth of an inch over the brake shoe on bonded 
linings or pads. Brake linings and pads shall not have cracks or breaks 
that extend to rivet holes except minor cracks that do not impair 
attachment. The wire in wire-backed lining shall not be visible on the 
friction surface. Drum brake linings shall be securely attached to brake 
shoes. Disc brake pads shall be securely attached to shoe plates.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for the conditions 
indicated, and measure the height of the rubbing surface of the lining 
over the fastener heads. Measure bonded lining thickness over the 
surface at the thinnest point on the lining or pad.
    (d) Structural and mechanical parts. Backing plates, brake spiders 
and caliper assemblies shall not be deformed or cracked. System parts 
shall not be broken, misaligned, missing, binding, or show evidence of 
severe wear. Automatic adjusters and other parts shall be assembled and 
installed correctly.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for conditions indicated.


<R05>
Sec. 570.60  Steering system.

    (a) System play. Lash or free play in the steering system shall not 
exceed the values shown in Table 2.
    (1) Inspection procedure. With the engine on and the steering axle 
wheels in the straight ahead position, turn the

[[Page 280]]

steering wheel in one direction until there is a perceptible movement of 
the wheel. If a point on the steering wheel rim moves more than the 
value shown in Table 1 before perceptible return movement of the wheel 
under observation, there is excessive lash or free play in the steering 
system.

                Table 2. Steering Wheel Free Play Values
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Lash
              Steering wheel diameter (inches)                 (inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
16 or less..................................................           2
18..........................................................      2\1/4\
20..........................................................      2\1/2\
22..........................................................      2\3/4\
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Linkage play. Free play in the steering linkage shall not exceed 
the values shown in Table 3.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Elevate the front end of the vehicle to 
load the ball joints, if the vehicle is so equipped. Insure that wheel 
bearings are correctly adjusted. Grasp the front and rear of a tire and 
attempt to turn the tire and wheel assemble left and right. If the free 
movement at the front or rear tread of the tire exceeds the applicable 
value shown in Table 3, there is excessive steering linkage play.

             Table 3. Front Wheel Steering Linkage Free Play
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Play
         Nominal bead diameter or rim size (inches)            (inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
16 or less..................................................       \1/4\
16.01 through 18.00.........................................       \3/8\
18.01 or more...............................................       \1/2\
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) Free turning. Steering wheels shall turn freely through the 
limit of travel in both directions.
    (1) Inspection procedure. With the engine running on a vehicle with 
power steering, or the steerable wheels elevated on a vehicle without 
power steering, turn the steering wheel through the limit of travel in 
both directions. Feel for binding or jamming in the steering gear 
mechanism.
    (d) Alignment. Toe-in or toe-out condition shall not be greater than 
1.5 times the values listed in the vehicle manufacturer's service 
specification for alignment setting.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Drive the vehicle over a sideslip 
indicator or measure with a tread gauge, and verify that the toe-in or 
toe-out is not greater than 1.5 times the values listed in the vehicle 
manufacturer's service specification.
    (e) Power steering system. The power steering system shall not have 
cracked, frayed or slipping belts, chafed or abrated hoses, show signs 
of leakage or have insufficient fluid in the reservoir.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine fluid reservoir, hoses and pump 
belts for the conditions indicated.
    Note: Inspection of the suspension system must not precede the 
service brake performance test.


<R05>
Sec. 570.61  Suspension system.

    (a) Suspension condition. Ball joint seals shall not be cut or 
cracked, other than superficial surface cracks. Ball joints and kingpins 
shall not be bent or damaged. Stabilizer bars shall be connected. 
Springs shall not be broken and coil springs shall not be extended by 
spacers. Shock absorber mountings, shackles, and U-bolts shall be 
securely attached. Rubber bushings shall not be cracked, extruded out 
from or missing from suspension joints. Radius rods shall not be missing 
or damaged.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine front and rear end suspension 
parts for the conditions indicated.
    (b) Shock absorber condition. There shall be no oil on the shock 
absorber housings attributable to leakage by the seal.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine shock absorbers for oil leakage 
from within.


<R05>
Sec. 570.62  Tires.

    (a) Tread depth. The tread shall be not less than four thirty-
seconds of an inch deep on each front tire of any vehicle other than a 
trailer and not less than two thirty-seconds of an inch on all other 
tires.
    (1) Inspection procedure. For tires with treadwear indicators, check 
for indicators in any two adjacent major grooves at three locations 
spaced approximately 120[deg] apart around the circumference of the 
tire. For tires without treadwear indicators, measure the tread depth 
with a suitable gauge or scale in two adjacent major grooves at 3 
locations spaced approximately 120[deg]

[[Page 281]]

apart around the circumference of the tire at the area of greatest wear.
    (b) Type. Vehicles should be equipped with tires on the same axle 
that are matched in construction and tire size designation, and dual 
tires shall be matched for overall diameter within one-half inch.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually. A mismatch in size and 
construction between tires on the same axle, or a major deviation from 
the size recommended by the vehicle or tire manufacturer, is a cause for 
rejection. On a dual-tire arrangement the diameter of one of the duals 
must be within one-half inch of the other as measured by a gauge block 
inserted between the tire and a caliper.
    (c) General condition. Tires shall be free from chunking, bumps, 
knots, or bulges evidencing cord, ply or tread separation from the 
casing.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for the conditions 
indicated.
    (d) Damage. Tire cords or belting materials shall not be exposed, 
either to the naked eye or when cuts on the tire are probed. 
Reinforcement repairs to the cord body are allowable on tires other than 
front-mounted tires.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for the conditions 
indicated, using a blunt instrument if necessary to probe cuts and 
abrasions.
    (e) Special purpose tires. Tires marked ``Not For Highway Use'' or 
``Farm Use Only'' or other such restrictions shall not be used on any 
motor vehicles operating on public highways.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for tires labeled with 
specific restrictions.


<R05>
Sec. 570.63  Wheel assemblies.

    (a) Wheel integrity. A tire rim, wheel disc or spider shall have no 
visible cracks, elongated bolt holes, or indications of in-service 
repair by welding.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for the conditions 
indicated.
    (b) Cast wheels. Cast wheels shall not be cracked or show evidence 
of excessive wear in the clamp area.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Examine visually for the conditions 
indicated.
    (c) Mounting. All wheel nuts shall be in place and tight.
    (1) Inspection procedure. Check wheel retention for the conditions 
indicated.


<R03>
PART 571_FEDERAL MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY STANDARDS--Table of Contents



                            Subpart A_General

Sec.
571.1 Scope.
571.3 Definitions.
571.4 Explanation of usage.
571.5 Matter incorporated by reference.
571.7 Applicability.
571.8 Effective date.
571.9 Separability.
571.10 Designation of seating positions.

            Subpart B_Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards

571.101 Standard No. 101; Controls and displays.
571.102 Standard No. 102; Transmission shift position sequence, starter 
          interlock, and transmission braking effect.
571.103 Standard No. 103; Windshield defrosting and defogging systems.
571.104 Standard No. 104; Windshield wiping and washing systems.
571.105 Standard No. 105; Hydraulic and electric brake systems.
571.106 Standard No. 106; Brake hoses.
571.107 [Reserved]
571.108 Standard No. 108; Lamps, reflective devices, and associated 
          equipment.
571.109 Standard No. 109; New pneumatic and certain specialty tires.
571.110 Tire selection and rims and motor home/recreation vehicle 
          trailer load carrying capacity information for motor vehicles 
          with a GVWR of 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds) or less.
571.111 Standard No. 111; Rearview mirrors.
571.112 [Reserved]
571.113 Standard No. 113; Hood latch system.
571.114 Standard No. 114; Theft protection.
571.115 [Reserved]
571.116 Standard No. 116; Motor vehicle brake fluids.
571.117 Standard No. 117; Retreaded pneumatic tires.
571.118 Standard No. 118; Power-operated window, partition, and roof 
          panel systems.
571.119 Standard No. 119; New pneumatic tires for motor vehicles with a 
          GVWR of more than 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds) and 
          motorcycles.
571.120 Tire selection and rims and motor home/recreation vehicle 
          trailer load carrying capacity information for motor vehicles 
          with a GVWR of more than 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds).
571.121 Standard No. 121; Air brake systems.

[[Page 282]]

571.122 Standard No. 122; Motorcycle brake systems.
571.123 Standard No. 123; Motorcycle controls and displays.
571.124 Standard No. 124; Accelerator control systems.
571.125 Standard No. 125; Warning devices.
571.126 Standard No. 126; Electronic stability control systems.
571.127-571.128 [Reserved]
571.129 Standard No. 129; New non-pneumatic tires for passenger cars.
571.131 Standard No. 131; School bus pedestrian safety devices.
571.135 Standard No. 135; Light vehicle brake systems.
571.138 Standard No. 138; Tire pressure monitoring systems.
571.139 Standard No. 139; New pneumatic radial tires for light vehicles.
571.201 Standard No. 201; Occupant protection in interior impact.
571.202 Standard No. 202; Head restraints; Applicable at the 
          manufacturers option until September 1, 2009.
571.202a Standard No. 202a; Head restraints; Mandatory applicability 
          begins on September 1, 2009.
571.203 Standard No. 203; Impact protection for the driver from the 
          steering control system.
571.204 Standard No. 204; Steering control rearward displacement.
571.205 Standard No. 205; Glazing materials.
571.205(a) Glazing equipment manufactured before September 1, 2006 and 
          glazing materials used in vehicles manufactured before 
          November 1, 2006.
571.206 Standard No. 206; Door locks and door retention components.
571.207 Standard No. 207; Seating systems.
571.208 Standard No. 208; Occupant crash protection.
571.208a Optional test procedures for vehicles manufactured between 
          January 27, 2004 and August 31, 2004.
571.209 Standard No. 209; Seat belt assemblies.
571.210 Standard No. 210; Seat belt assembly anchorages.
571.211 [Reserved]
571.212 Standard No. 212; Windshield mounting.
571.213 Standard No. 213; Child restraint systems.
571.214 Standard No. 214; Side impact protection.
571.215 [Reserved]
571.216 Standard No. 216; Roof crush resistance; Applicable unless a 
          vehicle is certified to Sec. 571.216a.
571.216a Standard No. 216a; Roof crush resistance; Upgraded standard.
571.217 Standard No. 217; Bus emergency exits and window retention and 
          release.
571.218 Standard No. 218; Motorcycle helmets.
571.219 Standard No. 219; Windshield zone intrusion.
571.220 Standard No. 220; School bus rollover protection.
571.221 Standard No. 221; School bus body joint strength.
571.222 Standard No. 222; School bus passenger seating and crash 
          protection.
571.223 Standard No. 223; Rear impact guards.
571.224 Standard No. 224; Rear impact protection.
571.225 Standard No. 225; Child restraint anchorage systems.
571.226 Standard No. 226; Ejection Mitigation.
571.301 Standard No. 301; Fuel system integrity.
571.302 Standard No. 302; Flammability of interior materials.
571.303 Standard No. 303; Fuel system integrity of compressed natural 
          gas vehicles.
571.304 Standard No. 304; Compressed natural gas fuel container 
          integrity.
571.305 Standard No. 305; Electric-powered vehicles: electrolyte 
          spillage and electrical shock protection.
571.401 Standard No. 401; Internal trunk release.
571.403 Standard No. 403; Platform lift systems for motor vehicles.
571.404 Standard No. 404; Platform lift installations in motor vehicles.
571.500 Standard No. 500; Low-speed vehicles.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 322, 30111, 30115, 30166 and 30177; delegation 
of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

    Editorial Note: Nomenclature changes to part 571 appear at 69 FR 
18803, Apr. 9, 2004.


<R04>
                            Subpart A_General


<R05>
Sec. 571.1  Scope.

    This part contains the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards for 
motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment established under section 103 
of the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 (80 Stat. 
718).

[33 FR 19703, Dec. 25, 1968. Redesignated at 35 FR 5118, Mar. 26, 1970]


<R05>
Sec. 571.3  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory definitions. All terms defined in section 102 of the 
Act are used in their statutory meaning.
    (b) Other definitions. As used in this chapter--
    Act means the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 
(80 Stat. 718).

[[Page 283]]

    Approved, unless used with reference to another person, means 
approved by the Secretary.
    Boat trailer means a trailer designed with cradle-type mountings to 
transport a boat and configured to permit launching of the boat from the 
rear of the trailer.
    Bus means a motor vehicle with motive power, except a trailer, 
designed for carrying more than 10 persons.
    Curb weight means the weight of a motor vehicle with standard 
equipment; maximum capacity of engine fuel, oil, and coolant; and, if so 
equipped, air conditioning and additional weight optional engine.
    Designated seating capacity means the number of designated seating 
positions provided.
    Designated seating position means:
    (1) For vehicles manufactured prior to September 1, 2011, any plan 
view location capable of accommodating a person at least as large as a 
5th percentile adult female, if the overall seat configuration and 
design and vehicle design is such that the position is likely to be used 
as a seating position while the vehicle is in motion, except for 
auxiliary seating accommodations such as temporary or folding jump 
seats. Any bench or split-bench seat in a passenger car, truck or 
multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR less than 4,536 kilograms 
(10,000 pounds), having greater than 127 centimeters (50 inches) of hip 
room (measured in accordance with Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) 
Recommended Practice J1100a, revised September 1975, ``Motor Vehicle 
Dimensions'' (incorporated by reference, see Sec. 571.5), shall have 
not less than three designated seating positions, unless the seat design 
or vehicle design is such that the center position cannot be used for 
seating. For the sole purpose of determining the classification of any 
vehicle sold or introduced into interstate commerce for purposes that 
include carrying students to and from school or related events, any 
location in such vehicle intended for securement of an occupied 
wheelchair during vehicle operation shall be regarded as four designated 
seating positions.
    (2) For vehicles manufactured on and after September 1, 2011, 
designated seating position means a seat location that has a seating 
surface width, as described in Sec. 571.10(c) of this part, of at least 
330 mm (13 inches). The number of designated seating positions at a seat 
location is determined according to the procedure set forth in Sec. 
571.10(b) of this part. However, for trucks and multipurpose passenger 
vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating greater than 10,000 lbs, 
police vehicles as defined in S7 of FMVSS No. 208, firefighting 
vehicles, ambulances, and motor homes, a seating location that is 
labeled in accordance with S4.4 of FMVSS No. 207 will not be considered 
a designated seating position. For the sole purpose of determining the 
classification of any vehicle sold or introduced into interstate 
commerce for purposes that include carrying students to and from school 
or related events, any location in such a vehicle intended for 
securement of an occupied wheelchair during vehicle operation is 
regarded as four designated seating positions.
    Driver means the occupant of a motor vehicle seated immediately 
behind the steering control system.
    Emergency brake means a mechanism designed to stop a motor vehicle 
after a failure of the service brake system.
    5th percentile adult female means a person possessing the dimensions 
and weight of the 5th percentile adult female specified for the total 
age group in ``Weight, Height, and Selected Body Dimensions of Adults: 
United States--1960-1962,'' first published as Public Health Service 
Publication No. 1000 Series 11-No. 8, June 1965 and republished as DHEW 
Publication No. (HRA) 76-1074 (incorporated by reference, see Sec. 
571.5).
    Firefighting vehicle means a vehicle designed exclusively for the 
purpose of fighting fires.
    Fixed collision barrier means a flat, vertical, unyielding surface 
with the following characteristics:
    (1) The surface is sufficiently large that when struck by a tested 
vehicle, no portion of the vehicle projects or passes beyond the 
surface.
    (2) The approach is a horizontal surface that is large enough for 
the vehicle to attain a stable attitude during its approach to the 
barrier, and that does not restrict vehicle motion during impact.

[[Page 284]]

    (3) When struck by a vehicle, the surface and its supporting 
structure absorb no significant portion of the vehicle's kinetic energy, 
so that a performance requirement described in terms of impact with a 
fixed collision barrier must be met no matter how small an amount of 
energy is absorbed by the barrier.
    Forward control means a configuration in which more than half of the 
engine length is rearward of the foremost point of the windshield base 
and the steering wheel hub is in the forward quarter of the vehicle 
length.
    Full trailer means a trailer, except a pole trailer, that is 
equipped with two or more axles that support the entire weight of the 
trailer.
    Gross axle weight rating or GAWR means the value specified by the 
vehicle manufacturer as the load-carrying capacity of a single axle 
system, as measured at the tire-ground interfaces.
    Gross combination weight rating or GCWR means the value specified by 
the manufacturer as the loaded weight of a combination vehicle.
    Gross vehicle weight rating or GVWR means the value specified by the 
manufacturer as the loaded weight of a single vehicle.
    H-Point means the pivot center of the torso and thigh on the three-
dimensional device used in defining and measuring vehicle seating 
accommodation, as defined in Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) 
Recommended Practice J1100, revised February 2001, ``Motor Vehicle 
Dimensions'' (incorporated by reference, see Sec. 571.5).
    Head impact area means all nonglazed surfaces of the interior of a 
vehicle that are statically contactable by a 6.5-inch diameter spherical 
head form of a measuring device having a pivot point to ``top-of-head'' 
dimension infinitely adjustable from 29 to 33 inches in accordance with 
the following procedure, or its graphic equivalent:
    (a) At each designated seating position, place the pivot point of 
the measuring device--
    (1) For seats that are adjustable fore and aft, at--
    (i) The seating reference point; and
    (ii) A point 5 inches horizontally forward of the seating reference 
point and vertically above the seating reference point an amount equal 
to the rise which results from a 5-inch forward adjustment of the seat 
or 0.75 inch; and
    (2) For seats that are not adjustable fore and aft, at the seating 
reference point.
    (b) With the pivot point to ``top-of-head'' dimension at each value 
allowed by the device and the interior dimensions of the vehicle, 
determine all contact points above the lower windshield glass line and 
forward of the seating reference point.
    (c) With the head form at each contact point, and with the device in 
a vertical position if no contact points exists for a particular 
adjusted length, pivot the measuring device forward and downward through 
all arcs in vertical planes to 90[deg] each side of the vertical 
longitudinal plane through the seating reference point, until the head 
form contacts an interior surface or until it is tangent to a horizontal 
plane 1 inch above the seating reference point, whichever occurs first.
    Interior compartment door means any door in the interior of the 
vehicle installed by the manufacturer as a cover for storage space 
normally used for personal effects.
    Longitudinal or longitudinally means parallel to the longitudinal 
centerline of the vehicle.
    Low-speed vehicle (LSV) means a motor vehicle,
    (1) That is 4-wheeled,
    (2) Whose speed attainable in 1.6 km (1 mile) is more than 32 
kilometers per hour (20 miles per hour) and not more than 40 kilometers 
per hour (25 miles per hour) on a paved level surface, and
    (3) Whose GVWR is less than 1,361 kilograms (3,000 pounds).
    Motorcycle means a motor vehicle with motive power having a seat or 
saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than 
three wheels in contact with the ground.
    Motor-driven cycle means a motorcycle with a motor that produces 5-
brake horsepower or less.
    Motor home means a multi-purpose vehicle with motive power that is 
designed to provide temporary residential accommodations, as evidenced 
by the presence of at least four of the following facilities: cooking; 
refrigeration

[[Page 285]]

or ice box; self-contained toilet; heating and/or air conditioning; a 
potable water supply system including a faucet and a sink; and a 
separate 110-125 volt electrical power supply and/or propane.
    Multifunction school activity bus (MFSAB) means a school bus whose 
purposes do not include transporting students to and from home or school 
bus stops.
    Multipurpose passenger vehicle means a motor vehicle with motive 
power, except a low-speed vehicle or trailer, designed to carry 10 
persons or less which is constructed either on a truck chassis or with 
special features for occasional off-road operation.
    Open-body type vehicle means a vehicle having no occupant 
compartment top or an occupant compartment top that can be installed or 
removed by the user at his convenience.
    Outboard designated seating position means a designated seating 
position where a longitudinal vertical plane tangent to the outboard 
side of the seat cushion is less than 12 inches from the innermost point 
on the inside surface of the vehicle at a height between the design H-
point and the shoulder reference point (as shown in fig. 1 of Federal 
Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 210) and longitudinally between the 
front and rear edges of the seat cushion.
    Overall vehicle width means the nominal design dimension of the 
widest part of the vehicle, exclusive of signal lamps, marker lamps, 
outside rearview mirrors, flexible fender extensions, and mud flaps, 
determined with doors and windows closed and the wheels in the straight-
ahead position.
    Parking brake means a mechanism designed to prevent the movement of 
a stationary motor vehicle.
    Passenger car means a motor vehicle with motive power, except a low-
speed vehicle, multipurpose passenger vehicle, motorcycle, or trailer, 
designed for carrying 10 persons or less.
    Pelvic impact area means that area of the door or body side panel 
adjacent to any outboard designated seating position which is bounded by 
horizontal planes 7 inches above and 4 inches below the seating 
reference point and vertical transverse planes 8 inches forward and 2 
inches rearward of the seating reference point.
    Pole trailer means a motor vehicle without motive power designed to 
be drawn by another motor vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by 
means of a reach or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the 
towing vehicle, for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such 
as poles, pipes, or structural members capable generally of sustaining 
themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
    Recreation vehicle trailer means a trailer, except a trailer 
designed primarily to transport cargo, designed to be drawn by a vehicle 
with motive power by means of a bumper, frame or fifth wheel hitch and 
designed to provide temporary residential accommodations, as evidenced 
by the presence of at least four of the following facilities: cooking; 
refrigeration or ice box; self-contained toilet; heating and/or air 
conditioning; a potable water supply system including a faucet and a 
sink; and a separate 110-125 volt electrical power supply and/or 
propane. ``Recreation vehicle trailer'' includes trailers used for 
personal purposes, commonly known as ``sport utility RVs'' or ``toy 
haulers,'' which usually have spacious rather than incidental living 
quarters and provide a cargo area for smaller items for personal use 
such as motorcycles, mountain bikes, all terrain vehicles (ATVs), 
snowmobiles, canoes or other types of recreational gear.
    School bus means a bus that is sold, or introduced in interstate 
commerce, for purposes that include carrying students to and from school 
or related events, but does not include a bus designed and sold for 
operation as a common carrier in urban transportation.
    Seating reference point (SgRP) means the unique design H-point, as 
defined in Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Recommended Practice 
J1100, revised June 1984, ``Motor Vehicle Dimensions'' (incorporated by 
reference, see Sec. 571.5), which:
    (1) Establishes the rearmost normal design driving or riding 
position of each designated seating position, which includes 
consideration of all modes of

[[Page 286]]

adjustment, horizontal, vertical, and tilt, in a vehicle;
    (2) Has X, Y, and Z coordinates, as defined in Society of Automotive 
Engineers (SAE) Recommended Practice J1100, revised June 1984, ``Motor 
Vehicle Dimensions'' (incorporated by reference, see Sec. 571.5), 
established relative to the designed vehicle structure;
    (3) Simulates the position of the pivot center of the human torso 
and thigh; and
    (4) Is the reference point employed to position the two-dimensional 
drafting template with the 95th percentile leg described in Society of 
Automotive Engineers (SAE) Standard J826, revised May 1987, ``Devices 
for Use in Defining and Measuring Vehicle Seating Accommodation'' 
(incorporated by reference, see Sec. 571.5), or, if the drafting 
template with the 95th percentile leg cannot be positioned in the 
seating position, is located with the seat in its most rearward 
adjustment position.
    Semitrailer means a trailer, except a pole trailer, so constructed 
that a substantial part of its weight rests upon or is carried by 
another motor vehicle.
    Service brake means the primary mechanism designed to stop a motor 
vehicle.
    Speed attainable in 1 mile means the speed attainable by 
accelerating at maximum rate from a standing start for 1 mile, on a 
level surface.
    Speed attainable in 2 miles means the speed attainable by 
accelerating at maximum rate from a standing start for 2 miles, on a 
level surface.
    Torso line means the line connecting the ``H'' point and the 
shoulder reference point as defined in Society of Automotive Engineers 
(SAE) Standard J787b, revised September 1966, ``Motor Vehicle Seat Belt 
Anchorage'' (incorporated by reference, see Sec. 571.5).
    Trailer means a motor vehicle with or without motive power, designed 
for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by another motor 
vehicle.
    Trailer converter dolly means a trailer chassis equipped with one or 
more axles, a lower half of a fifth wheel and a drawbar.
    Truck means a motor vehicle with motive power, except a trailer, 
designed primarily for the transportation of property or special purpose 
equipment.
    Truck tractor means a truck designed primarily for drawing other 
motor vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a 
part of the weight of the vehicle and the load so drawn.
    Unloaded vehicle weight means the weight of a vehicle with maximum 
capacity of all fluids necessary for operation of the vehicle, but 
without cargo, occupants, or accessories that are ordinarily removed 
from the vehicle when they are not in use.
    95th percentile adult male means a person possessing the dimensions 
and weight of the 95th percentile adult male specified ``Weight, Height, 
and Selected Body Dimensions of Adults: United States--1960-1962,'' 
first published as Public Health Service Publication No. 1000 Series 11-
No. 8, June 1965 and republished as DHEW Publication No. (HRA) 76-1074 
(incorporated by reference, see Sec. 571.5).
    Vehicle fuel tank capacity means the tank's unusable capacity (i.e., 
the volume of fuel left at the bottom of the tank when the vehicle's 
fuel pump can no longer draw fuel from the tank) plus its usable 
capacity (i.e., the volume of fuel that can be pumped into the tank 
through the filler pipe with the vehicle on a level surface and with the 
unusable capacity already in the tank). The term does not include the 
vapor volume of the tank (i.e., the space above the fuel tank filler 
neck) nor the volume of the fuel tank filler neck.

[33 FR 19703, Dec. 25, 1968. Redesignated at 35 FR 5118, Mar. 26, 1970]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.3, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.


<R05>
Sec. 571.4  Explanation of usage.

    The word any, used in connection with a range of values or set of 
items in the requirements, conditions, and procedures of the standards 
or regulations in this chapter, means generally the totality of the 
items or values, any one of which may be selected by the Administration 
for testing, except where clearly specified otherwise.


[[Page 287]]


    Examples: ``The vehicle shall meet the requirements of S4.1 when 
tested at any point between 18 and 22 inches above the ground.'' This 
means that the vehicle must be capable of meeting the specified 
requirements at every point between 18 and 22 inches above the ground. 
The test in question for a given vehicle may call for a single test (a 
single impact, for example), but the vehicle must meet the requirement 
at whatever point the Administration selects, within the specified 
range.
    ``Each tire shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this 
standard when mounted on any rim specified by the manufacturer as 
suitable for use with that tire.'' This means that, where the 
manufacturer specifies more than one rim as suitable for use with a 
tire, the tire must meet the requirements with whatever rim the 
Administration selects from the specified group.
    ``Any one of the items listed below may, at the option of the 
manufacturer, be substituted for the hardware specified in S4.1.'' Here 
the wording clearly indicates that the selection of items is at the 
manufacturer's option.

[36 FR 2511, Feb. 5, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 571.5  Matter incorporated by reference.

    (a) Documents listed in this section and additional documents 
referred to in subpart B of this part have been incorporated by 
reference into this part. The Director of the Federal Register approved 
the incorporation by reference as prescribed in 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 
CFR part 51. For materials subject to change, only the specific version 
approved by the Director of the Federal Register and specified in this 
section or in subpart B of this part are incorporated. A notice of any 
change in these materials will be published in the Federal Register. 
Anyone may inspect copies at the NHTSA Reading Room, 1200 New Jersey 
Avenue, Washington, DC 20590 and at the National Archives and Records 
Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this 
material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/
federal--register/code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--locations.html. 
Approved materials are available from the sources indicated in paragraph 
(b) of this section.
    (b) The materials approved for incorporation by reference in this 
part and the sections and paragraphs (if applicable) affected include, 
but are not limited to, as follows:

American Association of Textile Chemists and Colorists
 (AATCC), 1 Davis Dr., P.O. Box 12215, Research
 Triangle Park, NC 27709..............................
American National Standards Institute (ANSI), 1700
 North Moore St., Suite 1540, Arlington, VA 22209-1903
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), 100
 Barr Harbor Drive, P.O. Box C700, West Conshohocken,
 PA 19428-2959........................................
Department of Defense, DODSSP Standardization Document
 Order Desk, 700 Robbins Ave., Philadelphia, PA 19111-
 5098.................................................
General Services Administration (GSA), Superintendent
 of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
 Washington, DC 20402.................................
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America
 (IES), 120 Wall St., 7th Floor, New York, NY 10005...
National Center for Health Statistics, Centers for
 Disease Control (CDC), National Division for Health
 Statistics, Division of Data Services, Hyattsville,
 MD 20782. Phone: 1-800-232-4636; Web: http://
 www.cdc.gov/nchs.....................................
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
 (NHTSA), Office of Vehicle Safety Standards, DOT-
 NHTSA, 1200 New Jersey Ave, SE., Washington, DC 20590
``Parts List; Ejection Mitigation Headform Drawing       571.226, S7.1.1
 Package,'' December 2010; ``Parts List and Drawings;
 Ejection Mitigation Headform Drawing Package,''
 December 2010. Copies may be obtained by contacting:
 Reprographics Technologies, 9000 Virginia Manor Rd.,
 Beltsville, MD 20705, telephone (301) 210-5600.......
Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc. (SAE), 400
 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, Pennsylvania 15096.
 Phone: 1-724-776-4841; Web: http://www.sae.org.......

[[Page 288]]

 
Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Standard J787b,              571.3
 revised September 1966, ``Motor Vehicle Seat Belt
 Anchorage''..........................................
Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Standard J826,      571.3; 571.210
 revised May 1987, ``Devices for Use in Defining and
 Measuring Vehicle Seating Accommodation''............
Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Recommended                  571.3
 Practice J1100a, revised September 1975, ``Motor
 Vehicle Dimensions''.................................
Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Recommended         571.3; 571.210
 Practice J1100, revised June 1984, ``Motor Vehicle
 Dimensions''.........................................
Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Recommended                  571.3
 Practice J1100, revised February 2001, ``Motor
 Vehicle Dimensions''.................................
Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Surface Vehicle             571.10
 Standard J826, revised July 1995, ``Devices for Use
 in Defining and Measuring Vehicle Seating
 Accommodation''......................................
United Nations, Conference Services Division,
 Distribution and Sales Section, Office C.115-1,
 Palais des Nations, CH-1211, Geneva 10, Switzerland.
 Copies of Regulations also are available on the ECE
 internet Web site: www.unece.org/trans/main/wp29/
 wp29regs.html........................................
``Weight, Height, and Selected Body Dimensions of                  571.3
 Adults: United States--1960-1962,'' first published
 as Public Health Service Publication No. 1000 Series
 11-No. 8, June 1965 and republished as DHEW
 Publication No. (HRA) 76-1074........................
 


[73 FR 58896, Oct. 8, 2008, as amended at 76 FR 3296, Jan. 19, 2011]

    Effective Date Note: At 75 FR 28160, May 13, 2010, Sec. 571.5 was 
amended by revising paragraph (l)(4), effective May 13, 2013. For the 
convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:


<R05>
Sec. 571.5  Matter incorporated by reference.

                                * * * * *

    (l) * * *
    (4) SAE Recommended Practice J211/1, revised March 1995, 
``Instrumentation for Impact Test--Part 1--Electronic Instrumentation'' 
into Sec. Sec. 571.202a; 571.208; 571.218; 571.403.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 571.7  Applicability.

    (a) General. Except as provided in paragraphs (c) and (d) of this 
section, each standard set forth in subpart B of this part applies 
according to its terms to all motor vehicles or items of motor vehicle 
equipment the manufacture of which is completed on or after the 
effective date of the standard.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) Military vehicles. No standard applies to a vehicle or item of 
equipment manufactured for, and sold directly to, the Armed Forces of 
the United States in conformity with contractual specifications.
    (d) Export. No standard applies to a vehicle or item of equipment in 
the circumstances provided in section 108(b)(5) of the Act (15 U.S.C. 
1397 (b)(5)).
    (e) Combining new and used components. When a new cab is used in the 
assembly of a truck, the truck will be considered newly manufactured for 
purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, the application of the 
requirements of this chapter, and the Act, unless the engine, 
transmission, and drive axle(s) (as a minimum) of the assembled vehicle 
are not new, and at least two of these components were taken from the 
same vehicle.
    (f) Combining new and used components in trailer manufacture. When 
new materials are used in the assembly of a trailer, the trailer will be 
considered newly manufactured for purposes of paragraph (a) of this 
section, the application of the requirements of this chapter, and the 
Act, unless, at a minimum, the trailer running gear assembly (axle(s), 
wheels, braking and suspension) is not new, and was taken from an 
existing trailer--
    (1) Whose identity is continued in the reassembled vehicle with 
respect to the Vehicle Identification Number; and

[[Page 289]]

    (2) That is owned or leased by the user of the reassembled vehicle.

[33 FR 19703, Dec. 25, 1968. Redesignated at 35 FR 5118, Mar. 26, 1970, 
and amended at 36 FR 7855, Apr. 27, 1971; 38 FR 12808, May 16, 1973; 40 
FR 49341, Oct. 22, 1975; 41 FR 27074, July 1, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 571.8  Effective date.

    (a) Firefighting vehicles. Notwithstanding the effective date 
provisions of the motor vehicle safety standards in this part, the 
effective date of any standard or amendment of a standard issued after 
September 1, 1971, to which firefighting vehicles must conform shall be, 
with respect to such vehicles, either 2 years after the date on which 
such standard or amendment is published in the rules and regulations 
section of the Federal Register, or the effective date specified in the 
notice, whichever is later, except as such standard or amendment may 
otherwise specifically provide with respect to firefighting vehicles.
    (b) Vehicles built in two or more stages vehicles and altered 
vehicles. Unless Congress directs or the agency expressly determines 
that this paragraph does not apply, the date for manufacturer 
certification of compliance with any standard, or amendment to a 
standard, that is issued on or after September 1, 2006 is, insofar as 
its application to intermediate and final-stage manufacturers and 
alterers is concerned, one year after the last applicable date for 
manufacturer certification of compliance. Nothing in this provision 
shall be construed as prohibiting earlier compliance with the standard 
or amendment or as precluding NHTSA from extending a compliance 
effective date for intermediate and final-stage manufacturers and 
alterers by more than one year.

[70 FR 7435, Feb. 14, 2005]


<R05>
Sec. 571.9  Separability.

    If any standard established in this part or its application to any 
person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the part and 
the application of that standard to other persons or circumstances is 
not affected thereby.

[33 FR 19705, Dec. 25, 1968. Redesignated at 35 FR 5118, Mar. 26, 1970]


<R05>
Sec. 571.10  Designation of seating positions.

    (a) Application. This section applies to passenger cars, trucks, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, and buses manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2010. However, paragraph (b) of this section does not apply 
to trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a gross vehicle 
weight rating greater than 10,000 lbs, school buses, police vehicles as 
defined in S7 of Standard No. 208 (49 CFR 571.208), firefighting 
vehicles, ambulances, or motor homes. To determine the number of 
passenger seating positions in school buses, see S4.1 of Standard No. 
222 (49 CFR 571.222).
    (b) Number of designated seating positions. The formula for 
calculating the number of designated seating positions (N) for any seat 
location with a seating surface width greater than 330 mm (13 inches) is 
as follows:
    (1) For seat locations with a seating surface width, as described in 
paragraph (c), of less than 1400 mm (55.2 inches): N = [Seating surface 
width (in mm)/350] round down to the nearest whole number;
    (2) For seat locations with a seating surface width, as described in 
paragraph (c), greater than or equal to 1400 mm (55.2 inches): N = 
[Seating surface width (in mm)/450] round down to the nearest whole 
number.
    (c) Seating surface measurement. (1) As used in this section, 
``seating surface width'' is the maximum width of a seating surface 
measured in a zone extending from a transverse vertical plane 150 mm 
(5.9 inches) behind the front leading surface of that seating surface to 
a transverse vertical plane 250 mm (9.8 inches) behind that front 
leading surface, measured horizontally and longitudinally.
    (2) Adjacent seating surfaces are considered to form a single, 
continuous seating surface whose overall width is measured as specified 
in (c)(1) of this section, unless
    (i) The seating surfaces are separated by:
    (A) A fixed trimmed surface whose top surface is unpadded and that 
has a width not less than 140 mm (5.5 inches), as measured in each 
transverse vertical plane within that measurement zone, or

[[Page 290]]

    (B) A void whose cross section in each transverse vertical plane 
within that measurement zone is a rectangle that is not less than 140 mm 
(5.5 inches) wide and not less than 140 mm (5.5 inches) deep. The top 
edge of the cross section in any such plane is congruent with the 
transverse horizontal line that intersects the lowest point on the 
portion of the top profile of the seating surfaces that lie within that 
plane, or
    (ii) Interior trim interrupts the measurement of the nominal hip 
room of the seating surfaces, measured laterally along the ``X'' plane 
through the H-point. For purposes of this paragraph, the H-point is 
located using the SAE three-dimensional H-point machine per Society of 
Automotive Engineers (SAE) Surface Vehicle Standard J826, revised July 
1995, ``Devices for Use in Defining and Measuring Vehicle Seating 
Accommodation'' (incorporated by reference, see section 571.5) with the 
legs and leg weights removed, or
    (iii) The seating surfaces are adjacent outboard seats, and the 
lateral distance between any point on the seat cushion of one seat and 
any point on the seat cushion of the other seat is not less than 140 mm 
(5.5 inches).
    (3) Folding, removable, and adjustable seats are measured in the 
configuration that results in the single largest maximum seating surface 
width.

[73 FR 58897, Oct. 8, 2008, as amended at 74 FR 68190, Dec. 23, 2009]


<R04>
            Subpart B_Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards

    Source: 36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 571.101  Standard No. 101; Controls and displays.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies performance requirements for 
location, identification, color, and illumination of motor vehicle 
controls, telltales and indicators.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to ensure the 
accessibility, visibility and recognition of motor vehicle controls, 
telltales and indicators, and to facilitate the proper selection of 
controls under daylight and nighttime conditions, in order to reduce the 
safety hazards caused by the diversion of the driver's attention from 
the driving task, and by mistakes in selecting controls.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses.
    S4. Definitions.
    Adjacent, with respect to a control, telltale or indicator, and its 
identifier means:
    (a) The identifier is in close proximity to the control, telltale or 
indicator; and
    (b) No other control, telltale, indicator, identifier or source of 
illumination appears between the identifier and the telltale, indicator, 
or control that the identifier identifies.
    Common space means an area on which more than one telltale, 
indicator, identifier, or other message may be displayed, but not 
simultaneously.
    Control means the hand-operated part of a device that enables the 
driver to change the state or functioning of the vehicle or a vehicle 
subsystem.
    Indicator means a device that shows the magnitude of the physical 
characteristics that the instrument is designed to sense.
    Identifier means a symbol, word, or words used to identify a 
control, telltale, or indicator.
    Multi-function control means a control through which the driver may 
select, and affect the operation of, more than one vehicle function.
    Multi-task display means a display on which more than one message 
can be shown simultaneously.
    Telltale means an optical signal that, when illuminated, indicates 
the actuation of a device, a correct or improper functioning or 
condition, or a failure to function.
    S5. Requirements. Each passenger car, multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, truck and bus that is fitted with a control, a telltale or an 
indicator listed in Table 1 or Table 2 must meet the requirements of 
this standard for the location, identification, color, and illumination 
of that control, telltale or indicator. However, the requirements for 
telltales and indicators do not apply to vehicles with GVWRs of 4,536 kg 
or greater if

[[Page 291]]

these specified vehicles are manufactured before September 1, 2013.

                              S5.1 Location

    S5.1.1 The controls listed in Table 1 and in Table 2 must be located 
so they are operable by the driver under the conditions of S5.6.2.
    S5.1.2 The telltales and indicators listed in Table 1 and Table 2 
and their identification must be located so that, when activated, they 
are visible to a driver under the conditions of S5.6.1 and S5.6.2.
    S5.1.3 Except as provided in S5.1.4, the identification for 
controls, telltales and indicators must be placed on or adjacent to the 
telltale, indicator or control that it identifies.
    S5.1.4 The requirement of S5.1.3 does not apply to a multi-function 
control, provided the multi-function control is associated with a multi-
task display that:
    (a) Is visible to the driver under the conditions of S5.6.1 and 
S5.6.2,
    (b) Identifies the multi-function control with which it is 
associated graphically or using words,
    (c) For multi-task displays with layers, identifies on the top-most 
layer each system for which control is possible from the associated 
multi-function control, including systems not otherwise regulated by 
this standard. Subfunctions of the available systems need not be shown 
on the top-most layer of the multi-task display, and
    (d) Identifies the controls of Table 1 and Table 2 with the 
identification specified in those tables or otherwise required by this 
standard, whenever those are the active functions of the multi-function 
control. For lower levels of multi-task displays with layers, 
identification is permitted but not required for systems not otherwise 
regulated by this standard.
    (e) Does not display telltales listed in Table 1 or Table 2.

                           S5.2 Identification

    S5.2.1 Except for the Low Tire Pressure Telltale, each control, 
telltale and indicator that is listed in column 1 of Table 1 or Table 2 
must be identified by the symbol specified for it in column 2 or the 
word or abbreviation specified for it in column 3 of Table 1 or Table 2. 
If a symbol is used, each symbol provided pursuant to this paragraph 
must be substantially similar in form to the symbol as it appears in 
Table 1 or Table 2. If a symbol is used, each symbol provided pursuant 
to this paragraph must have the proportional dimensional characteristics 
of the symbol as it appears in Table 1 or Table 2. The Low Tire Pressure 
Telltale (either the display identifying which tire has low pressure or 
the display which does not identify which tire has low pressure) shall 
be identified by the appropriate symbol designated in column 4, or both 
the symbol in column 4 and the words in column 3. No identification is 
required for any horn (i.e., audible warning signal) that is activated 
by a lanyard or by the driver pressing on the center of the face plane 
of the steering wheel hub; or for a turn signal control that is operated 
in a plane essentially parallel to the face plane of the steering wheel 
in its normal driving position and which is located on the left side of 
the steering column so that it is the control on that side of the column 
nearest to the steering wheel face plane. However, if identification is 
provided for a horn control in the center of the face plane of the 
steering wheel hub, the identifier must meet Table 2 requirements for 
the horn.
    S5.2.2 Any symbol, word, or abbreviation not shown in Table 1 or 
Table 2 may be used to identify a control, a telltale or an indicator 
that is not listed in those tables.
    S5.2.3 Supplementary symbols, words, or abbreviations may be used at 
the manufacturer's discretion in conjunction with any symbol, word, or 
abbreviation specified in Table 1 or Table 2.

                            S5.2.4 [Reserved]

    S5.2.5 A single symbol, word, or abbreviation may be used to 
identify any combination of the control, indicator, and telltale for the 
same function.
    S5.2.6 Except as provided in S5.2.7, all identifications of 
telltales, indicators and controls listed in Table 1 or Table 2 must 
appear to the driver to be perceptually upright. A rotating control that 
has an ``off'' position shall appear to the driver perceptually upright

[[Page 292]]

when the rotating control is in the ``off'' position.
    S5.2.7 The identification of the following items need not appear to 
the driver to be perceptually upright:
    (a) A horn control;
    (b) Any control, telltale or indicator located on the steering 
wheel, when the steering wheel is positioned for the motor vehicle to 
travel in a direction other than straight forward; and
    (c) Any rotating control that does not have an ``off'' position.
    S5.2.8 Each control for an automatic vehicle speed system (cruise 
control) and each control for heating and air conditioning systems must 
have identification provided for each function of each such system.
    S5.2.9 Each control that regulates a system function over a 
continuous range must have identification provided for the limits of the 
adjustment range of that function. If color coding is used to identify 
the limits of the adjustment range of a temperature function, the hot 
limit must be identified by the color red and the cold limit by the 
color blue. If the status or limit of a function is shown by a display 
not adjacent to the control for that function, both the control (unless 
it is a multi-function control complying with S5.1.4) and the display 
must be independently identified as to the function of the control, in 
compliance with S5.2.1, on or adjacent to the control and on or adjacent 
to the display.

    Example 1. A slide lever controls the temperature of the air in the 
vehicle heating system over a continuous range, from no heat to maximum 
heat. Since the control regulates a single function over a quantitative 
range, only the extreme positions require identification.
    Example 2. A switch has three positions, for heat, defrost, and air 
conditioning. Since each position regulates a different function, each 
position must be identified.

                            S5.3 Illumination

                      S5.3.1 Timing of illumination

    (a) Except as provided in S5.3.1(c), the identifications of controls 
for which the word ``Yes'' is specified in column 5 of Table 1 must be 
capable of being illuminated whenever the headlamps are activated. This 
requirement does not apply to a control located on the floor, floor 
console, steering wheel, steering column, or in the area of windshield 
header, or to a control for a heating and air-conditioning system that 
does not direct air upon the windshield.
    (b) Except as provided in S5.3.1(c), the indicators and their 
identifications for which the word ``Yes'' is specified in column 5 of 
Table 1 must be illuminated whenever the vehicle's propulsion system and 
headlamps are activated.
    (c) The indicators, their identifications and the identifications of 
controls need not be illuminated when the headlamps are being flashed or 
operated as daytime running lamps.
    (d) At the manufacturer's option, any control, indicator, or their 
identifications may be capable of being illuminated at any time.
    (e) A telltale must not emit light except when identifying the 
malfunction or vehicle condition it is designed to indicate, or during a 
bulb check.

      S5.3.2 Brightness of illumination of controls and indicators

    S5.3.2.1 Means must be provided for illuminating the indicators, 
identifications of indicators and identifications of controls listed in 
Table 1 to make them visible to the driver under daylight and nighttime 
driving conditions.
    S5.3.2.2 The means of providing the visibility required by S5.3.2.1:
    (a) Must be adjustable to provide at least two levels of brightness;
    (b) At a level of brightness other than the highest level, the 
identification of controls and indicators must be barely discernible to 
the driver who has adapted to dark ambient roadway condition;
    (c) May be operable manually or automatically; and
    (d) May have levels of brightness, other than the two required 
visible levels of brightness, at which those items and identification 
are not visible.
    (1) If the level of brightness is adjusted by automatic means to a 
point where those items or their identification are not visible to the 
driver, means shall be provided to enable the driver to restore 
visibility.

[[Page 293]]

               S5.3.3 Brightness of telltale illumination

    (a) Means must be provided for illuminating telltales and their 
identification sufficiently to make them visible to the driver under 
daylight and nighttime driving conditions.
    (b) The means for providing the required visibility may be 
adjustable manually or automatically, except that the telltales and 
identification for brakes, highbeams, turn signals, and safety belts may 
not be adjustable under any driving condition to a level that is 
invisible.

  S5.3.4 Brightness of interior lamps. (a) Any source of illumination 
   within the passenger compartment which is forward of a transverse 
   vertical plane 110 mm rearward of the manikin ``H'' point with the 
 driver's seat in its rearmost driving position, which is not used for 
  the controls and displays regulated by this standard, which is not a 
telltale, and which is capable of being illuminated while the vehicle is 
                      in motion, shall have either:

    (1) Light intensity which is manually or automatically adjustable to 
provide at least two levels of brightness;
    (2) A single intensity that is barely discernible to a driver who 
has adapted to dark ambient roadway conditions;or
    (3) A means of being turned off.
    (b) Paragraph (a) of S5.3.4 does not apply to buses that are 
normally operated with the passenger compartment illuminated.
    S5.3.5 The provisions of S5.3.4 do not apply to buses that are 
normally operated with the passenger compartment illuminated.

                               S5.4 Color

    S5.4.1 The light of each telltale listed in Table 1 must be of the 
color specified for that telltale in column 6 of that table.
    S5.4.2 Any indicator or telltale not listed in Table 1 and any 
identification of that indicator or telltale must not be a color that 
masks the driver's ability to recognize any telltale, control, or 
indicator listed in Table 1.
    S5.4.3 Each identifier used for the identification of a telltale, 
control or indicator must be in a color that stands out clearly against 
the background. However, this requirement does not apply to an 
identifier for a horn control in the center of the face plane of the 
steering wheel hub. For vehicles with a GVWR of under 4,536 kg (10,000 
pounds), the compliance date for this provision is September 1, 2011. 
For vehicles with a GVWR of 4,536 kg (10,000 pounds) or over, the 
compliance date for this provision is September 1, 2013.

           S5.5 Common space for displaying multiple messages

    S5.5.1 A common space may be used to show messages from any sources, 
subject to the requirements in S5.5.2 through S5.5.6.
    S5.5.2 The telltales for any brake system malfunction required by 
Table 1 to be red, air bag malfunction, low tire pressure, electronic 
stability control malfunction (as of September 1, 2011), passenger air 
bag off, high beam, turn signal, and seat belt must not be shown in the 
same common space.
    S5.5.3 The telltales and indicators that are listed in Table 1 and 
are shown in the common space must illuminate at the initiation of any 
underlying condition.
    S5.5.4 Except as provided in S5.5.5, when the underlying conditions 
exist for actuation of two or more telltales, the messages must be 
either:
    (a) Repeated automatically in sequence, or
    (b) Indicated by visible means and capable of being selected for 
viewing by the driver under the conditions of S5.6.2.
    S5.5.5 In the case of the telltale for a brake system malfunction, 
air bag malfunction, side air bag malfunction, low tire pressure, 
electronic stability control malfunction (as of September 1, 2011), 
passenger air bag off, high beam, turn signal, or seat belt that is 
designed to display in a common space, that telltale must displace any 
other symbol or message in that common space while the underlying 
condition for the telltale's activation exists.
    S5.5.6(a) Except as provided in S5.5.6(b), messages displayed in a 
common space may be cancelable automatically or by the driver.
    (b) Telltales for high beams, turn signal, low tire pressure, and 
passenger

[[Page 294]]

air bag off, and telltales for which the color red is required in Table 
1 must not be cancelable while the underlying condition for their 
activation exists.

                             S5.6 Conditions

    S5.6.1 The driver has adapted to the ambient light roadway 
conditions.
    S5.6.2 The driver is restrained by the seat belts installed in 
accordance with 49 CFR 571.208 and adjusted in accordance with the 
vehicle manufacturer's instructions.

[[Page 295]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR22SE08.006


[[Page 296]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR22SE08.007


[[Page 297]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR22SE08.008


[[Page 298]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR22SE08.009


[[Page 299]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15MY06.035


[70 FR 48305, Aug. 17, 2005, as amended at 71 FR 27971, May 15, 2006; 72 
FR 17305, Apr. 6, 2007; 73 FR 54537, Sept. 22, 2008; 74 FR 40764, Aug. 
13, 2009]

[[Page 300]]


<R05>
Sec. 571.102  Standard No. 102; Transmission shift position sequence, starter 

interlock, and transmission braking effect.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard specifies the requirements for 
the transmission shift position sequence, a starter interlock, and for a 
braking effect of automatic transmissions, to reduce the likelihood of 
shifting errors, to prevent starter engagement by the driver when the 
transmission is in any drive position, and to provide supplemental 
braking at speeds below 40 kilometers per hour (25 miles per hour).
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, multi-
purpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses.
    S3. Requirements.
    S3.1 Automatic transmissions.
    S3.1.1 Location of transmission shift positions on passenger cars. A 
neutral position shall be located between forward drive and reverse 
drive positions.
    S3.1.1.1 Transmission shift levers. If a steering-column-mounted 
transmission shift lever is used, movement from neutral position to 
forward drive position shall be clockwise. If the transmission shift 
lever sequence includes a park position, it shall be located at the end, 
adjacent to the reverse drive position.
    S3.1.2 Transmission braking effect. In vehicles having more than one 
forward transmission gear ratio, one forward drive position shall 
provide a greater degree of engine braking than the highest speed 
transmission ratio at vehicle speeds below 40 kilometers per hour (25 
miles per hour).
    S3.1.3 Starter interlock. Except as provided in S3.1.3.1 through 
S3.1.3.3, the engine starter shall be inoperative when the transmission 
shift position is in a forward or reverse drive position.
    S3.1.3.1 After the driver has activated the vehicle's propulsion 
system:
    (a) The engine may stop and restart automatically when the 
transmission shift position is in any forward drive gear;
    (b) The engine may not automatically stop when the transmission is 
in reverse gear; and
    (c) The engine may automatically restart in reverse gear only if the 
vehicle satisfies (1) and (2):
    (1) When the engine is automatically stopped in a forward drive 
shift position and the driver selects Reverse, the engine restarts 
immediately whenever the service brake is applied.
    (2) When the engine is automatically stopped in a forward drive 
shift position and the driver selects Reverse, the engine does not start 
automatically if the service brake is not applied.
    S3.1.3.2 Notwithstanding S3.1.3.1, the engine may stop and start at 
any time after the driver has activated the vehicle's propulsion system 
if the vehicle can meet the requirements specified in paragraphs (a) and 
(b):
    (a) For passenger cars, multi-purpose passenger vehicles, trucks and 
buses with a GVWR less than or equal to 4,536 kg (10,000 pounds), the 
vehicle's propulsion system can propel the vehicle in the normal travel 
mode in all forward and reverse drive gears without the engine 
operating. For passenger cars, multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks 
and buses with a GVWR greater than 4,536 kg (10,000 pounds), the 
vehicle's propulsion system can propel the vehicle in the normal travel 
mode in Reverse and at least one forward drive gear without the engine 
operating.
    (b) If the engine automatically starts while the vehicle is 
traveling at a steady speed and steady accelerator control setting, the 
engine does not cause the vehicle to accelerate.
    S3.1.3.3 If the transmission shift position is in Park, 
automatically stopping or restarting the engine shall not take the 
transmission out of Park.
    S3.1.4 Identification of shift positions and of shift position 
sequence.
    S3.1.4.1 Except as specified in S3.1.4.3, if the transmission shift 
position sequence includes a park position, identification of shift 
positions, including the positions in relation to each other and the 
position selected, shall be displayed in view of the driver whenever any 
of the following conditions exist:
    (a) The ignition is in a position where the transmission can be 
shifted; or
    (b) The transmission is not in park.
    S3.1.4.2 Except as specified in S3.1.4.3, if the transmission shift 
position sequence does not include a park

[[Page 301]]

position, identification of shift positions, including the positions in 
relation to each other and the position selected, shall be displayed in 
view of the driver whenever the ignition is in a position in which the 
engine is capable of operation.
    S3.1.4.3 Such information need not be displayed when the ignition is 
in a position that is used only to start the vehicle.
    S3.1.4.4 All of the information required to be displayed by S3.1.4.1 
or S3.1.4.2 shall be displayed in view of the driver in a single 
location. At the option of the manufacturer, redundant displays 
providing some or all of the information may be provided.
    S3.2 Manual transmissions. Identification of the shift lever pattern 
of manual transmissions, except three forward speed manual transmissions 
having the standard ``H'' pattern, shall be displayed in view of the 
driver at all times when a driver is present in the driver's seating 
position.

[70 FR 38051, July 1, 2005, as amended at 70 FR 75965, Dec. 22, 2005]


<R05>
Sec. 571.103  Standard No. 103; Windshield defrosting and defogging systems.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for windshield 
defrosting and defogging systems.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses.
    S3. Definitions. Road load means the power output required to move a 
given motor vehicle at curb weight plus 180 kilograms on level, clean, 
dry, smooth portland cement concrete pavement (or other surface with 
equivalent coefficient of surface friction) at a specified speed through 
still air at 20 degrees Celsius, and standard barometric pressure (101.3 
kilopascals) and includes driveline friction, rolling friction, and air 
resistance.
    S4. Requirements. (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this 
section, each passenger car shall meet the requirements specified in 
S4.1, S4.2, and S4.3, and each multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, 
and bus shall meet the requirements specified in Sec. 4.1.
    (b) Each passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, and 
bus manufactured for sale in the noncontinental United States may, at 
the option of the manufacturer, have a windshield defogging system which 
operates either by applying heat to the windshield or by dehumidifying 
the air inside the passenger compartment of the vehicle, in lieu of 
meeting the requirements specified by paragraph (a) of this section.
    S4.1 Each vehicle shall have a windshield defrosting and defogging 
system.
    S4.2 Each passenger car windshield defrosting and defogging system 
shall meet the requirements of section 3 of SAE Recommended Practice 
J902, ``Passenger Car Windshield Defrosting Systems,'' August 1964, when 
tested in accordance with S4.3, except that ``the critical area'' 
specified in paragraph 3.1 of SAE Recommended Practice J902 shall be 
that established as Area C in accordance with Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standard No. 104, ``Windshield Wiping and Washing Systems,'' and ``the 
entire windshield'' specified in paragraph 3.3 of SAE Recommended 
Practice J902 shall be that established as Area A in accordance with 
Sec. 571.104.
    S4.3 Demonstration procedure. The passenger car windshield 
defrosting and defogging system shall be tested in accordance with the 
portions of paragraphs 4.1 through 4.4.7 of SAE Recommended Practice 
J902, August 1964, or SAE Recommended Practice J902a, March 1967, 
applicable to that system, except that--
    (a) During the first 5 minutes of the test:
    (1) For a passenger car equipped with a heating system other than a 
heat exchanger type that uses the engine's coolant as a means to supply 
the heat to the heat exchanger, the warm-up procedure is that specified 
by the vehicle's manufacturer for cold weather starting, except that 
connection to a power or heat source external to the vehicle is not 
permitted.
    (2) For all other passenger cars, the warm-up procedure may be that 
recommended by the vehicle's manufacturer for cold weather starting.
    (b) During the last 35 minutes of the test period (or the entire 
test period if the 5-minute warm-up procedure specified in paragraph (a) 
of this section is not used),

[[Page 302]]

    (1) For a passenger car equipped with a heating system other than a 
heat exchanger type that uses the engine's coolant as a means to supply 
the heat to the heat exchanger, the procedure shall be that specified by 
the vehicle's manufacturer for cold weather starting, except that 
connection to a power or heat source external to the vehicle is not 
permitted.
    (2) For all other passenger cars, either--
    (i) The engine speed shall not exceed 1,500 r.p.m. in neutral gear; 
or
    (ii) The engine speed and load shall not exceed the speed and load 
at 40 kilometers per hour in the manufacturer's recommended gear with 
road load;
    (c) A room air change of 90 times per hour is not required;
    (d) The windshield wipers may be used during the test if they are 
operated without manual assist;
    (e) One or two windows may be open a total of 25 millimeters;
    (f) The defroster blower may be turned on at any time; and
    (g) The wind velocity is at any level from 0 to 3 kilometers per 
hour.
    (h) The test chamber temperature and the wind velocity shall be 
measured, after the engine has been started, at the forwardmost point of 
the vehicle or a point 914 millimeters from the base of the windshield, 
whichever is farther forward, at a level halfway between the top and 
bottom of the windshield on the vehicle centerline.

[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971, as amended at 40 FR 12992, Mar. 24, 1975; 40 
FR 32336, Aug. 1, 1975; 50 FR 48775, Nov. 27, 1985; 59 FR 11006, Mar. 9, 
1994; 60 FR 13642, Mar. 14, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 571.104  Standard No. 104; Windshield wiping and washing systems.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for windshield 
wiping and washing systems.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses.
    S3. Definitions. The term seating reference point is substituted for 
the terms manikin H point, manikin H point with seat in rearmost 
position and H point wherever any of these terms appear in any SAE 
Standard or SAE Recommended Practice referred to in this standard.
    Daylight opening means the maximum unobstructed opening through the 
glazing surface, as defined in paragraph 2.3.12 of section E, Ground 
Vehicle Practice, SAE Aerospace-Automotive Drawing Standards, September 
1963.
    Glazing surface reference line means the line resulting from the 
intersection of the glazing surface and a horizontal plane 635 
millimeters above the seating reference point, as shown in Figure 1 of 
SAE Recommended Practice J903a, ``Passenger Car Windshield Wiper 
Systems,'' May 1966.
    Overall width means the maximum overall body width dimension 
``W116'', as defined in section E, Ground Vehicle Practice, SAE 
Aerospace-Automotive Drawing Standards, September 1963.
    Plan view reference line means--
    (a) For vehicles with bench-type seats, a line parallel to the 
vehicle longitudinal centerline outboard of the steering wheel 
centerline 0.15 times the difference between one-half of the shoulder 
room dimension and the steering wheel centerline-to-car-centerline 
dimension as shown in Figure 2 of SAE Recommended Practice J903a, May 
1966; or
    (b) For vehicles with individual-type seats, either--
    (i) A line parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline which 
passes through the center of the driver's designated seating position; 
or
    (ii) A line parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline located 
so that the geometric center of the 95 percent eye range contour is 
positioned on the longitudinal centerline of the driver's designated 
seating position.
    Shoulder room dimension means the front shoulder room dimension 
``W3'' as defined in section E, Ground Vehicle Practice, SAE Aerospace-
Automotive Drawing Standards, September 1963.
    95 percent eye range contour means the 95th percentile tangential 
cutoff specified in SAE Recommended Practice J941, ``Passenger Car 
Driver's Eye Range,'' November 1965.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1 Windshield wiping system. Each vehicle shall have a power-
driven windshield wiping system that meets the requirements of S4.1.1.
    S4.1.1 Frequency.

[[Page 303]]

    S4.1.1.1 Each windshield wiping system shall have at least two 
frequencies or speeds.
    S4.1.1.2 One frequency or speed shall be at least 45 cycles per 
minute regardless of engine load and engine speed.
    S4.1.1.3 Regardless of engine speed and engine load, the highest and 
one lower frequency or speed shall differ by at least 15 cycles per 
minute. Such lower frequency or speed shall be at least 20 cycles per 
minute regardless of engine speed and engine load.
    S4.1.1.4 Compliance with subparagraphs S4.1.1.2 and S4.1.1.3 may be 
demonstrated by testing under the conditions specified in sections 4.1.1 
and 4.1.2 of SAE Recommended Practice J903a, May 1966.
    S4.1.2 Wiped area. When tested wet in accordance with SAE 
Recommended Practice J903a, May 1966, each passenger car windshield 
wiping system shall wipe the percentage of Areas A, B, and C of the 
windshield (established in accordance with S4.1.2.1) that (1) is 
specified in column 2 of the applicable table following subparagraph 
S4.1.2.1 and (2) is within the area bounded by a perimeter line on the 
glazing surface 25 millimeters from the edge of the daylight opening.
    S4.1.2.1 Areas A, B, and C shall be established as shown in Figures 
1 and 2 of SAE Recommended Practice J903a, May 1966, using the angles 
specified in Columns 3 through 6 of Table I, II, III, or IV, as 
applicable.

                     Table I--Passenger Cars of Less Than 1520 Millimeters in Overall Width
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Column 2--           Angles in degrees
                                                                   Minimum  ------------------------------------
                         Column 1--Area                          percent to   Column   Column    Column   Column
                                                                  be wiped   3--Left  4--Right   5--Up   6--Down
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A..............................................................         80        16        49        7        5
B..............................................................         94        13        46        4        3
C..............................................................         99         7        15        3        1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


            Table II--Passenger Cars of 1520 or More But Less Than 1630 Millimeters in Overall Width
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Column 2--           Angles in degrees
                                                                   Minimum  ------------------------------------
                         Column 1--Area                          percent to   Column   Column    Column   Column
                                                                  be wiped   3--Left  4--Right   5--Up   6--Down
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A..............................................................         80        17        51        8        5
B..............................................................         94        13        49        4        3
C..............................................................         99         7        15        3        1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


            Table III--Passenger Cars of 1630 or More But Less Than 1730 Millimeters in Overall Width
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Column 2--           Angles in degrees
                                                                   Minimum  ------------------------------------
                         Column 1--Area                          percent to   Column   Column    Column   Column
                                                                  be wiped   3--Left  4--Right   5--Up   6--Down
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A..............................................................         80        17        53        9        5
B..............................................................         94        14        51        5        3
C..............................................................         99         8        15        4        1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                      Table IV--Passenger Cars of 1730 or More Millimeters in Overall Width
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Column 2--           Angles in degrees
                                                                   Minimum  ------------------------------------
                         Column 1--Area                          percent to   Column   Column    Column   Column
                                                                  be wiped   3--Left  4--Right   5--Up   6--Down
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A..............................................................         80        18        56       10        5
B..............................................................         94        14        53        5        3
C..............................................................         99        10        15        5        1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S4.2 Windshield washing system.
    S4.2.1 Each passenger car shall have a windshield washing system 
that meets the requirements of SAE Recommended Practice J942, 
``Passenger Car Windshield Washer Systems,'' November 1965, except that 
the reference to ``the effective wipe pattern defined in SAE J903, 
paragraph 3.1.2'' in paragraph 3.1 of SAE Recommended Practice J942 
shall be deleted and ``the areas established in accordance with 
subparagraph S4.1.2.1 of Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 104'' shall 
be inserted in lieu thereof.
    S4.2.2 Each multipurpose passenger vehicle truck, and bus shall have 
a windshield washing system that meets the requirements of SAE 
Recommended Practice J942, November

[[Page 304]]

1965, except that the reference to ``the effective wipe pattern defined 
in SAE J903, paragraph 3.1.2'' in paragraph 3.1 of SAE Recommended 
Practice J942 shall be deleted and ``the pattern designed by the 
manufacturer for the windshield wiping system on the exterior surface of 
the windshield glazing'' shall be inserted in lieu thereof.

[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971, as amended at 58 FR 13023, Mar. 9, 1993; 60 
FR 13643, Mar. 14, 1995; 63 FR 51000, Sept. 24, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 571.105  Standard No. 105; Hydraulic and electric brake systems.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for hydraulic and 
electric service brake systems, and associated parking brake systems.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to insure safe braking 
performance under normal and emergency conditions.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to multi-purpose passenger 
vehicles, trucks, and buses with a GVWR greater than 3,500 kilograms 
(7,716 pounds) that are equipped with hydraulic or electric brake 
systems.
    S4. Definitions.
    Antilock brake system or ABS means a portion of a service brake 
system that automatically controls the degree of rotational wheel slip 
during braking by:
    (1) Sensing the rate of angular rotation of the wheels;
    (2) Transmitting signals regarding the rate of wheel angular 
rotation to one or more controlling devices which interpret those 
signals and generate responsive controlling output signals; and
    (3) Transmitting those controlling signals to one or more modulators 
which adjust brake actuating forces in response to those signals.
    Backup system means a portion of a service brake system, such as a 
pump, that automatically supplies energy, in the event of a primary 
brake power source failure.
    Brake power assist unit means a device installed in a hydraulic 
brake system that reduces the operator effort required to actuate the 
system, and that if inoperative does not prevent the operator from 
braking the vehicle by a continued application of muscular force on the 
service brake control.
    Brake power unit means a device installed in a brake system that 
provides the energy required to actuate the brakes, either directly or 
indirectly through an auxiliary device, with the operator action 
consisting only of modulating the energy application level.
    Directly Controlled Wheel means a wheel for which the degree of 
rotational wheel slip is sensed, either at that wheel or on the axle 
shaft for that wheel and corresponding signals are transmitted to one or 
more modulators that adjust the brake actuating forces at that wheel. 
Each modulator may also adjust the brake actuating forces at other 
wheels that are on the same axle or in the same axle set in response to 
the same signal or signals.
    Electric vehicle or EV means a motor vehicle that is powered by an 
electric motor drawing current from rechargeable storage batteries, fuel 
cells, or other portable sources of electrical current, and which may 
include a non-electrical source of power designed to charge batteries 
and components thereof.
    Electrically-actuated service brakes means service brakes that 
utilize electrical energy to actuate the foundation brakes.
    Full brake application means a brake application in which the force 
on the brake pedal reaches 150 pounds within 0.3 seconds from the point 
of application of force to the brake control.
    Hydraulic brake system means a system that uses hydraulic fluid as a 
medium for transmitting force from a service brake control to the 
service brake, and that may incorporate a brake power assist unit, or a 
brake power unit.
    Indirectly Controlled Wheel means a wheel at which the degree of 
rotational wheel slip is not sensed, but at which the modulator of an 
antilock braking system adjusts its brake actuating forces in response 
to signals from one or more sensed wheels.
    Initial brake temperature means the average temperature of the 
service brakes on the hottest axle of the vehicle 0.2 mi before any 
brake application.
    Lightly loaded vehicle weight means:

[[Page 305]]

    (a) For vehicles with a GVWR of 10,000 lbs. or less, unloaded 
vehicle weight plus 400 lbs. (including driver and instrumentation);
    (b) For vehicles with a GVWR greater than 10,000 lbs., unloaded 
vehicle weight plus 500 lbs. (including driver and instrumentation).
    Maximum drive-through speed means the highest possible constant 
speed at which the vehicle can be driven through 200 feet of a 500-foot 
radius curve arc without leaving the 12-foot lane.
    Parking mechanism means a component or subsystem of the drive train 
that locks the drive train when the transmission control is placed in a 
parking or other gear position and the ignition key is removed.
    Peak friction coefficient or PFC means the ratio of the maximum 
value of braking test wheel longitudinal force to the simultaneous 
vertical force occurring prior to wheel lockup, as the braking torque is 
progressively increased.
    Pressure component means a brake system component that contains the 
brake system fluid and controls or senses the fluid pressure.
    Regenerative braking system or RBS means an electrical energy system 
that is installed in an EV for recovering or dissipating kinetic energy, 
and which uses the propulsion motor(s) as a retarder for partial braking 
of the EV while returning electrical energy to the propulsion batteries 
or dissipating electrical energy.
    Skid number means the frictional resistance of a pavement measured 
in accordance with American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) 
Method E-274-70 (as revised July, 1974) at 40 mph, omitting water 
delivery as specified in paragraphs 7.1 and 7.2 of that method.
    Snub means the braking deceleration of a vehicle from a higher 
reference speed to a lower reference speed that is greater than zero.
    Spike stop means a stop resulting from the application of 200 lbs of 
force on the service brake control in 0.08 s.
    Split service brake system means a brake system consisting of two or 
more subsystems actuated by a single control, designed so that a single 
failure in any subsystem (such as a leakage-type failure of a pressure 
component of a hydraulic subsystem except structural failure of a 
housing that is common to two or more subsystems, or an electrical 
failure in an electric subsystem) does not impair the operation of any 
other subsystem.
    Stopping distance means the distance traveled by a vehicle from the 
point of application of force to the brake control to the point at which 
the vehicle reaches a full stop.
    Tandem axle means a group of two or more axles placed in close 
arrangement one behind the other with the center lines of adjacent axles 
not more than 72 inches apart.
    Variable proportioning brake system means a system that 
automatically adjusts the braking force at the axles to compensate for 
vehicle static axle loading and/or dynamic weight transfer between axles 
during deceleration.
    Wheel lockup means 100 percent wheel slip.
    S5. Requirements.
    S5.1 Service brake systems. Each vehicle must be equipped with a 
service brake system acting on all wheels. Wear of the service brake 
must be compensated for by means of a system of automatic adjustment. 
Each passenger car and each multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, and 
bus with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less must be capable of meeting the 
requirements of S5.1.1 through S5.1.6 under the conditions prescribed in 
S6, when tested according to the procedures and in the sequence set 
forth in S7. Each school bus with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds must 
be capable of meeting the requirements of S5.1.1 through S5.1.5, and 
S5.1.7 under the conditions specified in S6, when tested according to 
the procedures and in the sequence set forth in S7. Each multipurpose 
passenger vehicle, truck and bus (other than a school bus) with a GVWR 
greater than 10,000 pounds must be capable of meeting the requirements 
of S5.1.1, S5.1.2, S5.1.3, and S5.1.7 under the conditions specified in 
S6, when tested according to the procedures and in the sequence set 
forth in S7. Except as noted in S5.1.1.2 and S5.1.1.4, if a vehicle is 
incapable of attaining a speed specified in S5.1.1, S5.1.2, S5.1.3, or 
S5.1.6, its service

[[Page 306]]

brakes must be capable of stopping the vehicle from the multiple of 5 
mph that is 4 to 8 mph less than the speed attainable in 2 miles, within 
distances that do not exceed the corresponding distances specified in 
Table II. If a vehicle is incapable of attaining a speed specified in 
S5.1.4 in the time or distance interval set forth, it must be tested at 
the highest speed attainable in the time or distance interval specified.
    S5.1.1 Stopping distance. (a) The service brakes shall be capable of 
stopping each vehicle with a GVWR of less than 8,000 pounds, and each 
school bus with a GVWR between 8,000 pounds and 10,000 pounds in four 
effectiveness tests within the distances and from the speeds specified 
in S5.1.1.1, S5.1.1.2, S5.1.1.3, and S5.1.1.4.
    (b) The service brakes shall be capable of stopping each vehicle 
with a GVWR of between 8,000 pounds and 10,000 pounds, other than a 
school bus, in three effectiveness tests within the distances and from 
the speeds specified in S5.1.1.1, S5.1.1.2, and S5.1.1.4.
    (c) The service brakes shall be capable of stopping each vehicle 
with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds in two effectiveness tests within 
the distances and from the speeds specified in S5.1.1.2 and S5.1.1.3. 
Each school bus with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds manufactured 
after January 12, 1996 and before March 1, 1999 and which is equipped 
with an antilock brake system may comply with paragraph S5.1.1.2 and 
S5.5.1 rather than the first effectiveness test, as specified in 
S5.1.1.1. Each school bus with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds 
manufactured on or after March 1, 1999 shall be capable of meeting the 
requirements of S5.1.1 through S5.1.5, under the conditions prescribed 
in S6, when tested according to the procedures and in the sequence set 
forth in S7.
    S5.1.1.1 In the first (preburnished) effectiveness test, the vehicle 
shall be capable of stopping from 30 mph and 60 mph within the 
corresponding distances specified in column I of table II.
    S5.1.1.2 In the second effectiveness test, each vehicle with a GVWR 
of 10,000 pounds or less and each school bus with a GVWR greater than 
10,000 pounds shall be capable of stopping from 30 mph and 60 mph, and 
each vehicle with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds (other than a school 
bus) shall be capable of stopping from 60 mph, within the corresponding 
distances specified in Column II of Table II. If the speed attainable in 
2 miles is not less than 84 mph, a passenger car or other vehicle with a 
GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less shall also be capable of stopping from 80 
mph within the corresponding distances specified in Column II of Table 
II.
    S5.1.1.3 In the third effectiveness test the vehicle shall be 
capable of stopping at lightly loaded vehicle weight from 60 mph within 
the corresponding distance specified in column III of table II.
    S5.1.1.4 In the fourth effectiveness test, a vehicle with a GVWR of 
10,000 pounds or less shall be capable of stopping from 30 and 60 mph 
within the corresponding distances specified in column I of table II. If 
the speed attainable in 2 miles is not less than 84 mph, a passenger 
car, or other vehicle with a GVWR of 10,000 lbs., or less, shall also be 
capable of stopping from 80 mph within the corresponding distance 
specified in column I of table II.
    If the speed attainable in 2 miles is not less than 99 mph, a 
passenger car shall, in addition, be capable of stopping from the 
applicable speed indicated below, within the corresponding distance 
specified in column I of table II.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Required
              Speed attainable in 2 miles (mph)                 to stop
                                                              from (mph)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Not less than 99 but less than 104..........................          95
104 or more.................................................         100
------------------------------------------------------------------------


For an EV, the speed attainable in 2 miles is determined with the 
propulsion batteries at a state of charge of not less than 95 percent at 
the beginning of the run.
    S5.1.2 Partial failure.
    S5.1.2.1 In vehicles manufactured with a split service brake system, 
in the event of a rupture or leakage type of failure in a single 
subsystem, other than a structural failure of a housing that is common 
to two or more subsystems, the remaining portion(s) of the service brake 
system shall continue to operate and shall be capable of stopping a 
vehicle from 60 mph within

[[Page 307]]

the corresponding distance specified in column IV of table II.
    S5.1.2.2 In vehicles not manufactured with a split service brake 
system, in the event of any one rupture or leakage type of failure in 
any component of the service brake system the vehicle shall, by 
operation of the service brake control, be capable of stopping 10 times 
consecutively from 60 mph within the corresponding distance specified in 
column IV of table II.
    S5.1.2.3 For a vehicle manufactured with a service brake system in 
which the brake signal is transmitted electrically between the brake 
pedal and some or all of the foundation brakes, regardless of the means 
of actuation of the foundation brakes, the vehicle shall be capable of 
stopping from 60 mph within the corresponding distance specified in 
Column IV of Table II with any single failure in any circuit that 
electrically transmits the brake signal, and with all other systems 
intact.
    S5.1.2.4 For an EV manufactured with a service brake system that 
incorporates RBS, the vehicle shall be capable of stopping from 60 mph 
within the corresponding distance specified in Column IV of Table II 
with any single failure in the RBS, and with all other systems intact.
    S5.1.3 Inoperative brake power assist unit or brake power unit. A 
vehicle equipped with one or more brake power assist units shall meet 
the requirements of either S5.1.3.1, S5.1.3.2, or S5.1.3.4 (chosen at 
the option of the manufacturer), and a vehicle equipped with one or more 
brake power units shall meet the requirements of either S5.1.3.1, 
S5.1.3.3, or S5.1.3.4 (chosen at the option of the manufacturer).
    S5.1.3.1 The service brakes on a vehicle equipped with one or more 
brake power assist units or brake power units, with one such unit 
inoperative and depleted of all reserve capability, shall be capable of 
stopping a vehicle from 60 mph within the corresponding distance 
specified in column IV of table II.
    S5.1.3.2 Brake power assist units. The service brakes on a vehicle 
equipped with one or more brake power assist units, with one such unit 
inoperative, shall be capable of stopping a vehicle from 60 mph:
    (a) In six consecutive stops at an average deceleration for each 
stop that is not lower than that specified in column I of table III, 
when the inoperative unit is not initially depleted of all reserve 
capability; and
    (b) In a final stop, at an average deceleration that is not lower 
than 7 FPSPS for passenger cars (equivalent stopping distance 554 feet) 
or 6 FPSPS for vehicles other than passenger cars (equivalent stopping 
distance 646 feet), as applicable, when the inoperative unit is depleted 
of all reserve capacity.
    S5.1.3.3 Brake power units. The service brakes of a vehicle equipped 
with one or more brake power units with an accumulator-type reserve 
system, with any one failure in any one unit shall be capable of 
stopping the vehicle from 60 mph--
    (a) In 10 consecutive stops at an average deceleration for each stop 
that is not lower than that specified in column II of table III, when 
the unit is not initially depleted of all reserve capability; and
    (b) In a final stop, at an average deceleration that is not lower 
than 7 FPSPS for passenger cars (equivalent stopping distance 554 feet) 
or 6 FPSPS for vehicles other than passenger cars (equivalent stopping 
distance 646 feet), as applicable, when the inoperative unit is depleted 
of all reserve capacity.
    S5.1.3.4 Brake power assist and brake power units. The service 
brakes of a vehicle equipped with one or more brake power assist units 
or brake power units with a backup system, with one brake power assist 
unit or brake power unit inoperative and depleted of all reserve 
capability and with only the backup system operating in the failed 
subsystem, shall be capable of stopping the vehicle from 60 mph in 15 
consecutive stops at an average deceleration for each stop that is not 
lower than 12 fpsps (equivalent stopping distance 323 feet).
    S5.1.3.5 Electric brakes. Each vehicle with electrically-actuated 
service brakes (brake power unit) shall comply with the requirements of 
S5.1.3.1 with any single electrical failure in the electrically-actuated 
service brakes and all other systems intact.
    S5.1.4 Fade and recovery. The service brakes shall be capable of 
stopping

[[Page 308]]

each vehicle in two fade and recovery tests as specified below.
    S5.1.4.1 The control force used for the baseline check stops or 
snubs shall be not less than 10 pounds, nor more than 60 pounds, except 
that the control force for a vehicle with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or 
more may be between 10 pounds and 90 pounds.
    S5.1.4.2 (a) Each vehicle with GVWR of 10,000 lbs or less shall be 
capable of making 5 fade stops (10 fade stops on the second test) from 
60 mph at a deceleration not lower than 15 fpsps for each stop, followed 
by 5 fade stops at the maximum deceleration attainable from 5 to 15 
fpsps.
    (b) Each vehicle with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds shall be 
capable of making 10 fade snubs (20 fade snubs on the second test) from 
40 mph to 20 mph at 10 fpsps for each snub.
    S5.1.4.3 (a) Each vehicle with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less shall 
be capable of making five recovery stops from 30 mph at 10 fpsps for 
each stop, with a control force application that falls within the 
following maximum and minimum limits:
    (1) A maximum for the first four recovery stops of 150 pounds, and 
for the fifth stop, of 20 pounds more than the average control force for 
the baseline check; and
    (2) A minimum of--
    (A) The average control force for the baseline check minus 10 
pounds, or
    (B) The average control force for the baseline check times 0.60,

whichever is lower (but in no case lower than 5 pounds).
    (b) Each vehicle with a GVWR of more than 10,000 pounds shall be 
capable of making five recovery snubs from 40 mph to 20 mph at 10 fpsps 
for each snub, with a control force application that falls within the 
following maximum and minimum limits:
    (1) A maximum for the first four recovery snubs of 150 pounds, and 
for the fifth snub, of 20 pounds more than the average control force for 
the baseline check (but in no case more than 100 pounds); and
    (2) A minimum of--
    (A) The average control force for the baseline check minus 10 
pounds, or
    (B) The average control force for the baseline check times 0.60,

whichever is lower (but in no case lower than 5 pounds).
    S5.1.5 Water recovery. The service brakes shall be capable of 
stopping each vehicle in a water recovery test, as specified below.
    S5.1.5.1 The control force used for the baseline check stops or 
snubs shall be not less than 10 pounds, nor more than 60 pounds, except 
that the control force for a vehicle with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or 
more may be between 10 and 90 pounds.
    S5.1.5.2(a) After being driven for 2 minutes at a speed of 5 mph in 
any combination of forward and reverse directions through a trough 
having a water dept of 6 inches, each vehicle with a GVWR of 10,000 
pounds or less shall be capable of making five recovery stops from 30 
mph at ten fpsps for each stop with a control force application that 
falls within the following maximum and minimum limits:
    (1) A maximum for the first four recovery stops of 150 pounds, and 
for the fifth stop, of 45 pounds more than the average control force for 
the baseline check (but in no case more than 90 pounds, except that the 
maximum control force for the fifth stop in the case of a vehicle 
manufactured before September 1, 1976, shall be not more than plus 60 
pounds of the average control force for the baseline check (but in no 
case more than 110 pounds).
    (2) A minimum of--
    (A) The average control force for the baseline check minus 10 
pounds, or
    (B) The average control force for the baseline check times 0.60,

whichever is lower (but in no case lower than 5 pounds).
    (b) After being driven for 2 minutes at a speed of 5 mph in any 
combination of forward and reverse directions through a trough having a 
water depth of 6 inches, each vehicle with a GVWR of more than 10,000 
pounds shall be capable of making five recovery stops from 30 mph at 10 
fpsps for each stop with a control force application that falls within 
the following maximum and minimum limits:
    (1) A maximum for the first four recovery stops of 150 pounds, and 
for the fifth stop, of 60 pounds more than the average control force for 
the baseline

[[Page 309]]

check (but in no case more than 110 pounds); and
    (2) A minimum of--
    (A) The average control force for the baseline check minus 10 
pounds, or
    (B) The average control force for the baseline check times 0.60,

whichever is lower (but in no case lower than 5 pounds).
    S5.1.6 Spike stops. Each vehicle with a GVWR of 10,000 lbs. or less 
shall be capable of making 10 spike stops from 30 mph, followed by 6 
effectiveness (check) stops from 60 mph, at least one of which shall be 
within a corresponding stopping distance specified in column I of table 
II.
    S5.1.7 Stability and control during braking. When stopped four 
consecutive times under the conditions specified in S6, each vehicle 
with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds manufactured on or after July 1, 
2005 and each vehicle with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds 
manufactured in two or more stages on or after July 1, 2006 shall stop 
from 30 mph or 75 percent of the maximum drive-through speed, whichever 
is less, at least three times within the 12-foot lane, without any part 
of the vehicle leaving the roadway. Stop the vehicle with the vehicle at 
its lightly loaded vehicle weight, or at the manufacturer's option, at 
its lightly loaded vehicle weight plus not more than an additional 1000 
pounds for a roll bar structure on the vehicle.
    S5.2 Parking Brake System. Each vehicle shall be manufactured with a 
parking brake system of a friction type with a solely mechanical means 
to retain engagement, which shall under the conditions of S6, when 
tested according to the procedures specified in S7, meet the 
requirements specified in S5.2.1, S5.2.2, or S5.2.3 as appropriate, with 
the system engaged--
    (a) In the case of a vehicle with a GVWR of 4,536 kilograms (10,000 
pounds) or less, with a force applied to the control not to exceed 125 
pounds for a foot-operated system and 90 pounds for a hand-operated 
system; and
    (b) In the case of a vehicle with a GVWR greater than 4,536 
kilograms (10,000 pounds), with a force applied to the control not to 
exceed 150 pounds for a foot-operated system and 125 pounds for a hand-
operated system.
    S5.2.1. Except as provided in Sec. 5.2.2, the parking brake system 
on a passenger car and on a school bus with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or 
less shall be capable of holding the vehicle stationary (to the limit of 
traction on the braked wheels) for 5 minutes in both a forward and 
reverse direction on a 30 percent grade.
    S5.2.2 A vehicle of a type described in S5.2.1 at the option of the 
manufacturer may meet the requirements of S5.2.2.1, S5.2.2.2, and 
S5.2.2.3 instead of the requirements of S5.2.1 if:
    (a) The vehicle has a transmission or transmission control which 
incorporates a parking mechanism, and
    (b) The parking mechanism must be engaged before the ignition key 
can be removed.
    S5.2.2.1 The vehicle's parking brake and parking mechanism, when 
both are engaged, shall be capable of holding the vehicle stationary (to 
the limit of traction of the braked wheels) for 5 minutes, in both 
forward and reverse directions, on a 30 percent grade.
    S5.2.2.2 The vehicle's parking brake, with the parking mechanism not 
engaged, shall be capable of holding the vehicle stationary for 5 
minutes, in both forward and reverse directions, on a 20 percent grade.
    S5.2.2.3 With the parking mechanism engaged and the parking brake 
not engaged, the parking mechanism shall not disengage or fracture in a 
manner permitting vehicle movement, when the vehicle is impacted at each 
end, on a level surface, by a barrier moving at 2\1/2\ mph.
    S5.2.3 (a) The parking brake system on a multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, truck or bus (other than a school bus) with a GVWR of 4,536 
kilograms (10,000 pounds) or less shall be capable of holding the 
vehicle stationary for 5 minutes, in both forward and reverse 
directions, on a 20 percent grade.
    (b) The parking brake system on a multipurpose passenger vehicle, 
truck, or bus (including a school bus) with a GVWR greater than 4,536 
kilograms (10,000 pounds) shall be capable of holding the vehicle 
stationary for 5 minutes, in both forward and reverse directions, on a 
20 percent grade.
    S5.3 Brake system indicator lamp. Each vehicle shall have a brake 
system

[[Page 310]]

indicator lamp or lamps, mounted in front of and in clear view of the 
driver, which meet the requirements of S5.3.1 through S5.3.5. A vehicle 
with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less may have a single common indicator 
lamp. A vehicle with a GVWR of greater than 10,000 pounds may have an 
indicator lamp which is common for gross loss of pressure, drop in the 
level of brake fluid, or application of the parking brake, but shall 
have a separate indicator lamp for antilock brake system malfunction. 
However, the options provided in S5.3.1(a) shall not apply to a vehicle 
manufactured without a split service brake system; such a vehicle shall, 
to meet the requirements of S5.3.1(a), be equipped with a malfunction 
indicator that activates under the conditions specified in S5.3.1(a)(4). 
This warning indicator shall, instead of meeting the requirements of 
S5.3.2 through S5.3.5, activate (while the vehicle remains capable of 
meeting the requirements of S5.1.2.2 and the ignition switch is in the 
``on'' position) a continuous or intermittent audible signal and a 
flashing warning light, displaying the words ``STOP-BRAKE FAILURE'' in 
block capital letters not less than one-quarter of an inch in height.
    S5.3.1 An indicator lamp shall be activated when the ignition 
(start) switch is in the ``on'' (``run'') position and whenever any of 
the conditions (a) or (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), and (g) occur:
    (a) A gross loss of pressure (such as caused by rupture of a brake 
line but not by a structural failure of a housing that is common to two 
or more subsystems) due to one of the following conditions (chosen at 
the option of the manufacturer):
    (1) Before or upon application of a differential pressure of not 
more than 225 lb/in\2\ between the active and failed brake system 
measured at a master cylinder outlet or a slave cylinder outlet.
    (2) Before or upon application of 50 pounds of control force upon a 
fully manual service brake.
    (3) Before or upon application of 25 pounds of control force upon a 
service brake with a brake power assist unit.
    (4) When the supply pressure in a brake power unit drops to a level 
not less than one-half of the normal system pressure.
    (b) A drop in the level of brake fluid in any master cylinder 
reservoir compartment to less than the recommended safe level specified 
by the manufacturer or to one-fourth of the fluid capacity of that 
reservoir compartment, whichever is greater.
    (c) A malfunction that affects the generation or transmission of 
response or control signals in an antilock brake system, or a total 
functional electrical failure in a variable proportioning brake system.
    (d) Application of the parking brake.
    (e) For a vehicle with electrically-actuated service brakes, failure 
of the source of electric power to the brakes, or diminution of state of 
charge of the batteries to less than a level specified by the 
manufacturer for the purpose of warning a driver of degraded brake 
performance.
    (f) For a vehicle with electric transmission of the service brake 
control signal, failure of a brake control circuit.
    (g) For an EV with RBS that is part of the service brake system, 
failure of the RBS.
    S5.3.2 (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, all 
indicator lamps shall be activated as a check of lamp function either 
when the ignition (start) switch is turned to the ``on'' (run) position 
when the engine is not running, or when the ignition (start) switch is 
in a position between ``on'' (run) and ``start'' that is designated by 
the manufacturer as a check position.
    (b) The indicator lamps need not be activated when a starter 
interlock is in operation.
    S5.3.3 (a) Each indicator lamp activated due to a condition 
specified in S5.3.1 shall remain activated as long as the malfunction 
exists, whenever the ignition (start) switch is in the ``on'' (run) 
position, whether or not the engine is running.
    (b) For vehicles manufactured on and after September 1, 1999 with 
GVWRs greater than 10,000 lbs, each message about the existence of a 
malfunction, as described in S5.3.1(c), shall be stored in the antilock 
brake system after the ignition switch is turned to the ``off'' position 
and the indicator lamp shall

[[Page 311]]

be automatically reactivated when the ignition switch is again turned to 
the ``on'' position. The indicator lamp shall also be activated as a 
check of lamp function whenever the ignition is turned to the ``on'' 
(run) position. The indicator lamp shall be deactivated at the end of 
the check of lamp function unless there is a malfunction or a message 
about a malfunction that existed when the key switch was last turned to 
the ``off'' position.
    S5.3.4 When an indicator lamp is activated it may be steady burning 
or flashing.
    S5.3.5 (a) Each indicator lamp shall display word, words or 
abbreviation, in accordance with the requirements of Standard No. 101 
(49 CFR 571.101) and/or this section, which shall have letters not less 
than \1/8\-inch high and be legible to the driver in daylight when 
lighted. Words in addition to those required by Standard No. 101 and/or 
this section and symbols may be provided for purposes of clarity.
    (b) If a single common indicator is used, the lamp shall display the 
word ``Brake''. The letters and background of a single common indicator 
shall be of contrasting colors, one of which is red.
    (c)(1) If separate indicators are used for one or more of the 
conditions described in S5.3.1(a) through S5.3.1(g) of this standard, 
the indicator display shall include the word ``Brake'' and appropriate 
additional labeling, except as provided in (c)(1) (A) through (D) of 
this paragraph.
    (A) If a separate indicator lamp is provided for gross loss of 
pressure, the words ``Brake Pressure'' shall be used for S5.3.1(a).
    (B) If a separate indicator lamp is provided for low brake fluid, 
the words ``Brake Fluid'' shall be used for S5.3.1(b), except for 
vehicles using hydraulic system mineral oil.
    (C) If a separate indicator lamp is provided for an anti-lock 
system, the single word ``Antilock'' or ``Anti-lock'', or the 
abbreviation ``ABS'', may be used for S5.3.1(c).
    (D) If a separate indicator lamp is provided for application of the 
parking brake, the single word ``Park'' may be used for S5.3.1(d).
    (E) If a separate indicator is used for the regenerative brake 
system, the symbol ``RBS'' may be used. RBS failure may also be 
indicated by a lamp displaying the symbol ``ABS/RBS.''
    (2) Except for a separate indicator lamp for an anti-lock system, a 
regenerative system, or an indicator for both anti-lock and regenerative 
system, the letters and background of each separate indicator lamp shall 
be of contrasting colors, one of which is red. The letters and 
background of a separate lamp for an anti-lock system, a regenerative 
system, or a lamp displaying both an anti-lock and a regenerative system 
shall be of contrasting colors, one of which is yellow.
    S5.4 Reservoirs.
    S5.4.1 Master cylinder reservoirs. A master cylinder shall have a 
reservoir compartment for each service brake subsystem serviced by the 
master cylinder. Loss of fluid from one compartment shall not result in 
a complete loss of brake fluid from another compartment.
    S5.4.2 Reservoir capacity. Reservoirs, whether for master cylinders 
or other type systems, shall have a total minimum capacity equivalent to 
the fluid displacement resulting when all the wheel cylinders or caliper 
pistons serviced by the reservoirs move from a new lining, fully 
retracted position (as adjusted initially to the manufacturer's 
recommended setting) to a fully worn, fully applied position, as 
determined in accordance with S7.18(c) of this standard. Reservoirs 
shall have completely separate compartments for each subsystem except 
that in reservoir systems utilizing a portion of the reservoir for a 
common supply to two or more subsystems, individual partial compartments 
shall each have a minimum volume of fluid equal to at least the volume 
displaced by the master cylinder piston servicing the subsystem, during 
a full stroke of the piston. Each brake power unit reservoir servicing 
only the brake system shall have a minimum capacity equivalent to the 
fluid displacement required to charge the system piston(s) or 
accumulator(s) to normal operating pressure plus the displacement 
resulting when

[[Page 312]]

all the wheel cylinders or caliper pistons serviced by the reservoir or 
accumulator(s) move from a new lining fully retracted position (as 
adjusted initially to the manufacturer's recommended setting) to a fully 
worn, fully applied position.
    S5.4.3 Reservoir labeling--Each vehicle equipped with hydraulic 
brakes shall have a brake fluid warning statement that reads as follows, 
in letters at least one-eighth of an inch high: ``WARNING, Clean filler 
cap before removing. Use only ------ fluid from a sealed container.'' 
(Inserting the recommended type of brake fluid as specified in 49 CFR 
571.116, e.g., ``DOT 3''). The lettering shall be--
    (a) Permanently affixed, engraved, or embossed;
    (b) Located so as to be visible by direct view, either on or within 
4 inches of the brake fluid reservoir filler plug or cap; and
    (c) Of a color that contrasts with its background, if it is not 
engraved or embossed.
    S5.5 Antilock and variable proportioning brake systems.
    S5.5.1 Each vehicle with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds, except 
for any vehicle with a speed attainable in 2 miles of not more than 33 
mph, shall be equipped with an antilock brake system that directly 
controls the wheels of at least one front axle and the wheels of at 
least one rear axle of the vehicle. On each vehicle with a GVWR greater 
than 10,000 pounds but not greater than 19,500 pounds and motor homes 
with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds but not greater than 22,500 
pounds manufactured before March 1, 2001, the antilock brake system may 
also directly control the wheels of the rear drive axle by means of a 
single sensor in the driveline. Wheels on other axles of the vehicle may 
be indirectly controlled by the antilock brake system.
    S5.5.2 In the event of any failure (structural or functional) in an 
antilock or variable proportioning brake system, the vehicle shall be 
capable of meeting the stopping distance requirements specified in 
S5.1.2 for service brake system partial failure. For an EV that is 
equipped with both ABS and RBS that is part of the service brake system, 
the ABS must control the RBS.
    S5.6 Brake system integrity. Each vehicle shall be capable of 
completing all performance requirements of S5 without--
    (a) Detachment or fracture of any component of the braking system, 
such as brake springs and brake shoe or disc pad facing, other than 
minor cracks that do not impair attachment of the friction facing. All 
mechanical components of the braking system shall be intact and 
functional. Friction facing tearout (complete detachment of lining) 
shall not exceed 10 percent of the lining on any single frictional 
element.
    (b) Any visible brake fluid or lubricant on the friction surface of 
the brake, or leakage at the master cylinder or brake power unit 
reservoir cover, seal and filler openings.
    S6 Test conditions. The performance requirements of S5 shall be met 
under the following conditions. Where a range of conditions is 
specified, the vehicle shall be capable of meeting the requirements at 
all points within the range. Compliance of vehicles manufactured in two 
or more stages may, at the option of the final-stage manufacturer, be 
demonstrated to comply with this standard by adherence to the 
instructions of the incomplete manufacturer provided with the vehicle in 
accordance with Sec. 568.4(a)(7)(ii) and Sec. 568.5 of title 49 of the 
Code of Federal Regulations.
    S6.1 Vehicle weight.
    S6.1.1 Other than tests specified at lightly loaded vehicle weight 
in S7.5(a), S7.7, S7.8, and S7.9, the vehicle is loaded to its GVWR such 
that the weight on each axle as measured at the tire-ground interface is 
in proportion to its GAWR, except that each fuel tank is filled to any 
level from 100 percent of capacity (corresponding to full GVWR) to 75 
percent. However, if the weight on any axle of a vehicle at lightly 
loaded vehicle weight exceeds the axle's proportional share of the gross 
vehicle weight rating, the load required to reach GVWR is placed so that 
the weight on that axle remains the same as a lightly loaded vehicle 
weight.
    S6.1.2 For applicable tests specified in S7.5(a), S7.7, S7.8, and 
S7.9, vehicle weight is lightly loaded vehicle weight,

[[Page 313]]

with the added weight, except for the roll bar structure allowed for 
trucks and buses with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds, distributed in 
the front passenger seat area in passenger cars, multipurpose passenger 
vehicles, and trucks, and in the area adjacent to the driver's seat in 
buses.
    S6.2 Electric vehicles and electric brakes.
    S6.2.1 The state of charge of the propulsion batteries is determined 
in accordance with SAE Recommended Practice J227a, Electric Vehicle Test 
Procedure, February 1976. The applicable sections of J227a are 3.2.1 
through 3.2.4, 3.3.1 through 3.3.2.2, 3.4.1 and 3.4.2, 4.2.1, 5.2, 
5.2.1, and 5.3.
    S6.2.2 At the beginning of the first effectiveness test specified in 
S7.3, and at the beginning of each burnishing procedure, each EV's 
propulsion battery is at the maximum state of charge recommended by the 
manufacturer, as stated in the vehicle operator's manual or on a label 
that is permanently attached to the vehicle, or, if the manufacturer has 
made no recommendation, at a state of charge of not less than 95 
percent. If a battery is replaced rather than recharged, the replacement 
battery is to be charged and measured for state of charge in accordance 
with these procedures. During each burnish procedure, each propulsion 
battery is restored to the recommended state of charge or a state of 
charge of not less than 95 percent after each increment of 40 burnish 
stops until each burnish procedure is complete. The batteries may be 
charged at a more frequent interval if, during a particular 40-stop 
increment, the EV is incapable of achieving the initial burnish test 
speed. During each burnish procedure, the propulsion batteries may be 
charged by an external means or replaced by batteries that are charged 
to the state of charge recommended by the manufacturer or a state of 
charge of not less than 95 percent. For EVs having a manual control for 
setting the level of regenerative braking, the manual control, at the 
beginning of each burnish procedure, is set to provide maximum 
regenerative braking throughout the burnish.
    S6.2.3 At the beginning of each performance test in the test 
sequence (S7,3, S7.5, S7.7 through S7.11, and S7.13 through S7.19 of 
this standard), unless otherwise specified, each propulsion battery of 
an EV is at the maximum state of charge recommended by the manufacturer, 
as stated in the vehicle operator's manual or on a label that is 
permanently attached to the vehicle, or, if the manufacturer has made no 
recommendation, at a state of charge of not less than 95 percent. If 
batteries are replaced rather than recharged, each replacement battery 
shall be charged and measured for state of charge in accordance with 
these procedures. No further charging of any propulsion battery occurs 
during any of the performance tests in the test sequence of this 
standard. If the propulsion batteries are depleted during a test 
sequence such that the vehicle reaches automatic shut-down, will not 
accelerate, or the low state of charge warning lamp is illuminated, the 
vehicle is to be accelerated to brake test speed by auxiliary means.
    S6.2.4 (a) For an EV equipped with RBS, the RBS is considered to be 
part of the service brake system if it is automatically controlled by an 
application of the service brake control, if there is no means provided 
for the driver to disconnect or otherwise deactivate it, and if it is 
activated in all transmission positions, including neutral. The RBS is 
operational during all burnishes and all tests, except for the test of a 
failed RBS.
    (b) For an EV equipped with an RBS that is not part of the service 
brake system, the RBS is operational and set to produce the maximum 
regenerative braking effect during the burnishes, and is disabled during 
the test procedures. If the vehicle is equipped with a neutral gear that 
automatically disables the RBS, the test procedures which are designated 
to be conducted in gear may be conducted in neutral.
    S6.2.5 For tests conducted ``in neutral,'' the operator of an EV 
with no ``neutral'' position (or other means such as a clutch for 
disconnecting the drive train from the propulsion motor(s)) does not 
apply any electromotive force to the propulsion motor(s). Any 
electromotive force that is applied to the propulsion motor(s) 
automatically remains in effect unless

[[Page 314]]

otherwise specified by the test procedure.
    S6.2.6 A vehicle equipped with electrically-actuated service brakes 
also performs the following test series. Conduct 10 stopping tests from 
a speed of 100 kph or the maximum vehicle speed, whichever is less. At 
least two of the 10 stopping distances must be less than or equal to 70 
meters. The vehicle is loaded to GVWR for these tests and the 
transmission is in the neutral position when the service brake control 
is actuated and throughout the remainder of the test. The battery or 
batteries providing power to those electrically-actuated brakes, at the 
beginning of each test, shall be in a depleted state of charge for 
conditions (a), (b), or (c) of this paragraph as appropriate. An 
auxiliary means may be used to accelerate an EV to test speed.
    (a) For an EV equipped with electrically-actuated service brakes 
deriving power from the propulsion batteries, and with automatic shut-
down capability of the propulsion motor(s), the propulsion batteries are 
at not more than five percent above the EV actual automatic shut-down 
critical value. The critical value is determined by measuring the state-
of-charge of each propulsion battery at the instant that automatic shut-
down occurs and averaging the states-of-charge recorded.
    (b) For an EV equipped with electrically-actuated service brakes 
deriving power from the propulsion batteries, and with no automatic 
shut-down capability of the propulsion motor(s), the propulsion 
batteries are at an average of not more than five percent above the 
actual state of charge at which the brake failure warning signal, 
required by S5.3.1(e) of this standard, is illuminated.
    (c) For a vehicle which has an auxiliary battery (or batteries) that 
provides electrical energy to operate the electrically-actuated service 
brakes, the auxiliary battery(batteries) is (are) at (at an average of) 
not more than five percent above the actual state of charge at which the 
brake failure warning signal, required by S5.3.1(e) of this standard, is 
illuminated.
    S6.3 Tire inflation pressure. Tire inflation pressure is the 
pressure recommended by the vehicle manufacturer for the GVWR of the 
vehicle.
    S6.4 Transmission selector control. For S7.3, S7.5, S7.8, S7.15, 
S7.17, S7.11.1.2, S7.11.2.2, S7.11.3.2, and as required for S7.13, the 
transmission selector control is in neutral for all decelerations. For 
all other tests during all decelerations, the transmission selector is 
in the control position, other than overdrive, recommended by the 
manufacturer for driving on a level surface at the applicable test 
speed. To avoid engine stall during tests required to be run in gear a 
manual transmission may be shifted to neutral (or the clutch disengaged) 
when the vehicle speed decreases to 20 mph.
    S6.5 Engine. Engine idle speed and ignition timing settings are 
according to the manufacturer's recommendations. If the vehicle is 
equipped with an adjustable engine speed governor, it is adjusted 
according to the manufacturer's recommendation.
    S6.6 Vehicle openings. All vehicle openings (doors, windows, hood, 
trunk, convertible top, cargo doors, etc.) are closed except as required 
for instrumentation purposes.
    S6.7 Ambient temperature. The ambient temperature is any temperature 
between 32 [deg]F. and 100 [deg]F.
    S6.8 Wind velocity. The wind velocity is zero.
    S6.9 Road surface.
    S6.9.1 For vehicles with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less, road tests 
are conducted on a 12-foot-wide, level roadway, having a skid number of 
81. Burnish stops are conducted on any surface. The parking brake test 
surface is clean, dry, smooth, Portland cement concrete.
    S6.9.2(a) For vehicles with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds, road 
tests (excluding stability and control during braking tests) are 
conducted on a 12-foot-wide, level roadway, having a peak friction 
coefficient of 0.9 when measured using an American Society for Testing 
and Materials (ASTM) E 1136 standard reference test tire, in accordance 
with ASTM Method E 1337-90, at a speed of 40 mph, without water 
delivery. Burnish stops are conducted on any surface. The parking brake 
test surface is clean, dry, smooth, Portland cement concrete.

[[Page 315]]

    S6.9.2(b) For vehicles with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds, 
stability and control during braking tests are conducted on a 500-foot-
radius curved roadway with a wet level surface having a peak friction 
coefficient of 0.5 when measured on a straight or curved section of the 
curved roadway using an American Society for Testing and Materials 
(ASTM) E1136 standard reference tire, in accordance with ASTM Method 
E1337-90, at a speed of 40 mph, with water delivery.
    S6.10 Vehicle position and wheel lockup restrictions. The vehicle is 
aligned in the center of the roadway at the start of each brake 
application. Stops, other than spike stops, are made without any part of 
the vehicle leaving the roadway.
    S6.10.1 For vehicles with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less, stops are 
made with wheel lockup permitted only as follows:
    (a) At vehicle speeds above 10 mph, there may be controlled wheel 
lockup on an antilock-equipped axle, and lockup of not more than one 
wheel per vehicle, uncontrolled by an antilock system. (Dual wheels on 
one side of an axle are considered a single wheel.)
    (b) At vehicle speeds of 10 mph or less, any wheel may lock up for 
any duration.
    (c) Unlimited wheel lockup is allowed during spike stops (but not 
spike check stops), partial failure stops, and inoperative brake power 
or power assist unit stops.
    S6.10.2 For vehicles with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds, stops 
are made with wheel lockup permitted only as follows:
    (a) At vehicle speeds above 20 mph, any wheel on a nonsteerable axle 
other than the two rearmost nonliftable, nonsteerable axles may lock up 
for any duration. The wheels on the two rearmost nonliftable, 
nonsteerable axles may lock up according to (b).
    (b) At vehicle speeds above 20 mph, one wheel on any axle or two 
wheels on any tandem may lock up for any duration.
    (c) At vehicle speeds above 20 mph, any wheel not permitted to lock 
in (a) or (b) may lock up repeatedly, with each lockup occurring for a 
duration of one second or less.
    (d) At vehicle speeds of 20 mph or less, any wheel may lock up for 
any duration.
    (e) Unlimited wheel lockup is allowed during partial failure stops, 
and inoperative brake power or power assist stops.
    S6.11 Thermocouples. The brake temperature is measured by plug-type 
thermocouples installed in the approximate center of the facing length 
and width of the most heavily loaded shoe or disc pad, one per brake, as 
shown in figure 1. A second thermocouple may be installed at the 
beginning of the test sequence if the lining wear is expected to reach a 
point causing the first thermocouple to contact the metal rubbing 
surface of a drum or rotor. For centergrooved shoes or pads, 
thermocouples are installed within one-eighth of an inch to one-quarter 
inch of the groove and as close to the center as possible.
    S6.12 Initial brake temperature. Unless otherwise specified the 
brake temperature is 150 [deg]F. to 200 [deg]F.
    S6.13 Control forces. Unless otherwise specified, the force applied 
to a brake control is not less than 15 lb and not more than 150 lb.
    S6.14 Special drive conditions. A vehicle with a GVWR greater than 
10,000 pounds equipped with an interlocking axle system or a front wheel 
drive system that is engaged and disengaged by the driver is tested with 
the system disengaged.
    S6.15 Selection of compliance options. Where manufacturer options 
are specified, the manufacturer shall select the option by the time it 
certifies the vehicle and may not thereafter select a different option 
for the vehicle. Each manufacturer shall, upon request from the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, provide information regarding 
which of the compliance options it has selected for a particular vehicle 
or make/model.
    S7. Test procedure and sequence. Each vehicle shall be capable of 
meeting all the applicable requirements of S5 when tested according to 
the procedures and sequence set forth below, without replacing any brake 
system part or making any adjustments to the brake system other than as 
permitted

[[Page 316]]

in the burnish and reburnish procedures and in S7.9 and S7.10. (For 
vehicles only having to meet the requirements of S5.1.1, S5.1.2, S5.1.3, 
and S5.1.7 in section S5.1, the applicable test procedures and sequence 
are S7.1, S7.2, S7.4, S7.5(b), S7.5(a), S7.8, S7.9, S7.10, and S7.18. 
However, at the option of the manufacturer, the following test procedure 
and sequence may be conducted: S7.1, S7.2, S7.3, S7.4, S7.5(b), S7.6, 
S7.7, S7.5(a), S7.8, S7.9, S7.10, and S7.18. The choice of this option 
must not be construed as adding to the requirements specified in S5.1.2 
and S5.1.3.) Automatic adjusters must remain activated at all times. A 
vehicle shall be deemed to comply with the stopping distance 
requirements of S5.1 if at least one of the stops at each speed and load 
specified in each of S7.3, S7.5(b), S7.8, S7.9, S7.10, S7.15 and S7.17 
(check stops) is made within a stopping distance that does not exceed 
the corresponding distance specified in Table II. When the transmission 
selector control is required to be in neutral for a deceleration, a stop 
or snub must be obtained by the following procedures:
    (a) Exceed the test speed by 4 to 8 mph;
    (b) Close the throttle and coast in gear to approximately 2 mph 
above the test speed;
    (c) Shift to neutral; and
    (d) When the test speed is reached, apply the service brakes.
    S7.1 Brake warming. If the initial brake temperature for the first 
stop in a test procedure (other than S7.7 and S7.16) has not been 
reached, heat the brakes to the initial brake temperature by making not 
more than 10 snubs from not more than 40 to 10 mph, at a deceleration 
not greater than 10 fpsps.
    S7.2 Pretest instrumentation check. Conduct a general check of 
instrumentation by making not more than 10 stops from a speed of not 
more than 30 mph, or 10 snubs from a speed of not more than 40 to 10 
mph, at a deceleration of not more than 10 fpsps. If instrument repair, 
replacement, or adjustment is necessary, make not more than 10 
additional stops or snubs after such repair, replacement, or adjustment.
    S7.3 Service brake system--first (preburnish) effectiveness test. 
Make six stops from 30 mph. Then make six stops from 60 mph.
    S7.4 Service brake system--burnish procedure.
    S7.4.1 Vehicles with GVWR of 10,000 lb or less.
    S7.4.1.1 Burnish. Burnish the brakes by making 200 stops from 40 mph 
at 12 fpsps (the 150 lb control force limit does not apply here). The 
interval from the start of one service brake application to the start of 
the next shall be either the time necessary to reduce the initial brake 
temperature to between 230 [deg]F. and 270 [deg]F., or the distance of 1 
mile, whichever occurs first. Accelerate to 40 mph after each stop and 
maintain that speed until making the next stop.
    S7.4.1.2 Brake adjustment--post burnish. After burnishing, adjust 
the brakes in accordance with the manufacturer's published 
recommendations.
    S7.4.2 Vehicles with GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds.
    S7.4.2.1 Burnish. Vehicles are burnished according to the following 
procedures. Make 500 snubs between 40 mph and 20 mph at a deceleration 
rate of 10 f.p.s.p.s. Except where an adjustment is specified, after 
each brake application accelerate to 40 mph and maintain that speed 
until making the next brake application at a point 1 mile from the 
initial point of the previous brake application. If the vehicle cannot 
attain a speed of 40 mph in 1 mph, continue to accelerate until the 
vehicle reaches 40 mph or until the vehicle has traveled 1.5 miles from 
the initial point of the previous brake application, whichever occurs 
first. The brakes shall be adjusted three times during the burnish 
procedure, in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations, after 
125, 250, and 375 snubs.
    S7.4.2.2 Brake adjustment--post burnish. After burnishing, adjust 
the brakes in accordance with the manufacturer's published 
recommendations.
    S7.5 (a) Stability and control during braking (vehicles with a GVWR 
greater than 10,000 pounds). Make four stops in the lightly-loaded 
weight condition specified in S5.1.7. Use a full brake application for 
the duration of the stop, with the clutch pedal depressed or the 
transmission selector control in the

[[Page 317]]

neutral position, for the duration of each stop.
    (b) Service brake system--second effectiveness test. For vehicles 
with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less, or any school bus, make six stops 
from 30 mph. Then, for any vehicle, make six stops from 60 mph. Then, 
for a vehicle with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less, make four stops from 
80 mph if the speed attainable in 2 miles is not less than 84 mph.
    S7.6 First reburnish. Repeat S7.4, except make 35 burnish stops or 
snubs. In the case of vehicles burnished in accordance with S7.4.2.1(a) 
of this section, reburnish the vehicle by making 35 snubs from 60 to 20 
mph, but if the hottest brake temperature reaches 500 [deg]F <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>50 [deg]F, make the remainder of the brake applications 
from the highest snub condition listed in Table IV that will maintain 
the hottest brake temperature at 500 [deg]F <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>50 
[deg]F. If at a snub condition of 40 to 20 mph, the temperature of the 
hottest brake exceeds 550 [deg]F, make the remainder of the 35 brake 
applications from the snub condition without regard to brake 
temperature.
    S7.7 Parking brake test. The parking brake tests for any vehicle on 
different grades, in different directions, and for different loads may 
be conducted in any order. The force required for actuation of a hand-
operated brake system shall be measured at the center of the hand grip 
area or at a distance of 1\1/2\ inches from the end of the actuation 
lever, as illustrated in Figure II.
    S7.7.1 Test procedure for requirements of S5.2.1 and S5.2.3.
    S7.7.1.1 Condition the parking brake friction elements so that the 
temperature at the beginning of the test is at any level not more than 
150 [deg]F. (when the temperature of components on both ends of an axle 
are averaged).
    S7.7.1.2 Drive the vehicle, loaded to GVWR, onto the specified grade 
with the longitudinal axis of the vehicle in the direction of the slope 
of the grade, stop the vehicle and hold it stationary by application of 
the service brake control, and place the transmission in neutral.
    S7.7.1.3 With the vehicle held stationary by means of the service 
brake control, apply the parking brake by a single application of the 
force specified in (a), (b), or (c) of this paragraph, except that a 
series of applications to achieve the specified force may be made in the 
case of a parking brake system design that does not allow the 
application of the specified force in a single application:
    (a) In the case of a passenger car or other vehicle with a GVWR of 
10,000 lbs. or less, not more than 125 pounds for a foot-operated 
system, and not more than 90 pounds for a hand-operated system; and
    (b) In the case of a vehicle with a GVWR greater than 4,536 
kilograms (10,000 pounds) not more than 150 pounds for a foot-operated 
system, and not more than 125 pounds for a hand-operated system.
    (c) For a vehicle using an electrically-activated parking brake, 
apply the parking brake by activating the parking brake control.
    S7.7.1.4 Following the application of the parking brake in 
accordance with S7.7.1.3, release all force on the service brake control 
and commence the measurement of time if the vehicle remains stationary. 
If the vehicle does not remain stationary, reapplication of the service 
brake to hold the vehicle stationary, with reapplication of a force to 
the parking brake control at the level specified in S7.7.1.3 (a) or (b) 
as appropriate for the vehicle being tested (without release of the 
ratcheting or other holding mechanism of the parking brake) may be used 
twice to attain a stationary position.
    S7.7.1.5 Following observation of the vehicle in a stationary 
condition for the specified time in one direction, repeat the same test 
procedure with the vehicle orientation in the opposite direction on the 
specified grade.
    S7.7.1.6 Check the operation of the parking brake application 
indicator required by S5.3.1(d).
    S7.7.2 Test procedure for requirements of S5.2.2 (a) Check that 
transmission must be placed in park position to release key;
    (b) Test as in S7.7.1, except in addition place the transmission 
control to engage the parking mechanism; and
    (c) Test as in S7.7.1 except on a 20 percent grade, with the parking 
mechanism not engaged.

[[Page 318]]

    S7.7.3 Lightly loaded vehicle. Repeat S7.7.1 or S7.7.2 as applicable 
except with the vehicle at lightly loaded vehicles weight or at 
manufacturer's option, for a vehicle with GVWR greater than 10,000 
pounds, at lightly loaded vehicle weight plus not more than an 
additional 1,000 pounds for a roll bar structure on the vehicle.
    S7.7.4 Non-service brake type parking brake systems. For vehicles 
with parking brake systems not utilizing the service brake friction 
elements, burnish the friction elements of such systems prior to parking 
brake tests according to the manufacturer's published recommendations as 
furnished to the purchaser. If no recommendations are furnished, run the 
vehicle in an unburnished condition.
    S7.8 Service brake system test--lightly loaded vehicle (third 
effectiveness) test. Make six stops from 60 mph with vehicle at lightly 
vehicle weight, or at the manufacturer's option for a vehicle with GVWR 
greater than 10,000 pounds, at lightly loaded vehicle weight plus not 
more than an additional 1,000 pounds for a roll bar structure on the 
vehicle. (This test is not applicable to a vehicle which has a GVWR of 
not less than 7,716 pounds and not greater than 10,000 pounds and is not 
a school bus.)
    S7.9 Service brake system test--partial failure.
    S7.9.1 With the vehicle at lightly loaded vehicle weight or at the 
manufacturer's option for a vehicle with a GVWR greater than 10,000 
pounds, at lightly loaded vehicle weight plus not more than an 
additional 1,000 pounds for a roll bar structure on the vehicle, alter 
the service brake system to produce any one rupture or leakage type of 
failure, other than a structural failure of a housing that is common to 
two or more subsystems. Determine the control force, pressure level, or 
fluid level (as appropriate for the indicator being tested) necessary to 
activate the brake system indicator lamp. Make four stops if the vehicle 
is equipped with a split service brake system, or 10 stops if the 
vehicle is not so equipped, each from 60 mph, by a continuous 
application of the service brake control. Restore the service brake 
system to normal at completion of this test.
    S7.9.2 Repeat S7.9.1 for each of the other subsystems.
    S7.9.3 Repeat S7.9.1 and S7.9.2 with vehicle at GVWR. Restore the 
service brake system to normal at completion of this test.
    S7.9.4 (For vehicles with antilock and/or variable proportioning 
brake systems.) With vehicle at GVWR, disconnect functional power 
source, or otherwise render antilock system inoperative. Disconnect 
variable proportioning brake system. Make four stops, each from 60 mph. 
If more than one antilock or variable proportioning brake subsystem is 
provided, disconnect or render one subsystem inoperative and run as 
above. Restore system to normal at completion of this test. Repeat for 
each subsystem provided.
    Determine whether the brake system indicator lamp is activated when 
the electrical power source to the antilock or variable proportioning 
unit is disconnected.
    S7.9.5 For a vehicle in which the brake signal is transmitted 
electrically between the brake pedal and some or all of the foundation 
brakes, regardless of the means of actuation of the foundation brakes, 
the tests in S7.9.1 through S7.9.3 of this standard are conducted by 
inducing any single failure in any circuit that electrically transmits 
the brake signal, and all other systems intact. Determine whether the 
brake system indicator lamp is activated when the failure is induced.
    S7.9.6 For an EV with RBS that is part of the service brake system, 
the tests specified in S7.9.1 through S7.9.3 are conducted with the RBS 
disconnected and all other systems intact. Determine whether the brake 
system indicator lamp is activated when the RBS is disconnected.
    S7.10 Service brake system--inoperative brake power unit or brake 
power assist unit test. (For vehicles equipped with brake power unit or 
brake power assist unit.)
    S7.10.1 Regular procedure. (This test need not be run if the option 
in S7.10.2 is selected.) On vehicles with brake power assist units, 
render the brake power assist unit inoperative, or one of the brake 
power assist unit subsystems

[[Page 319]]

if two or more subsystems are provided, by disconnecting the relevant 
power supply. Exhaust any residual brake power reserve capability of the 
disconnected system. On vehicles with brake power units, disconnect the 
primary source of power. Make four stops, each from 60 mph by a 
continuous application of the service brake control. Restore the system 
to normal at completion of this test. For vehicles equipped with more 
than one brake power unit or brake power assist unit, conduct tests of 
each in turn.
    S7.10.2 Optional Procedures. On vehicles with brake power assist 
units, the unit is charged to maximum prior to start of test. (Engine 
may be run up in speed, then throttle closed quickly to attain maximum 
charge on vacuum assist units.) Brake power units shall also be charged 
to maximum accumulator pressure prior to start of test. No recharging is 
allowed after start of test.
    (a) (For vehicles with brake power assist units.) Disconnect the 
primary source of power. Make six stops each from 60 mph, to achieve the 
average deceleration for each stop as specified in table III. Apply the 
brake control as quickly as possible. Maintain control force until 
vehicle has stopped.

At the completion of the stops specified above, deplete the system of 
any residual brake power reserve capability. Make one stop from 60 mph 
at an average deceleration of not lower than 7 fpsps for passenger cars 
(equivalent stopping distance 554 feet), or 6 fpsps for vehicles other 
than passenger cars (equivalent stopping distance 646 feet) and 
determine whether the control force exceeds 150 pounds.
    (b) (For vehicles with brake power units with accumulator type 
systems.) Test as in S7.10.2(a), except make 10 stops instead of 6 and, 
at the completion of the 10 stops, deplete the failed element of the 
brake power unit of any residual brake power reserve capability before 
making the final stop.
    (c) (For vehicles with brake power assist or brake power units with 
backup systems.) If the brake power or brake power assist unit operates 
in conjunction with a backup system and the backup system is activated 
automatically in the event of a primary power failure, the backup system 
is operative during this test. Disconnect the primary source of power of 
one subsystem. Make 15 stops, each from 60 mph, with the backup system 
activated for the failed subsystem, to achieve an average deceleration 
of 12 fpsps for each stop.
    (d) Restore systems to normal at completion of these tests. For 
vehicles equipped with more than one brakepower assist or brakepower 
unit, conduct tests of each in turn.
    S7.10.3 Electric brakes.
    (a) For vehicles with electrically-actuated service brakes, the 
tests in S7.10.1 or S7.10.2 are conducted with any single electrical 
failure in the electric brake system instead of the brake power or brake 
power assist systems, and all other systems intact.
    (b) For EVs with RBS that is part of the service brake system, the 
tests in S7.10.1 or S7.10.2 are conducted with the RBS discontinued and 
all other systems intact.
    S7.11 Service brake system--first fade and recovery test.
    S7.11.1 Baseline check stops or snubs.
    S7.11.1.1 Vehicles with GVWR of 10,000 lb or less. Make three stops 
from 30 mph at 10 fpsps for each stop. Control force readings may be 
terminated when vehicle speed falls to 5 mph. Average the maximum brake 
control force required for the three stops.
    S7.11.1.2 Vehicles with GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds. With 
transmission in neutral (or declutched), make three snubs from 40 to 20 
mph at 10 fpsps for each snub. Average the maximum brake control force 
required for the three snubs.
    S7.11.2 Fade stops or snubs.
    S7.11.2.1 Vehicles with GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less. Make 5 stops 
from 60 mph at 15 fpsps followed by 5 stops at the maximum attainable 
deceleration between 5 and 15 fpsps for each stop. Establish an initial 
brake temperature before the first brake application of 130[deg] to 150 
[deg]F. Initial brake temperatures before brake applications for 
subsequent stops are those occurring at the distance intervals. Attain 
the required deceleration within 1 second and, as a minimum, maintain it 
for the remainder of the stopping time. Control force readings may be 
terminated

[[Page 320]]

when vehicle speed falls to 5 mph. Leave an interval of 0.4 mi between 
the start of brake applications. Accelerate immediately to the initial 
test speed after each stop. Drive 1 mi at 30 mph after the last fade 
stop, and immediately follow the recovery procedure specified in 
S7.11.3.1.
    S7.11.2.2 Vehicles with GVWR greater than 10,000 lb. With 
transmission in neutral (or declutched) make 10 snubs from 40 to 20 mph 
at 10 fpsps for each snub. Establish an initial brake temperature before 
the first brake application of 130 [deg]F. to 150 [deg]F. Initial brake 
temperatures before brake application for subsequent snubs are those 
occurring in the time intervals specified below. Attain the required 
deceleration within 1 s and maintain it for the remainder of the 
snubbing time. Leave an interval of 30 s between snubs (start of brake 
application to start of brake application). Accelerate immediately to 
the initial test speed after each snub. Drive for 1.5 mi at 40 mph after 
the last snub and immediately follow the recovery procedure specified in 
S7.11.3.2.
    S7.11.3 Recovery stops or snubs.
    S7.11.3.1 Vehicles with GVWR of 10,000 lb or less. Make five stops 
from 30 mph at 10 fpsps for each stop. Control force readings may be 
terminated when vehicle speed falls to 5 mph. Allow a braking distance 
interval of 1 mi. Immediately after each stop accelerate at maximum rate 
to 30 mph and maintain that speed until making the next stop. Record the 
maximum control force for each stop.
    S7.11.3.2 Vehicles with GVWR greater than 10,000 lb. With 
transmission in neutral (or declutched) make five snubs from 40 to 20 
mph at 10 fpsps for each snub. After each snub, accelerate at maximum 
rate to 40 mph and maintain that speed until making the next brake 
application at a point 1.5 mi from the point of the previous brake 
application. Record the maximum control force for each snub.
    S7.12 Service brake system--second reburnish. Repeat S7.6.
    S7.13 Service brake system--second fade and recovery test. Repeat 
S7.11 except in S7.11.2 run 15 fade stops or 20 snubs instead of 10.
    S7.14 Third reburnish. Repeat S7.6.
    S7.15 Service brake system--fourth effectiveness test. Repeat S7.5. 
Then (for passenger cars) make four stops from either 95 mph if the 
speed attainable in 2 mi is 99 to (but not including) 104 mph, or 100 
mph if the speed attainable in 2 mi is 104 mph or greater.
    S7.16 Service brake system--water recovery test.
    S7.16.1 Baseline check stop. Make three stops from 30 mph at 10 
fpsps for each stop. Control force readings may be terminated when 
vehicle speed falls to 5 mph. Average the maximum brake control force 
required for the three stops.
    S7.16.2 Wet brake recovery stops. With the brakes fully released at 
all times, drive the vehicle for 2 min at a speed of 5 mph in any 
combination of forward and reverse directions, through a trough having a 
water depth of 6 in. After leaving the trough, immediately accelerate at 
a maximum rate to 30 mph without a brake application. Immediately upon 
reaching that speed make five stops, each from 30 mph at 10 fpsps for 
each stop. After each stop (except the last), accelerate the vehicle 
immediately at a maximum rate to a speed of 30 mph and begin the next 
stop.
    S7.17 Spike stops. Make 10 successive spike stops from 30 mph with 
the transmission in neutral, with no reverse stops. Make spike stops by 
applying a control force of 200 lb while recording control force versus 
time. Maintain control force until vehicle has stopped. At completion of 
10 spike stops, make six effectiveness stops from 60 mph.
    S7.18 Final inspection. Inspect--
    (a) The service brake system for detachment or fracture of any 
components, such as brake springs and brake shoes or disc pad facing.
    (b) The friction surface of the brake, the master cylinder or brake 
power unit reservoir cover and seal and filler openings, for leakage of 
brake fluid or lubricant.
    (c) The master cylinder or brake power unit reservoir for compliance 
with the volume and labeling requirements of S5.4.2 and S5.4.3. In 
determining the fully applied worn condition assume that the lining is 
worn to: (1) Rivet or bolt heads on riveted or bolted linings, or (2) 
within one thirty-

[[Page 321]]

seconds of an inch of shoe or pad mounting surface on bonded linings, or 
(3) the limit recommended by the manufacturer, whichever is larger 
relative to the total possible shoe or pad movement. Drums or rotors are 
assumed to be at nominal design drum diameter or rotor thickness. 
Linings are assumed adjusted for normal operating clearance in the 
released position.
    (d) The brake system indicator light(s), for compliance with 
operation in various key positions, lens color, labeling, and location, 
in accordance with S5.3.
    S7.19 Moving barrier test. (Only for vehicles that have been tested 
according to S7.7.2.) Load the vehicle to GVWR, release parking brake, 
and place the transmission selector control to engage the parking 
mechanism. With a moving barrier as described in paragraph 4.3 of SAE 
recommended practice J972 ``Moving Barrier Collision Tests,'' Nov. 1966 
(revised May 2000), impact the vehicle from the front at 2\1/2\ mph. 
This incorporation by reference was approved by the Director of the 
Federal Register in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. 
Copies may be obtained from the Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc., 
400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096-0001. Copies may be 
inspected at the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
Technical Information Services, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Plaza Level, 
Room 403, Washington, DC 20590, or at the National Archives and Records 
Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this 
material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/
federal--register/code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--locations.html. 
Keep the longitudinal axis of the barrier parallel with the longitudinal 
axis of the vehicle. Repeat the test, impacting the vehicle from the 
rear.

    Note: The vehicle used for this test need not be the same vehicle 
that has been used for the braking tests.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.004

            Figure 1--Typical Plug Thermocouple Installations
    Note: The second thermocouple shall be installed at .080 inch depth 
within 1 inch circumferentially of the thermocouple installed at .040 
inch depth.

[[Page 322]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.005


                             Table I--Brake Test Procedure Sequence and Requirements
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               Test load
             Sequence             ----------------------------------     Test procedure          Requirements
                                        Light             GVWR
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Instrumentation check.........  ...............  ...............  S7.2                    ...................
2. First (preburnish)              ...............               X   S7.3..................  S5.1.1.1
 effectiveness test.
3. Burnish procedure.............  ...............               X   S7.4                    ...................
4. Second effectiveness test.....  ...............               X   S7.5(b)...............  S5.1.1.2
5. First reburnish...............  ...............               X   S7.6..................  ...................
6. Parking brake.................               X                X   S7.7..................  S5.2
7. Stability and control during                 X   ...............  S7.5(a)...............  S5.1.7
 braking (braking-in-a-curve
 test).
8. Third effectiveness (lightly                 X   ...............  S7.8..................  S5.1.1.3
 loaded vehicle).
9. Partial failure...............               X                X   S7.9..................  S5.1.2
10. Inoperative brake power and    ...............               X   S7.10.................  S5.1.3
 power assist units.
11. First fade and recovery......  ...............               X   S7.11.................  S5.1.4
12. Second reburnish.............  ...............               X   S7.12                   ...................
13. Second fade and recovery.....  ...............               X   S7.13.................  S5.1.4
14. Third reburnish..............  ...............               X   S7.14                   ...................
15. Fourth effectiveness.........  ...............               X   S7.15.................  S5.1.1.4
16. Water recovery...............  ...............               X   S7.16.................  S5.1.5
17. Spike stops..................  ...............               X   S7.17.................  S5.1.6
18. Final inspection.............  ...............  ...............  S7.18.................  S5.6
19. Moving barrier test..........  ...............               X   S7.19.................  S5.2.2.3
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 323]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07SE99.007


                         Table III--Inoperative Brake Power Assist and Brake Power Units
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     Average deceleration, FPSPS           Equivalent stopping distance, feet
                             -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                Column 1--brake      Column 2--brake      Column 3--brake      Column 4--brake
          Stop No.                power assist          power unit          power assist          power unit
                             -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         (b) and              (b) and              (b) and              (b) and
                                 (a)       (c)        (a)       (c)        (a)       (c)        (a)       (c)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1...........................      16.0       14.0      16.0       13.0       242        277       242        298
2...........................      12.0       12.0      13.0       11.0       323        323       298        352
3...........................      10.0       10.0      12.0       10.0       388        388       323        388
4...........................       9.0        8.5      11.0        9.5       431        456       352        409
5...........................       8.0        7.5      10.0        9.0       484        517       388        431
6...........................       7.5        6.7       9.5        8.5       517        580       409        456
7...........................   \1\ 7.0    \1\ 6.0       9.0        8.0       554        646       431        484
8...........................        NA         NA       8.5        7.5        NA         NA       456        517
9...........................        NA         NA       8.0        7.0        NA         NA       484        554
10..........................        NA         NA       7.5        6.5        NA         NA       517        596
11..........................        NA         NA   \1\ 7.0    \1\ 6.0        NA         NA       554        646
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Depleted. (a) Passenger cars; (b) vehicles other than passenger cars with GVWR of 10,000 lbs or less; (c)
  vehicles with GVWR greater than 10,000 lbs; NA=Not applicable.


[41 FR 29696, July 19, 1976]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.106 see the List of CFR Sections Affected which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.


<R05>
Sec. 571.106  Standard No. 106; Brake hoses.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies labeling and performance 
requirements for motor vehicle brake hose, brake hose assemblies, and 
brake hose end fittings.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries occurring as a result of brake system failure from pressure or 
vacuum loss due to hose or hose assembly rupture.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, buses, trailers, and 
motorcycles, and to hydraulic, air, and vacuum brake hose, brake hose 
assemblies, and brake hose end fittings for use in those vehicles.
    S4. Definitions.
    Armor means protective material installed on a brake hose to 
increase the resistance of the hose or hose assembly to abrasion or 
impact damage.
    Brake hose means a flexible conduit, other than a vacuum tubing 
connector,

[[Page 324]]

manufactured for use in a brake system to transmit or contain the fluid 
pressure or vacuum used to apply force to a vehicle's brakes. For hose, 
a dimensional description such as ``\1/4\-inch hose'' refers to the 
nominal inside diameter. For tubing, a dimensional description such as 
``\1/4\-in tubing'' refers to the nominal outside diameter.
    Brake hose assembly means a brake hose, with or without armor, 
equipped with end fittings for use in a brake system, but does not 
include an air or vacuum assembly prepared by the owner or operator of a 
used vehicle, by his employee, or by a repair facility, for installation 
in that used vehicle.
    Brake hose end fitting means a coupler, other than a clamp, designed 
for attachment to the end of a brake hose.
    Free length means the linear measurement of hose exposed between the 
end fittings of a hose assembly in a straight position.
    Permanently attached end fitting means an end fitting that is 
attached by deformation of the fitting about the hose by crimping or 
swaging, or an end fitting that is attached by use of a sacrificial 
sleeve or ferrule that requires replacement each time a hose assembly is 
rebuilt.
    Preformed means a brake hose that is manufactured with permanent 
bends and is shaped to fit a specific vehicle without further bending.
    Rupture means any failure that results in separation of a brake hose 
from its end fitting or in leakage.
    Vacuum tubing connector means a flexible conduit of vacuum that (i) 
connects metal tubing to metal tubing in a brake system, (ii) is 
attached without end fittings, and (iii) when installed, has an 
unsupported length less than the total length of those portions that 
cover the metal tubing.
    S5. Requirements--hydraulic brake hose, brake hose assemblies, and 
brake hose end fittings.
    S5.1 Construction. (a) Each hydraulic brake hose assembly shall have 
permanently attached brake hose end fittings which are attached by 
deformation of the fitting about the hose by crimping or swaging.
    (b) Each hydraulic brake hose assembly that is equipped with a 
permanent supplemental support integrally attached to the assembly and 
is manufactured as a replacement for use on a vehicle not equipped, as 
an integral part of the vehicle's original design, with a means of 
attaching the support to the vehicle shall be equipped with a bracket 
that is integrally attached to the supplemental support and that adapts 
the vehicle to properly accept this type of brake hose assembly.
    S5.2 Labeling.
    S5.2.1 Each hydraulic brake hose, except hose sold as part of a 
motor vehicle, shall have at least two clearly identifiable stripes of 
at least one-sixteenth of an inch in width, placed on opposite sides of 
the brake hose parallel to its longitudinal axis. One stripe may be 
interrupted by the information required by S5.2.2, and the other stripe 
may be interrupted by additional information at the manufacturer's 
option. However, hydraulic brake hose manufactured for use only in an 
assembly whose end fittings prevent its installation in a twisted 
orientation in either side of the vehicle, need not meet the 
requirements of S5.2.1.
    S5.2.2 Each hydraulic brake hose shall be labeled, or cut from bulk 
hose that is labeled, at intervals of not more than 6 inches, measured 
from the end of one legend to the beginning of the next, in block 
capital letters and numerals at least one-eighth of an inch high, with 
the information listed in paragraphs (a) through (e) of this section. 
The information need not be present on hose that is sold as part of a 
brake hose assembly or a motor vehicle.
    (a) The symbol DOT, constituting a certification by the hose 
manufacturer that the hose conforms to all applicable motor vehicle 
safety standards.
    (b) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of the hose, 
which shall be filed in writing with: Office of Vehicle Safety 
Compliance, Equipment Division NVS-222, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh St. SW., Washington, DC 20590. The marking 
may consist of a designation other than block capital letters required 
by S5.2.2.
    (c) The month, day, and year, or the month and year, of manufacture, 
expressed in numerals. For example, 10/1/96 means October 1, 1996.

[[Page 325]]

    (d) The nominal inside diameter of the hose expressed in inches or 
fractions of inches, or in millimeters followed by the abbreviation 
``mm.''
    (e) Either ``HR'' to indicate that the hose is regular expansion 
hydraulic hose or ``HL'' to indicate that the hose is low expansion 
hydraulic hose.
    S5.2.3 Package labeling for brake hose assemblies designed to be 
used with a supplemental support. (a) Each hydraulic brake hose assembly 
that is equipped with a permanent supplemental support integrally 
attached to the assembly and is manufactured as a replacement assembly 
for a vehicle equipped, as an integral part of the vehicle's original 
design, with a means of attaching the support to the vehicle shall be 
sold in a package that is marked or labeled as follows: ``FOR USE ON 
[insert Manufacturer, Model Name] ONLY'';
    (b) Each hydraulic brake hose assembly that is equipped with a 
permanent supplemental support integrally attached to the assembly and 
is manufactured as a replacement for use on a vehicle not equipped, as 
an integral part of the vehicle's original design, with a means of 
attaching the support to the vehicle shall comply with paragraphs (a) 
(1) and (2) of this section:
    (1) Be sold in a package that is marked or labeled as follows: ``FOR 
USE ONLY WITH A SUPPLEMENTAL SUPPORT.''
    (2) Be accompanied by clear, detailed instructions explaining the 
proper installation of the brake hose and the supplemental support 
bracket to the vehicle and the consequences of not attaching the 
supplemental support bracket to the vehicle. The instructions shall be 
printed on or included in the package specified in paragraph (a)(1) of 
this section.
    S5.2.4 Each hydraulic brake hose assembly, except those sold as part 
of a motor vehicle, shall be labeled by means of a band around the brake 
hose assembly as specified in this paragraph or, at the option of the 
manufacturer, by means of labeling as specified in S5.2.4.1. The band 
may at the manufacturer's option be attached so as to move freely along 
the length of the assembly, as long as it is retained by the end 
fittings. The band shall be etched, embossed, or stamped in block 
capital letters, numerals or symbols at least one-eighth of an inch 
high, with the following information:
    (a) The symbol DOT constituting certification by the hose assembler 
that the hose assembly conforms to all applicable motor vehicle safety 
standards.
    (b) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of the hose 
assembly, which shall be filed in writing with: Office of Vehicle Safety 
Compliance, Equipment Division NVS-222, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh St. SW., Washington, DC 20590. The 
designation may consist of block capital letters, numerals or a symbol.
    S5.2.4.1 At least one end fitting of a hydraulic brake hose assembly 
shall be etched, stamped or embossed with a designation at least one-
sixteenth of an inch high that identifies the manufacturer of the hose 
assembly and is filed in accordance with S5.2.4(b).
    S5.3 Test requirements. A hydraulic brake hose assembly or 
appropriate part thereof shall be capable of meeting any of the 
requirements set forth under this heading, when tested under the 
conditions of S13 and the applicable procedures of S6. However, a 
particular hose assembly or appropriate part thereof need not meet 
further requirements after having been subjected to and having met the 
constriction requirement (S5.3.1) and any one of the requirements 
specified in S5.3.2 through S5.3.13.
    S5.3.1 Constriction. Except for that part of an end fitting which 
does not contain hose, every inside diameter of any section of a 
hydraulic brake hose assembly shall be not less than 64 percent of the 
nominal inside diameter of the brake hose (S6.12).
    S5.3.2 Expansion and burst strength. The maximum expansion of a 
hydraulic brake hose assembly at 1,000 psi, 1,500 psi and 2,900 psi 
shall not exceed the values specified in Table I (S6.1), except that a 
brake hose larger than \3/16\ inch or 5 mm is not subject to the 2,900 
psi expansion test requirements. The hydraulic brake hose assembly shall 
then withstand water pressure of 4,000 psi for 2 minutes without 
rupture, and then shall not rupture at less than 7,000

[[Page 326]]

psi for a \1/8\ inch, 3 mm, or smaller diameter hose, or at less than 
5,000 psi for a hose with a diameter larger than \1/8\ inch or 3 mm 
(S6.2).

                           Table I--Maximum Expansion of Free Length Brake Hose, CC/FT
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Test pressure
                                   -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                            1,000 psi                 1,500 psi                 2,900 psi
   Hydraulic brake hose, inside    -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
             diameter                 Regular        Low          Low        Regular      Regular        Low
                                     expansion    expansion    expansion    expansion    expansion    expansion
                                        hose         hose         hose         hose         hose         hose
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/8\ inch, or 3mm, or less.......         0.66         0.33         0.79         0.42         1.21         0.61
<ls-thn-eq> \1/8\ inch or 3mm, to          0.86         0.55         1.02         0.72         1.67         0.91
 \3/16\ inch or 5 mm..............
<ls-thn-eq> \3/16\ inch or 5 mm...         1.04         0.82         1.30         1.17            *            *
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S5.3.3 Whip resistance. A hydraulic brake hose assembly shall not 
rupture when run continuously on a flexing machine for 35 hours (S6.3).
    S5.3.4 Tensile strength. A hydraulic brake hose assembly shall 
withstand a pull of 325 pounds without separation of the hose from its 
end fittings during a slow pull test, and shall withstand a pull of 370 
pounds without separation of the hose from its end fittings during a 
fast pull test (S6.4).
    S5.3.5 Water absorption and burst strength. A hydraulic brake hose 
assembly, after immersion in water for 70 hours (S6.5), shall withstand 
water pressure of 4,000 psi for 2 minutes, and then shall not rupture at 
less than 5,000 psi (S6.2).
    S5.3.6 Water absorption and tensile strength. A hydraulic brake hose 
assembly, after immersion in water for 70 hours (S6.5), shall withstand 
a pull of 325 pounds without separation of the hose from its end 
fittings during a slow pull test, and shall withstand a pull of 370 
pounds without separation of the hose from its end fittings during a 
fast pull test (S6.4).
    S5.3.7 Water absorption and whip resistance. A hydraulic brake hose 
assembly, after immersion in water for 70 hours (S6.5), shall not 
rupture when run continuously on a flexing machine for 35 hours (S6.3).
    S5.3.8 Low-temperature resistance. A hydraulic brake hose 
conditioned at a temperature between minus 49 degrees Fahrenheit (minus 
45 degrees Celsius) and minus 54 degrees Fahrenheit (minus 48 degrees 
Celsius) for 70 hours shall not show cracks visible without 
magnification when bent around a cylinder as specified in S6.6 (S6.6).
    S5.3.9 Brake fluid compatibility, constriction, and burst strength. 
Except for brake hose assemblies designed for use with mineral or 
petroleum-based brake fluids, a hydraulic brake hose assembly shall meet 
the constriction requirement of S5.3.1 after having been subjected to a 
temperature of 248 degrees Fahrenheit (120 degrees Celsius) for 70 hours 
while filled with SAE RM-66-04 ``Compatibility Fluid,'' as described in 
appendix B of SAE Standard J1703, revised JAN 1995, ``Motor Vehicle 
Brake Fluid.'' This incorporation by reference was approved by the 
Director of the Federal Register in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 
1 CFR part 51. Copies may be obtained from the Society of Automotive 
Engineers, Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096-0001. 
Copies may be inspected at the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, Technical Information Services, 400 Seventh Street, SW., 
Plaza Level, Room 403, Washington, DC 20590, or at the National Archives 
and Records Administration (NARA). For information on the availability 
of this material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://
www.archives.gov/federal--register/code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--
locations.html. It shall then withstand water pressure of 4,000 psi for 
2 minutes and thereafter shall not rupture at less than 5,000 psi (S6.2 
except all sizes of hose are tested at 5,000 psi).
    S5.3.10 Ozone resistance. A hydraulic brake hose shall not show 
cracks visible under 7-power magnification after exposure to ozone for 
70 hours at 104 [deg]F. (S6.8).

[[Page 327]]

    S5.3.12 High temperature impulse test. A brake hose assembly tested 
under the conditions in S6.10:
    (a) Shall withstand pressure cycling for 150 cycles, at 295 degrees 
Fahrenheit (146 degrees Celsius) without leakage;
    (b) Shall not rupture during a 2-minute, 4,000 psi pressure hold 
test, and;
    (c) Shall not burst at a pressure less than 5,000 psi.
    S5.3.13 End fitting corrosion resistance. After 24 hours of exposure 
to salt spray, a hydraulic brake hose end fitting shall show no base 
metal corrosion on the end fitting surface except where crimping or the 
application of labeling information has caused displacement of the 
protective coating (S6.11).
    S6. Test procedures--Hydraulic brake hose, brake hose assemblies, 
and brake hose end fittings.
    S6.1. Expansion test.
    S6.1.1 Apparatus. Utilize a test apparatus (as shown in Figure 1) 
which consists of:
    (a) Source for required fluid pressure;
    (b) Test fluid of water without any additives and free of gases;
    (c) Reservoir for test fluid;
    (d) Pressure gauges;
    (e) Brake hose end fittings in which to mount the hose vertically; 
and
    (f) Graduate burette with 0.05 cc increments.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.006
    
                    Fig. 1--Expansion Test Apparatus
    S6.1.2 Preparation. (a) Measure the free length of the hose 
assembly.
    (b) Mount the hose so that it is in a vertical straight position 
without tension when pressure is applied.
    (c) Fill the hose with test fluid and bleed all gases from the 
system.
    (d) Close the valve to the burette and apply 1,500 psi for 10 
seconds; then release pressure.
    S6.1.3 Calculation of expansion at 1,000 and 1,500 psi. (a) Adjust 
the fluid level in the burette to zero.
    (b) Close the valve to the burette, apply pressure at the rate of 
15,000 psi per minute, and seal 1,000 psi in the hose (1,500 psi in the 
second series, and 2,900 psi in the third series).
    (c) After 3 seconds open the valve to the burette for 10 seconds and 
allow the fluid in the expanded hose to rise into the burette.
    (d) Repeat the procedure in steps (b) and (c) twice. Measure the 
amount of test fluid which has accumulated in the burette as a result of 
the three applications of pressure.
    (e) Calculate the volumetric expansion per foot by dividing the 
total accumulated test fluid by 3 and further dividing by the free 
length of the hose in feet.
    S6.2 Burst strength test. (a) Connect the brake hose to a pressure 
system

[[Page 328]]

and fill it completely with water, allowing all gases to escape.
    (b) Apply water pressure of 4,000 psi at a rate of 15,000 psi per 
minute.
    (c) After 2 minutes at 4,000 psi, increase the pressure at the rate 
of 15,000 psi per minute until the pressure exceeds 5,000 psi for a 
brake hose larger than \1/8\ inch or 3 mm diameter, or until the 
pressure exceeds 7,000 psi for a brake hose of \1/8\ inch, 3 mm, or 
smaller diameter.
    S6.3 Whip resistance test.
    S6.3.1 Apparatus. Utilize test apparatus that is dynamically 
balanced and includes:
    (a) A movable header consisting of a horizontal bar equipped with 
capped end fittings and mounted through bearings at each end to points 4 
inches from the center of two vertically rotating disks whose edges are 
in the same vertical plane;
    (b) An adjustable stationary header parallel to the movable header 
in the same horizontal plane as the centers of the disks, and fitted 
with open end fittings;
    (c) An elapsed time indicator; and
    (d) A source of water pressure connected to the open end fittings.
    S6.3.2 Preparation. (a) Except for the supplemental support 
specified in S6.3.2(d), remove all external appendages including, but 
not limited to, hose armor, chafing collars, mounting brackets, date 
band and spring guards.
    (b) Measure the hose free length.
    (c) Mount the hose in the whip test machine, introducing slack as 
specified in Table II for the size hose tested, measuring the projected 
length parallel to the axis of the rotating disks. The manufacturer may, 
at his option, adapt the fitting attachment points to permit mounting 
hose assemblies equipped with angled or other special fittings in the 
same orientation as hose assemblies equipped with straight fittings.
    (d) In the case of a brake hose assembly equipped with a permanent 
supplemental support integrally attached to the assembly, the assembly 
may be mounted using the supplemental support and associated means of 
simulating its attachment to the vehicle. Mount the supplemental support 
in the same vertical and horizontal planes as the stationary header end 
of the whip test fixture described in S6.3.1(b). Mount or attach the 
supplemental support so that it is positioned in accordance with the 
recommendation of the assembly manufacturer for attaching the 
supplemental support on a vehicle.

                         Table II--Hose Lengths
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       Slack, inches
                                                 -----------------------
                                                  \1/8\ inch   More than
    Free length between end fittings, inches        or 3 mm   \1/8\ inch
                                                    hose or     or 3 mm
                                                     less        hose
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8 to 15\1/2\, inclusive.........................       1.750  ..........
10 to 15\1/2\, inclusive........................  ..........       1,000
Over 15\1/2\ to 19 inclusive....................       1.250  ..........
Over 19 to 24, inclusive........................       0.750  ..........
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S6.3.3 Operation. (a) Apply 235 psi water pressure and bleed all 
gases from the system.
    (b) Drive the movable head at 800 rpm.
    S6.4 Tensile strength test. Utilize a tension testing machine 
conforming to the requirements of American Society for Testing and 
Materials (ASTM) E4-03, ``Standard Practices for Force Verification of 
Testing Machines,'' and provided with a recording device to measure the 
force applied. This incorporation by reference was approved by the 
Director of the Federal Register in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 
1 CFR part 51. Copies may be obtained from the American Society for 
Testing and Materials (ASTM) International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, P.O. 
Box C700, West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959. Copies may be inspected at 
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Technical 
Information Services, 400 Seventh St., S.W., Plaza Level, Room 403, 
Washington, D.C. 20590, or at the National Archives and Records 
Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this 
material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/
federal--register/code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    S6.4.1 Preparation. Mount the hose assembly to ensure straight, 
evenly distributed machine pull.
    S6.4.2 Operation. (a) Conduct the slow pull test by applying tension 
at a rate of 1 inch per minute travel of the moving head until 
separation occurs.

[[Page 329]]

    (b) Conduct the fast pull test by applying tension at a rate of 2 
inches per minute travel of the moving head until separation occurs.
    S6.5 Water absorption sequence tests. (a) Prepare three brake hose 
assemblies and measure the free length of the hose assemblies.
    (b) Immerse the brake hose assemblies in distilled water at 185 
degrees Fahrenheit (85 degrees Celsius) for 70 hours. Remove the brake 
hose assemblies from the water and condition in air at room temperature 
for 30 minutes.
    (c) Conduct the tests in S6.2, S6.3, and S6.4, using a different 
hose for each sequence.
    S6.6 Low temperature resistance test.
    S6.6.1 Preparation. (a) Remove hose armor, if any, and condition the 
hose in a straight position in air at a temperature between minus 49 
degrees Fahrenheit and minus 54 degrees Fahrenheit (minus 45 degrees 
Celsius and minus 48 degrees Celsius) for 70 hours.
    (b) Condition a cylinder in air at a temperature between minus 49 
degrees Fahrenheit and minus 54 degrees Fahrenheit (minus 45 degrees 
Celsius and minus 48 degrees Celsius) for 70 hours, using a cylinder of 
2\1/2\ inches in diameter for tests of hose less than \1/8\ inch or 3mm, 
3 inches in diameter for tests of \1/8\ inch or 3 mm hose, 3\1/2\ inches 
in diameter for tests of \3/16\ to \1/4\ inch hose or 4 mm to 6 mm hose, 
and 4 inches in diameter for tests of hose greater than \1/4\ inch or 6 
mm in diameter.
    S6.6.2 Flexibility testing. Bend the conditioned hose 180 degrees 
around the conditioned cylinder at a steady rate in a period of 3 to 5 
seconds. Examine without magnification for cracks.
    S6.7 Brake fluid compatibility test.
    S6.7.1 Preparation. (a) Attach a hose assembly below a 1-pint 
reservoir filled with 100 ml. of SAE RM-66-04 Compatibility Fluid as 
shown in Figure 2. (SAE RM-66-03 Compatibility Fluid, as described in 
appendix A of SAE Standard J1703 NOV83, ``Motor Vehicle Brake Fluid,'' 
November 1983, may be used in place of SAE RM-66-04 until January 1, 
1995.)
    (b) Fill the hose assembly with brake fluid, seal the lower end, and 
place the test assembly in an oven in a vertical position.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.007

    S6.7.2 Oven treatment. (a) Condition the hose assembly at 200 
[deg]F. for 70 hours.
    (b) Cool the hose assembly at room temperature for 30 minutes.
    (c) Drain the brake hose assembly, immediately determine that every 
inside diameter of any section of the hose assembly, except for that 
part of an end fitting which does not contain hose, is not less than 64 
percent of the nominal inside diameter of the hose, and conduct the test 
specified in S6.2.
    S6.8 Ozone resistance test. Utilize a cylinder with a diameter eight 
times the nominal outside diameter of the brake hose excluding armor.
    S6.8.1 Preparation. After removing any armor, bind a hydraulic brake 
hose 360[deg] around the cylinder. In the case of hose shorter than the 
circumference of the cylinder, bend the hose so that as much of its 
length as possible is in contact.
    S6.8.2 Exposure to ozone. (a) Condition the hose on the cylinder in 
air at room temperature for 24 hours.
    (b) Immediately thereafter, condition the hose on the cylinder for 
70 hours in

[[Page 330]]

an exposure chamber having an ambient air temperature of 104 degrees 
Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius) during the test and containing air mixed 
with ozone in the proportion of 100 parts of ozone per 100 million parts 
of air by volume.
    (c) Examine the hose for cracks under 7-power magnification, 
ignoring areas immediately adjacent to or within the area covered by 
binding.
    S6.9 End fitting corrosion resistance test. Utilize the apparatus 
described in ASTM B117-64, ``Salt Spray (Fog) Testing''.
    S6.9 Dynamic ozone test.
    S6.9.1 Apparatus. Utilize a test apparatus shown in Figure 3 which 
is constructed so that:
    (a) It has a fixed pin with a vertical orientation over which one 
end of the brake hose is installed.
    (b) It has a movable pin that is oriented 30 degrees from vertical, 
with the top of the movable pin angled towards the fixed pin. The 
moveable pin maintains its orientation to the fixed pin throughout its 
travel in the horizontal plane. The other end of the brake hose is 
installed on the movable pin.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20DE04.004

    S6.9.2 Preparation. (a) Precondition the hose assembly by laying it 
on a flat surface in an unstressed condition, at room temperature, for 
24 hours.
    (b) Cut the brake hose assembly to a length of 8.6 inches (218 mm), 
such that no end fittings remain on the cut hose.

[[Page 331]]

    (c) Mount the brake hose onto the test fixture by fully inserting 
the fixture pins into each end of the hose. Secure the hose to the 
fixture pins using a band clamp at each end of the hose.
    (d) Place the test fixture into an ozone chamber
    (e) Stabilize the atmosphere in the ozone chamber so that the 
ambient temperature is 104 [deg]F (40 degrees Celsius) and the air 
mixture contains air mixed with ozone in the proportion of 100 parts of 
ozone per 100 million parts of air by volume. This atmosphere is to 
remain stable throughout the remainder of the test.
    (f) Begin cycling the movable pin at a rate of 0.3 Hz. Continue the 
cycling for 48 hours.
    (g) At the completion of 48 hours of cycling, remove the test 
fixture from the ozone chamber. Without removing the hose from the test 
fixture, visually examine the hose for cracks without magnification, 
ignoring areas immediately adjacent to or within the area covered by the 
band clamps. Examine the hose with the movable pin at any point along 
its travel.
    S6.10 High temperature impulse test.
    S6.10.1 Apparatus. (a) A pressure cycling machine to which one end 
of the brake hose assembly can be attached, with the entire hose 
assembly installed vertically inside of a circulating air oven. The 
machine shall be capable of increasing the pressure in the hose from 
zero psi to 1600 psi, and decreasing the pressure in the hose from 1600 
psi to zero psi, within 2 seconds.
    (b) A circulating air oven that can reach a temperature of 295 
degrees Fahrenheit (146 degrees Celsius) within 30 minutes, and that can 
maintain a constant 295 degrees F (146 degrees Celsius) thereafter, with 
the brake hose assembly inside of the oven and attached to the pressure 
cycling machine.
    (c) A burst test apparatus to conduct testing specified in S6.2
    S6.10.2 Preparation. (a) Connect one end of the hose assembly to the 
pressure cycling machine and plug the other end of the hose. Fill the 
pressure cycling machine and hose assembly with SAE RM-66-04 
``Compatibility Fluid,'' as described in appendix B of SAE Standard 
J1703, revised JAN 1995 ``Motor Vehicle Brake Fluid,'' and bleed all 
gases from the system.
    (b) Place the brake hose assembly inside of the circulating air oven 
in a vertical position. Increase the oven temperature to 295 degrees F 
(146 degrees Celsius) and maintain this temperature throughout the 
pressure cycling test.
    (c) During each pressure cycle, the pressure in the hose is 
increased from zero psi to 1600 psi and held constant for 1 minute, then 
the pressure is decreased from 1600 psi to zero psi and held constant 
for 1 minute. Perform 150 pressure cycles on the brake hose assembly.
    (d) Remove the brake hose assembly from the oven, disconnect it from 
the pressure cycling machine, and drain the fluid from the hose. Cool 
the brake hose assembly at room temperature for 45 minutes.
    (e) Wipe the brake hose using acetone to remove residual 
Compatibility Fluid. Conduct the burst strength test in S6.2, except all 
sizes of hose are tested at 5,000 psi.
    S6.11 End fitting corrosion test. Utilize the apparatus described in 
ASTM B117-03, ``Standard Practice for Operating Salt Spray (Fog) 
Apparatus''. This incorporation by reference was approved by the 
Director of the Federal Register in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 
1 CFR Part 51. Copies may be obtained from the American Society for 
Testing and Materials (ASTM) International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, P.O. 
Box C700, West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959. Copies may be inspected at 
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Technical 
Information Services, 400 Seventh St., SW., Plaza Level, Room 403, 
Washington, DC 20590, or at the National Archives and Records 
Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this 
material at NARA, call (202) 741-6030, or go to: http://
www.archives.gov/federal--register/code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--
locations.html.
    S6.11.1 Construction. Construct the salt spray chamber so that:
    (a) The construction material does not affect the corrosiveness of 
the fog.
    (b) The hose assembly is supported or suspended 30 degrees from the 
vertical

[[Page 332]]

and parallel to the principal direction of the horizontal flow of fog 
through the chamber.
    (c) The hose assembly does not contact any metallic material or any 
material capable of acting as a wick
    (d) Condensation which falls from the assembly does not return to 
the solution reservoir for respraying.
    (e) Condensation from any source does not fall on the brake hose 
assemblies or the solution collectors.
    (f) Spray from the nozzles is not directed onto the hose assembly.
    S6.11.2 Preparation. (a) Plug each end of the hose assembly.
    (b) Mix a salt solution five parts by weight of sodium chloride to 
95 parts of distilled water, using sodium chloride substantially free of 
nickel and copper, and containing on a dry basis not more than 0.1 
percent of sodium iodide and not more than 0.3 percent total impurities. 
Ensure that the solution is free of suspended solids before the solution 
is atomized.
    (c) After atomization at 95 degrees Fahrenheit (35 degrees Celsius), 
ensure that the collected solution is in the PH range of 6.5 to 7.2. 
Make the PH measurements at 77 degrees Fahrenheit (28 degrees Celsius).
    (d) Maintain a compressed air supply to the nozzle or nozzles free 
of oil and dirt and between 10 and 25 psi.
    S6.11.3 Operation. Subject the brake hose assembly to the salt spray 
continuously for 24 hours.
    (a) Regulate the mixture so that each collector will collect from 1 
to 2 milliliters of solution per hour for each 80 square centimeters of 
horizontal collecting area.
    (b) Maintain exposure zone temperature at 95 degrees Fahrenheit (35 
degrees Celsius).
    (c) Upon completion, remove the salt deposit from the surface of the 
hose by washing gently or dipping in clean running water not warmer than 
100 degrees Fahrenheit (38 degrees Celsius) and then drying immediately.
    S6.12 Constriction test. Brake hose constriction test requirements 
shall be met using at least one of the methods specified in S6.12.1, 
S6.12.2, or S6.12.3.
    S6.12.1 Plug gauge. (a) Utilize a plug gauge as shown in Figure 4. 
Diameter ``A'' is equal to 64 percent of the nominal inside diameter of 
the hydraulic brake hose being tested.
    (b) Brake hose assemblies that are to be used for additional testing 
have constriction testing only at each end fitting. Other brake hose 
assemblies may be cut into 3-inch lengths to permit constriction testing 
of the entire assembly. Hose assemblies with end fittings that do not 
permit entry of the gauge (e.g., restrictive orifice or banjo fitting) 
are cut 3 inches from the point at which the hose terminates in the end 
fitting and then tested from the cut end.
    (c) Hold the brake hose in a straight position and vertical 
orientation.
    (d) Place the spherical end of the plug gauge just inside the hose 
or end fitting. If the spherical end will not enter the hose or end 
fitting using no more force than gravity acting on the plug gauge, this 
constitutes failure of the constriction test.
    (e) Release the plug gauge. Within 3 seconds, the plug gauge shall 
fall under the force of gravity alone up to the handle of the gauge. If 
the plug gauge does not fully enter the hose up to the handle of the 
gauge within three seconds, this constitutes failure of the constriction 
test.
    S6.12.2 Extended plug gauge. (a) The test in 6.12.1 may be conducted 
with an extended plug gauge to enable testing of the entire brake hose 
from one end fitting, without cutting the brake hose. The extended plug 
gauge weight and spherical diameter specifications are as shown in 
Figure 4, but the handle portion of the gauge may be deleted and the 
gauge length may be greater than 3 inches.
    (b) The required performance of the extended plug gauge in 
S6.12.1(e) is that after the plug gauge is released, the extended plug 
gauge shall fall under the force of gravity alone at an average rate of 
1 inch per second until the spherical diameter of the extended gauge 
passes through all portions of the brake hose assembly containing hose. 
If the extended plug gauge does not pass through all portions of the 
brake hose assembly containing hose at an average rate of 1 inch per 
second, this constitutes failure of the constriction test.

[[Page 333]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20DE04.005

    S6.12.3 Drop ball test. (a) Utilize a rigid spherical ball with a 
diameter equal to 64 percent of the nominal inside diameter of the 
hydraulic brake hose being tested. The weight of the spherical ball 
shall not exceed 2 ounces (57 grams).
    (b) Hold the brake hose in a straight position and vertical 
orientation.
    (c) Hold the ball just above the end fitting.
    (d) Release the ball. The ball shall fall under the force of gravity 
alone completely through all portions of the brake hose assembly 
containing hose, at an average rate of 1 inch per second. Failure of the 
ball to pass completely through all portions of the brake hose assembly 
containing hose, at an average rate of 1 inch per second, constitutes 
failure of the constriction test.
    S7. Requirements--Air brake hose, brake hose assemblies, and brake 
hose end fittings.
    S7.1 Construction. Each air brake hose assembly shall be equipped 
with permanently attached brake hose end fittings or reusable brake hose 
end fittings. Each air brake hose constructed of synthetic or natural 
elastomeric rubber shall conform to the dimensional requirements 
specified in Table III, except for brake hose manufactured in metric 
sizes.
    S7.2 Labeling
    S7.2.1 Hose. Each air brake hose shall be labeled, or cut from bulk 
hose that is labeled, at intervals of not more than 6 inches, measured 
from the end of one legend to the beginning of the next, in block 
capital letters and numerals at least one-eighth of an inch high, with 
the information listed in paragraphs (a) through (e) of this section. 
The information need not be present on hose that is sold as part of a 
brake hose assembly or a motor vehicle.
    (a) The symbol DOT, constituting a certification by the hose 
manufacturer that the hose conforms to all applicable motor vehicle 
safety standards.
    (b) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of the hose, 
which shall be filed in writing with: Office of Vehicle Safety 
Compliance, Equipment Division NVS-222, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh St. SW., Washington, DC 20590. The 
designation may consist of block capital letters, numerals, or a symbol.

[[Page 334]]

    (c) The month, day, and year, or the month and year, of manufacture, 
expressed in numerals. For example, 10/1/96 means October 1, 1996.
    (d) The nominal inside diameter of the hose expressed in inches or 
fractions of inches or in millimeters. The abbreviation ``mm'' shall 
follow hose sizes that are expressed in millimeters. (Examples: \3/8\, 
\1/2\ (\1/2\SP in the case of \1/2\ inch special air brake hose), 4mm, 
6mm.)
    (e) The type designation corresponding to the brake hose dimensions 
in Table III. Type A shall be labeled with the letter ``A'', Type AI 
shall be labeled with the letters ``AI'', and type AII shall be labeled 
with the letters ``AII''. Metric air brake hose shall be labeled with 
the letter ``A.''

    Table III--Air Brake Hose Dimensions--Inside Diameter (ID) and Outside Diameter (OD) Dimensions in Inches
                                                  (Millimeters)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                           Type A--Hose Size--Nominal Inside Diameter
                                               -----------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                             \1/2\ SP
                                                  \1/4\      \5/16\     \3/8\      \7/16\     \(1)\      \5/8\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Min. I.D......................................     0.227      0.289      0.352      0.407      0.469      0.594
                                                   (5.8)      (7.3)      (8.9)     (10.3)     (11.9)     (15.1)
Max. I.D......................................     0.273      0.335      0.398      0.469      0.531      0.656
                                                   (6.9)      (8.5)     (10.1)     (11.9)     (13.5)     (16.7)
Min. O.D......................................     0.594      0.656      0.719      0.781      0.844      1.031
                                                  (15.1)     (16.7)     (18.3)     (19.8)     (21.4)     (26.2)
Max. O.D......................................     0.656      0.719      0.781      0.843      0.906      1.094
                                                  (16.7)     (18.3)     (19.8)     (21.4)     (23.0)     (27.8)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                        Type AI \(2)\--Hose Size--Nominal Inside Diameter
                                               -----------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  \3/16\      \1/4\     \5/16\    \13/32\      \1/2\      \5/8\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Min. I.D......................................     0.188      0.250      0.312      0.406      0.500      0.625
                                                   (4.8)      (6.4)      (7.9)     (10.3)     (12.7)     (15.9)
Max. I.D......................................     0.214      0.281      0.343      0.437      0.539      0.667
                                                   (5.4)      (7.1)      (8.7)     (11.1)     (13.7)     (16.9)
Min. O.D......................................     0.472      0.535      0.598      0.714      0.808      0.933
                                                  (12.0)     (13.6)     (15.1)     (18.1)     (20.5)     (23.7)
Max. O.D......................................     0.510      0.573      0.636      0.760      0.854      0.979
                                                  (13.0)     (14.6)     (16.2)     (19.3)     (21.7)     (24.9)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       Type AII \(2)\--Hose Size--Nominal Inside Diameter
                                               -----------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  \3/16\      \1/4\     \5/16\    \13/32\      \1/2\      \5/8\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Min. I.D......................................     0.188      0.250      0.312      0.406      0.500      0.625
                                                   (4.8)      (6.4)      (7.9)     (10.3)     (12.7)     (15.9)
Max. I.D......................................     0.214      0.281      0.343      0.437      0.539      0.667
                                                   (5.4)      (7.1)      (8.7)     (11.1)     (13.7)     (16.9)
Min. O.D......................................     0.500      0.562      0.656      0.742      0.898      1.054
                                                  (12.7)     (14.3)     (16.7)     (18.8)     (22.8)     (26.8)
Max. O.D......................................     0.539      0.602      0.695      0.789      0.945      1.101
                                                  (13.7)     (15.3)     (17.7)     (20.1)     (24.0)     (27.9)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\(1)\ Notes: Type A, sizes \3/8\, \7/16\, and \1/2\ Special can be assembled with reusable end fittings. All
  sizes can be assembled using permanently-attached (crimped) end fittings.
\(2)\ Types AI and AII, all sizes, can be assembled with reusable or permanently-attached (crimped) end
  fittings.

    S7.2.2 End fittings. Except for an end fitting that is attached by 
deformation of the fitting about a hose by crimping or swaging, at least 
one component of each air brake hose fitting shall be etched, embossed, 
or stamped in block capital letters and numerals at least one-sixteenth 
of an inch high with the following information:
    (a) The symbol DOT, constituting a certification by the manufacturer 
of that component that the component

[[Page 335]]

conforms to all applicable motor vehicle safety standards.
    (b) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of that component 
of the fitting, which shall be filed in writing with: Office of Vehicle 
Safety Compliance, Equipment Division NVS-222, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 Seventh St. S.W., Washington, DC 20590. The 
designation may consist of block capital letters, numerals, or a symbol.
    (c) The letter ``A'' shall indicate intended use in air brake 
systems. In the case of an end fitting intended for use in a reusable 
assembly with brake hose subject to Table III, ``AI'' or ``AII'' shall 
indicate use with Type I or Type II hose, respectively.
    (d) The nominal inside diameter of the hose to which the fitting is 
properly attached expressed in inches or fractions of inches or in 
millimeters. (See examples in S7.2.1 (d).) The abbreviation ``mm'' shall 
follow hose sizes that are expressed in millimeters.
    S7.2.3 Assemblies. Each air brake hose assembly made with end 
fittings that are attached by crimping or swaging, except those sold as 
part of a motor vehicle, shall be labeled by means of a band around the 
brake hose assembly as specified in this paragraph or, at the option of 
the manufacturer, by means of labeling as specified in S7.2.3.1. The 
band may at the manufacturer's option be attached so as to move freely 
along the length of the assembly, as long as it is retained by the end 
fittings. The band shall be etched, embossed, or stamped in block 
capital letters, numerals or symbols at least one-eighth of an inch 
high, with the following information:
    (a) The symbol DOT, constituting certification by the hose assembler 
that the hose assembly conforms to all applicable motor vehicle safety 
standards.
    (b) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of the hose 
assembly, which shall be filed in writing with: Office of Crash 
Avoidance Standards, Vehicle Dynamics Division, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20590. The 
designation may consist of block capital letters, numerals or a symbol.
    S7.2.3.1 At least one end fitting of an air brake hose assembly made 
with end fittings that are attached by crimping or swaging shall be 
etched, stamped or embossed with a designation at least one-sixteenth of 
an inch high that identifies the manufacturer of the hose assembly and 
is filed in accordance with S7.2.3(b).
    S7.3 Test requirements. Each air brake hose assembly or appropriate 
part thereof shall be capable of meeting any of the requirements set 
forth under this heading, when tested under the conditions of S13 and 
the applicable procedures of S8. However, a particular hose assembly or 
appropriate part thereof need not meet further requirements after having 
met the constriction requirement (S7.3.1) and then having been subjected 
to any one of the requirements specified in S7.3.2 through S7.3.13.
    S7.3.1 Constriction. Every inside diameter of any section of an air 
brake hose assembly shall not be less than 66 percent of the nominal 
inside diameter of the brake hose. (S8.14)
    S7.3.2 High temperature resistance. An air brake hose shall not show 
external or internal cracks, charring, or disintegration visible without 
magnification when straightened after being bent for 70 hours at 212 
degrees Fahrenheit (100 degrees Celsius) over a small test cylinder 
having the radius specified in Table IV for the size of hose tested. 
(S8.1)
    S7.3.3 Low temperature resistance. The inside and outside surfaces 
of an air brake hose shall not show cracks as a result of conditioning 
at minus 40 degrees Fahrenheit (minus 40 degrees Celsius) for 70 hours 
when bent around a large test cylinder having the radius specified in 
Table IV for the size of hose tested (S8.2).

                           Table IV--Air Brake Hose Diameters and Test Cylinder Radii
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nominal hose inside diameter, inches \1\..    \3/16\     \1/4\    \5/16\     \3/8\   \13/32\   \7/16\,     \5/8\
                                                                                                 \1/2\

[[Page 336]]

 
Nominal hose inside diameter, millimeters       4, 5         6         8  ........        10        12        16
 \1\......................................
Small test cylinder, radius in inches         1 (25)    1\1/2\    1\3/4\    1\3/4\    1\7/8\    2 (51)    2\1/2\
 (millimeters) \2\........................                (38)      (45)      (45)      (48)                (64)
Large test cylinder, radius in inches         2 (51)    2\1/2\    3 (76)    3\1/2\    3\1/2\   4 (102)    4\1/2\
 (millimeters) \3\........................                (64)                (89)      (89)              (114)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Notes:
\1\ These sizes are listed to provide test cylinder radii for brake hoses manufactured in these sizes. They do
  not represent conversions.
\2\ Small test cylinders are used for the high temperature resistance test.
\3\ Large test cylinders are used for the low temperature resistance, ozone resistance, and adhesion of wire-
  reinforced hose tests.

    S7.3.4 Oil resistance. After immersion in ASTM No. 3 oil for 70 
hours at 212 [deg]F. the volume of a specimen prepared from the inner 
tube and cover of an air brake hose shall not increase more than 100 
percent (S8.3).
    S7.3.5 Ozone resistance. An air brake hose assembly shall not show 
cracks visible under 7-power magnification after exposure to ozone for 
70 hours at 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius) when bent around 
a test cylinder of the radius specified in Table IV for the size of hose 
tested (S8.4).
    S7.3.6 Length change. An air brake hose shall not contract in length 
more than 7 percent nor elongate more than 5 percent when subjected to 
air pressure of 200 psi (S8.5).
    S7.3.7 Adhesion. (a) Except for hose reinforced by wire, an air 
brake hose shall withstand a tensile force of 8 pounds per inch of 
length before separation of adjacent layers (S8.6).
    (b) An air brake hose reinforced by wire shall permit a steel ball 
to roll freely along the entire length of the inside of the hose when 
the hose is subjected to a vacuum of 25 inches of Hg and bent around a 
test cylinder (S8.13).
    S7.3.8 Flex strength and air pressure leakage. An air brake hose 
assembly of the length specified in the table accompanying Figure 5, 
when subjected to a flex test and internal pressure cycling, shall be 
capable of having its internal pressure increased from zero to 140 psi 
within 2 minutes with pressurized air supplied through an orifice 
(S8.7).
    S7.3.9 Corrosion resistance and burst strength. An air brake hose 
assembly exposed to salt spray shall not rupture when exposed to 
hydrostatic pressure of 900 psi (S8.8).
    S7.3.10 Tensile strength. An air brake hose assembly designed for 
use between a frame and axle or between a towed and towing vehicle shall 
withstand, without separation of the hose from its end fittings, a pull 
of 250 pounds if it is \1/4\ inch, 6 mm, or less in nominal inside 
diameter, or a pull of 325 pounds if it is larger than \1/4\ inch or 6 
mm in nominal inside diameter. An air brake hose assembly designed for 
use in any other application shall withstand, without separation of the 
hose from its end fittings, a pull of 50 pounds if it is \1/4\ inch, 6 
mm, or less in nominal inside diameter, 150 pounds if it is larger than 
\1/4\ inch or 6 mm and equal to or smaller than \1/2\ inch or 12 mm in 
nominal inside diameter, or 325 pounds if it is larger than \1/2\ inch 
or 12 mm in nominal inside diameter (S8.9).
    S7.3.11 Water absorption and tensile strength. After immersion in 
distilled water for 70 hours, an air brake hose assembly designed for 
use between a frame and axle or between a towed and a towing vehicle 
shall withstand, without separation of the hose from its end fittings, a 
pull of 250 pounds if it is \1/4\ inch or less or 6 mm or less in 
nominal inside diameter, or a pull of 325 pounds if it is larger than 
\1/4\ inch or 6 mm in nominal inside diameter. After immersion in 
distilled water for 70 hours, an air brake hose assembly designed for

[[Page 337]]

use in any other application shall withstand, without separation of the 
hose from its end fittings, a pull of 50 pounds if it is \1/4\ inch or 6 
mm or less in nominal inside diameter, 150 pounds if it is larger than 
\1/4\ inch or 6 mm and equal to or smaller than \1/2\ inch or 12 mm in 
nominal inside diameter, or 325 pounds if it is larger than \1/2\ inch 
or 12 mm in nominal inside diameter. (S8.10)
    S7.3.12 Zinc chloride resistance. The outer cover of an air brake 
hose shall not show cracks visible under 7-power magnification after 
immersion in a 50 percent zinc chloride aqueous solution for 200 hours 
(S8.11).
    S7.3.13 End fitting corrosion resistance. After 24 hours of exposure 
to salt spray, air brake hose end fittings shall show no base metal 
corrosion on the end fitting surface except where crimping or the 
application of labeling information causes a displacement of the 
protective coating.
    S8. Test procedures--Air brake hose, brake hose assemblies, and 
brake hose end fittings.
    S8.1 High temperature resistance test.
    (a) Utilize a small test cylinder with a radius specified in Table 
IV for the size of hose tested.
    (b) Bind the hose around the cylinder and condition it in an air 
oven for 70 hours at 212 degrees Fahrenheit (100 degrees Celsius).
    (c) Cool the hose to room temperature, remove it from the cylinder 
and straighten it.
    (d) Without magnification, examine the hose externally and cut the 
hose lengthwise and examine the inner tube.
    S8.2 Low temperature resistance test. (a) Utilize a large test 
cylinder with a radius specified in Table IV for the size of hose 
tested.
    (b) Condition the cylinder and the brake hose, in a straight 
position, in a cold box at minus 40 [deg]F. for 70 hours.
    (c) With the hose and cylinder at minus 40 degrees Fahrenheit (minus 
40 degrees Celsius), bend the hose 180 degrees around the cylinder at a 
steady rate in a period of 3 to 5 seconds. Remove the hose from the test 
cylinder and visibly examine the exterior of the hose for cracks without 
magnification.
    (d) Allow the hose to warm at room temperature for 2 hours. All 
reusable end fittings are removed from the hose. All permanently-
attached end fittings are cut away from the hose. Cut through one wall 
of the hose longitudinally along its entire length. Unfold the hose to 
permit examination of the interior surface. Visibly examine the interior 
of the hose for cracks without magnification.
    S8.3 Oil resistance test. Utilize three test specimens and average 
the results.
    S8.3.1 Preparation. Fashion a test specimen by cutting a rectangular 
block 2 inches long and not less than one-third of an inch in width, 
having a thickness of not more than one-sixteenth inch, from the brake 
hose and buff the specimen on both faces to ensure smooth surfaces.
    S8.3.2 Measurement. (a) Weigh each specimen to the nearest milligram 
in air (W1) and in distilled water (W2) at room temperature. If wetting 
is necessary to remove air bubbles, dip the specimen in acetone and 
thoroughly rinse it with distilled water.
    (b) Immerse each specimen in ASTM IRM 903 oil for 70 hours at 212 
degrees Fahrenheit (100 degrees Celsius) and then cool in ASTM IRM 903 
oil at room temperature for 30 to 60 minutes.
    (c) Dip the specimen quickly in acetone and blot it lightly with 
filter paper.
    (d) Weigh each specimen in a tared weighing bottle (W3) and in 
distilled water (W4) within five minutes of removal from the cooling 
liquid.
    (e) Calculate the percentage increase in volume follows:


Percent of increase=

[(W<INF>3</INF>-W<INF>4</INF>)-(W<INF>1</INF>-W<INF>2</INF>)]/
    (W<INF>1</INF>-W<INF>2</INF>)x100

    S8.4 Ozone resistance test. Conduct the test specified in S6.8, 
using air brake hose, except use the large test cylinder specified in 
Table IV for the size of hose tested.
    S8.5 Length change test. (a) Position a test hose in a straight, 
horizontal position, and apply air pressure of 10 psi thereto.
    (b) Measure the hose to determine original free length.
    (c) Without releasing the 10 psi, raise the air pressure to the test 
hose to 200 psi.
    (d) Measure the hose under 200 psi to determine final free length. 
An elongation or contraction is an increase or

[[Page 338]]

decrease, respectively, in the final free length from the original free 
length of the hose.
    S8.6 Adhesion test for air brake hose not reinforced by wire.
    S8.6.1 Apparatus. A tension testing machine that is power-driven and 
that applies a constant rate of extension is used for measuring the 
force required to separate the layers of the test specimen. The 
apparatus is constructed so that:
    (a) The recording head includes a freely rotating form with an 
outside diameter substantially the same as the inside diameter of the 
hose specimen to be placed on it.
    (b) The freely rotating form is mounted so that its axis of rotation 
is in the plane of the ply being separated from the specimen and so that 
the applied force is perpendicular to the tangent of the specimen 
circumference at the line of separation.
    (c) The rate of travel of the power-actuated grip is a uniform one 
inch per minute and the capacity of the machine is such that maximum 
applied tension during the test is not more than 85 percent nor less 
than 15 percent of the machine's rated capacity.
    (d) The machine produces a chart with separation as one coordinate 
and applied tension as the other.
    S8.6.2 Preparation. (a) Cut a test specimen of 1 inch or more in 
length from the hose to be tested and cut the layer to be tested of that 
test specimen longitudinally along its entire length to the level of 
contact with the adjacent layer.
    (b) Peel the layer to be tested from the adjacent layer to create a 
flap large enough to permit attachment of the power-actuated clamp of 
the apparatus.
    (c) Mount the test specimen on the freely rotating form with the 
separated layer attached to the power-actuated clamp.
    S8.6.3 [Reserved]
    S8.6.4 Calculations. (a) The adhesion value shall be the minimum 
force recorded on the chart excluding that portion of the chart which 
corresponds to the initial and final 20 percent portion along the 
displacement axis.
    (b) Express the force in pounds per inch of length.
    S8.7 Flex strength and air pressure test.
    S8.7.1 Apparatus. A flex testing machine with a fixed hose assembly 
attachment point and a movable hose assembly attachment point, which 
meets the dimensional requirements of Figure 5 for the size of hose 
being tested. The attachment points connect to the end fittings on the 
hose assembly without leakage and, after the hose assembly has been 
installed for the flex test, are restrained from rotation. The movable 
end has a linear travel of 6 inches and a cycle rate of 100 cycles per 
minute. The machine is capable of increasing the air pressure in the 
hose assembly from zero to 150 psi within 2 seconds, and decreasing the 
air pressure in the hose assembly from 150 to zero psi within 2 seconds.

[[Page 339]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20DE04.006


                         Table Accompanying Figure 5--Dimensions in Inches (Millimeters)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Dimensions
                                                 ---------------------------------------------------------------
                                  Nominal hose            Position ``1''                  Position ``2''
       Free hose length          inside diameter ---------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                             R                               R
                                                     A       B       C     \(1)\     A       B       C     \(1)\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
10.00 (254)...................  \3/16\, \1/4\...    3.00    2.75    3.75    1.40    3.00    2.75    3.75    1.20
                                                    (76)    (70)    (95)    (34)    (76)    (70)    (95)    (30)
11.00 (279)...................  \5/16\, \3/8\,      3.00    3.50    4.50    1.70    3.00    3.50    4.50    1.30
                                 \13/32\.           (76)    (89)   (114)    (43)    (76)    (89)   (114)    (33)
14.00 (355)...................  \7/16\, \1/2\,      3.00    4.00    5.00    2.20    3.00    4.00    5.00    1.80
                                 \5/8\.             (76)   (102)   (127)    (56)    (76)   (102)   (127)    (46)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note (1): This is an approximate average radius.

    S8.7.2 Preparation. (a) Lay the hose material on a flat surface in 
an unstressed condition. Apply a permanent marking line along the 
centerline of the hose on the uppermost surface.
    (b) Prepare the hose assembly with a free length as shown in the 
table accompanying Figure 5. The end fittings shall be attached 
according to the end fitting manufacturer's instructions.
    (c) Plug the ends of the hose assembly and conduct the salt spray 
test in S6.11 using an air brake hose assembly. Remove the plugs from 
the end fittings.
    (d) Within 168 hours of completion of the salt spray test, expose 
the hose assembly to an air temperature of 212 degrees Fahrenheit (100 
degrees Celsius) for 70 hours, with the hose in a straight position. 
Remove the hose and cool it at room temperature for 2 hours. Within 166 
hours, subject the hose to the flexure test in S8.7.2(e).
    (e) Install the hose assembly on the flex testing machine as 
follows. With the movable hose attachment point at the mid point of its 
travel, attach one end of the hose to the movable attachment point with 
the marked line on the hose in the uppermost position. Attach the other 
end of the hose to the fixed attachment point allowing the hose to 
follow its natural curvature.

[[Page 340]]

    (f) Cycle the air pressure in the hose by increasing the pressure in 
the hose from zero psi to 150 psi and holding constant for one minute, 
then decreasing the pressure from 150 psi to zero psi and holding 
constant for one minute. Continue the pressure cycling for the duration 
of the flex testing. Begin the flex testing by cycling the movable 
attachment point through 6 inches of travel at a rate of 100 cycles per 
minute. Stop the flex testing and pressure cycling after one million 
flex cycles have been completed.
    (g) Install an orifice with a hole diameter of 0.0625 inches and a 
thickness of 0.032 inches in the air pressure supply line to the hose 
assembly. Provide a gauge or other means to measure air pressure in the 
hose assembly. Regulate the supply air pressure to the orifice to 150 
psi.
    (h) Apply 150 psi air pressure to the orifice. After 2 minutes have 
elapsed, measure the air pressure in the brake hose assembly, while 
pressurized air continues to be supplied through the orifice.
    S8.8 Corrosion resistance and burst strength test. (a) Conduct the 
test specified in S6.11 using an air brake hose assembly. Remove the 
plugs from the ends of the hose assembly.
    (b) Fill the hose assembly with water, allowing all gases to escape. 
Apply water pressure at a uniform rate of increase of approximately 
1,000 psi per minute until the hose ruptures.
    S8.9 Tensile strength test. Utilize a tension testing machine 
conforming to the requirements of American Society for Testing and 
Materials (ASTM) E4-03 ``Standard Practices for Force Verification of 
Testing Machines,'' and provided with a recording device to measure the 
force applied.
    (a) Attach an air brake hose assembly to the testing machine to 
permit straight, even, machine pull on the hose. Use adapters to mount 
hose assemblies equipped with angled end fittings so that the hose is in 
a straight position when installed on the machine.
    (b) Apply tension at a rate of 1 inch per minute travel of the 
moving head until separation occurs.
    S8.10 Water Absorption and tensile strength test. Immerse an air 
brake hose assembly in distilled water at room temperature for 70 hours. 
Thirty minutes after removal from the water, conduct the test specified 
in S8.9.
    S8.11 Zinc chloride resistance test. Immerse an air brake hose in a 
50 percent zinc chloride aqueous solution at room temperature for 200 
hours. Remove it from the solution and examine it under 7-power 
magnification for cracks.
    S8.12 End fitting corrosion resistance test. Conduct the test 
specified in S6.11 using an air brake hose assembly.
    S8.13 Adhesion test for air brake hose reinforced by wire. (a) Place 
a steel ball with a diameter equal to 73 percent of the nominal inside 
diameter of the hose being tested inside of the hose. Plug one end of 
the hose. Attach the other end of the hose to a source of vacuum.
    (b) Subject the hose to a vacuum of 25 inches of Hg for five 
minutes. With the vacuum still applied to the hose, bend the hose 180 
degrees around a large test cylinder with a radius specified in Table IV 
for the size of hose tested. At the location of this bend, bend the hose 
180 degrees around the test cylinder in the opposite direction.
    (c) With the vacuum still applied to the hose, return the hose to a 
straight position. Attempt to roll the ball inside the hose using 
gravity from one end of the hose to the other end.
    S8.14 Constriction test. Perform the constriction test in S6.12 
using an air brake hose, except that the spherical diameter ``A'' of the 
plug gauge in Figure 4, or the diameter of the rigid spherical ball in 
S6.12.3(a), shall be 66 percent of the nominal inside diameter of the 
air brake hose being tested.
    S9. Requirements--vacuum brake hose, brake hose assemblies, and 
brake hose end fittings.
    S9.1 Labeling.
    S9.1.1 Hose. Each vacuum brake hose shall be labeled, or cut from 
bulk hose that is labeled, at intervals of not more than 6 inches, 
measured from the end of one legend to the beginning of the next, in 
block capital letters and numerals at least one-eighth of an inch high, 
with the information listed in paragraphs (a) through (e) of this 
section. The information need not be present on hose that is sold as 
part of

[[Page 341]]

a brake hose assembly or a motor vehicle. (a) The symbol DOT, 
constituting a certification by the hose manufacturer that the hose 
conforms to all applicable motor vehicle safety standards.
    (b) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of the hose, 
which shall be filed in writing with: Office of Crash Avoidance 
Standards, Vehicle Dynamics Division, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. The 
designation may consist of block capital letters, numerals or a symbol.
    (c) The month, day, and year, or the month and year, of manufacture, 
expressed in numerals. For example, 10/1/96 means October 1, 1996.
    (d) The nominal inside diameter of the hose expressed in inches or 
fractions of inches or in millimeters, or the nominal outside diameter 
of plastic tubing expressed in inches or fractions of inches or in 
millimeters followed by the letters OD. The abbreviation ``mm'' shall 
follow hose sizes that are expressed in millimeters. (Example of inside 
diameter: \7/32\, \1/4\, 4 mm. Example of outside diameter: \1/4\ OD, 12 
mm OD.)
    (e) The letters ``VL'' or ``VH'' shall indicate that the component 
is a light-duty vacuum brake hose or heavy-duty vacuum brake hose, 
respectively.
    S9.1.2 End fittings. Except for an end fitting that is attached by 
heat shrinking or by interference fit with plastic vacuum hose or that 
is attached by deformation of the fitting about a hose by crimping or 
swaging, at least one component of each vacuum brake hose fitting shall 
be etched, embossed, or stamped in block capital letters and numerals at 
least one-sixteenth of an inch high with the following information:
    (a) The symbol DOT, constituting a certification by the manufacturer 
of that component that the component conforms to all applicable motor 
vehicle safety standards.
    (b) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of that component 
of the fitting, which shall be filed in writing with: Office of Crash 
Avoidance Standards, Vehicle Dynamics Division, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. 
The designation may consist of block capital letters, numerals or a 
symbol.
    (c) The letters ``VL'' or ``VH'' shall indicate that the end fitting 
is intended for use in a light-duty or heavy-duty vacuum brake system, 
respectively.
    (d) The nominal inside diameter of the hose to which the fitting is 
properly attached expressed in inches or fractions of inches or in 
millimeters, or the outside diameter of the plastic tubing to which the 
fitting is properly attached expressed in inches or fraction of inches 
or in millimeters followed by the letter OD (See examples in S9.1.1(d)). 
The abbreviation ``mm'' shall follow hose sizes that are expressed in 
millimeters.
    S9.1.3 Assemblies. Each vacuum brake hose assembly made with end 
fittings that are attached by crimping or swaging and each plastic tube 
assembly made with end fittings that are attached by heat shrinking or 
dimensional interference fit, except those sold as part of a motor 
vehicle, shall be labeled by means of a band around the brake hose 
assembly as specified in this paragraph or, at the option of the 
manufacturer, by means of labeling as specified in S9.1.3.1. The band 
may at the manufacturer's option be attached so as to move freely along 
the length of the assembly, as long as it is retained by the end 
fittings. The band shall be etched, embossed, or stamped in block 
capital letters, numerals or symbols at least one-eighth of an inch 
high, with the following information:
    (a) The symbol DOT, constituting certification by the hose assembler 
that the hose assembly conforms to all applicable motor vehicle safety 
standards.
    (b) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of the hose 
assembly, which shall be filed in writing with: Office of Crash 
Avoidance Standards, Vehicle Dynamics Division, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20590. The 
designation may consist of block capital letters, numerals or a symbol.
    S9.1.3.1 At least one end fitting of a vacuum brake hose assembly 
made with end fittings that are attached by crimping or swaging, or of a 
plastic

[[Page 342]]

tubing assembly made with end fittings that are attached by heat 
shrinking or dimensional interference fit shall be etched, stamped or 
embossed with a designation at least one-sixteenth of an inch high that 
identifies the manufacturer of the hose assembly and is filed in 
accordance with S9.1.3(b).
    S9.2 Test requirements. Each vacuum brake hose assembly or 
appropriate part thereof shall be capable of meeting any of the 
requirements set forth under this heading, when tested under the 
conditions of S13 and the applicable procedures of S10. However, a 
particular hose assembly or appropriate part thereof need not meet 
further requirements after having met the constriction requirement 
(S9.2.1) and then having been subjected to any one of the requirements 
specified in S9.2.2 through S9.2.10.
    S9.2.1 Constriction. Except for that part of an end fitting which 
does not contain hose, every inside diameter of any section of a vacuum 
brake hose assembly shall not be less than 75 percent of the nominal 
inside diameter of the hose if for heavy duty, or 70 percent of the 
nominal inside diameter of the hose if for light duty (S10.11).
    S9.2.2 High temperature resistance. A vacuum brake hose tested under 
the conditions specified in S10.1:
    (a) Shall not have collapse of the outside diameter exceeding 10 
percent of the initial outside diameter for a heavy-duty vacuum brake 
hose, or exceeding 15 percent of the initial outside diameter for a 
light-duty vacuum brake hose;
    (b) Shall not show external cracks, charring, or disintegration 
visible without magnification, and;
    (c) Shall not leak when subjected to a hydrostatic pressure test.
    S9.2.3 Low temperature resistance. A vacuum brake hose tested under 
the conditions specified in S10.2 shall:
    (a) Not show cracks visible without magnification after conditioning 
at minus 40 degrees Fahrenheit (minus 40 degrees Celsius) for 70 hours 
when bent around a cylinder having the radius specified in Table V for 
the size hose tested; and
    (b) Not leak when subjected to a hydrostatic pressure test 
(S10.1(e)).
    S9.2.4 Ozone resistance. A vacuum brake hose shall not show cracks 
visible under 7-power magnification after exposure to ozone for 70 hours 
(S10.3).
    S9.2.5 Burst strength. A vacuum brake hose shall not rupture under 
hydrostatic pressure of 350 psi (S10.4).
    S9.2.6 Vacuum. The collapse of the outside diameter of a vacuum 
brake hose under internal vacuum of 26 inches of Hg. for five minutes 
shall not exceed one-sixteenth of an inch (S10.5).
    S9.2.7 Bend. The collapse of the outside diameter of a vacuum brake 
hose, other than a preformed vacuum brake hose, at the middle point of 
the test length when bent until the ends touch shall not exceed the 
values given in Table V for the size of hose tested (S10.6).

                                  Table V--Vacuum Brake Hose Test Requirements
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hose inside diameter*    High temperature       Low temperature            Bend
----------------------      resistance            resistance      ----------------------
                      --------------------------------------------             Maximum    Deformation--collapsed
                                                                     Hose     collapse       inside diameter
 Inches   Millimeters    Hose     Radius of    Hose     Radius of   length,  of outside   (dimension D), inches
                        length,   cylinder,   length,   cylinder,   inches    diameter,
                        inches     inches     inches     inches                inches
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 \7/32\          5           8     1\1/2\    17\1/2\          3          7    \11/64\             \3/64\
  \1/4\          6           9     1\1/2\    17\1/2\          3          8     \3/32\             \1/16\
 \9/32\  ............        9     1\3/4\         19     3\1/2\          9    \12/64\             \4/64\
\11/32\          8           9     1\3/4\         19     3\1/2\         11    \13/64\             \5/64\
  \3/8\         10          10     1\3/4\         19     3\1/2\         12     \5/32\             \3/32\
 \7/16\  ............       11          2    20\1/2\          4         14    \17/64\             \5/64\
\15/32\  ............       11          2    20\1/2\          4         14    \17/64\             \5/64\
  \1/2\         12          11          2    20\1/2\          4         16     \7/32\              \1/8\
  \5/8\         16          12     2\1/4\         22     4\1/2\         22     \7/32\             \5/32\
  \3/4\  ............       14     2\1/2\         24          5         28     \7/32\             \3/16\
      1  ............       16     3\1/4\    28\1/2\     6\1/2\         36     \9/32\              \1/4\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*These sizes are listed to provide test values for brake hoses manufactured in these sizes. They do not
  represent conversions.


[[Page 343]]

    S9.2.8 Swell and adhesion. Following exposure to Reference Fuel B, 
every inside diameter of any section of a vacuum brake hose shall not be 
less than 75 percent of the nominal inside diameter of the hose if for 
heavy duty, or 70 percent of the nominal inside diameter of the hose if 
for light duty. The vacuum brake hose shall show no leakage in a vacuum 
test of 26 inches of Hg for 10 minutes. A vacuum hose that is 
constructed of two or more layers shall withstand a force of 6 pounds 
per inch of length before separation of adjacent layers. (S10.7).
    S9.2.9 Deformation. A vacuum brake hose shall return to 90 percent 
of its original outside diameter within 60 seconds after five 
applications of force as specified in S10.8, except that a wire-
reinforced hose need only return to 85 percent of its original outside 
diameter. In the case of a heavy duty hose, the first application of 
force shall not exceed a peak value of 70 pounds, and the fifth 
application of force shall reach a peak value of at least 40 pounds. In 
the case of light duty hose the first application of force shall not 
exceed a peak value of 50 pounds, and the fifth application of force 
shall reach a peak value of at least 20 pounds (S10.9).
    S9.2.10 End fitting corrosion resistance. After 24 hours of exposure 
to salt spray, vacuum brake hose end fittings shall show no base metal 
corrosion of the end fitting surface except where crimping or the 
application of labeling information has caused displacement of the 
protective coating. (S10.10).
    S10. Test procedures--Vacuum brake hose, brake hose assemblies, and 
brake hose end fittings.
    S10.1 High temperature resistance test. (a) Measure the initial 
outside diameter of the hose.
    (b) Subject the hose to an internal vacuum of 26 inches of Hg at an 
ambient temperature of 257 degrees Fahrenheit (125 degrees Celsius) for 
a period of 96 hours. Remove the hose to room temperature and 
atmospheric pressure.
    (c) Within 5 minutes of completion of the conditioning in S10.1(b), 
measure the outside diameter at the point of greatest collapse and 
calculate the percentage collapse based on the initial outside diameter.
    (d) Cool the hose at room temperature for 5 hours. Bend the hose 
around a mandrel with a diameter equal to five times the initial outside 
diameter of the hose. Examine the exterior of the hose for cracks, 
charring, or disintegration visible without magnification. Remove the 
hose from the mandrel.
    (e) Fill the hose assembly with water, allowing all gases to escape. 
Apply water pressure in the hose of 175 psi within 10 seconds. Maintain 
an internal hydrostatic pressure of 175 psi for one minute and examine 
the hose for visible leakage.
    S10.2 Low temperature resistance test. (a) Conduct the test 
specified in S8.2(a) through (c) using vacuum brake hose with the 
cylinder radius specified in Table V for the size of hose tested.
    (b) Remove the hose from the test cylinder, warm the hose at room 
temperature for 5 hours, and conduct the hydrostatic pressure test in 
S10.1(e).
    S10.3 Ozone resistance test. Conduct the test specified in S6.8 
using vacuum brake hose.
    S10.4 Burst strength test. Conduct the test specified in S8.8 using 
vacuum brake hose.
    S10.5 Vacuum test. Utilize a 12-inch vacuum brake hose assembly 
sealed at one end. (a) Measure the hose outside diameter.
    (b) Attach the hose to a source of vacuum and subject it to a vacuum 
of 26 inches of Hg for 5 minutes.
    (c) Measure the hose to determine the minimum outside diameter while 
the hose is still subject to vacuum.
    S10.6 Bend test. (a) Bend a vacuum brake hose, of the length 
prescribed in Table V, in the direction of its normal curvature until 
the ends just touch as shown in Figure 6.
    (b) Measure the outside diameter of the specimen at point A before 
and after bending.
    (c) The difference between the two measurements is the collapse of 
the hose outside diameter on bending.

[[Page 344]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.008

                 Fig. 6--Bend Test of Vacuum Brake Hose.
    S10.7 Swell and adhesion test. (a) Fill a specimen of vacuum brake 
hose 12 inches long with ASTM Reference Fuel B as described in ASTM 
D471-98 <SUP>[egr]</SUP>\1\ Standard Test Method for Rubber Property--
Effect of Liquids. This incorporation by reference was approved by the 
Director of the Federal Register in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 
1 CFR part 51. Copies may be obtained from the American Society for 
Testing and Materials (ASTM) International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, P.O. 
Box C700, West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959. Copies may be inspected at 
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Technical 
Information Services, 400 Seventh St., SW., Plaza Level, Room 403, 
Washington, DC 20590, or at the National Archives and Records 
Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this 
material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/
federal--register/code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    (b) Maintain reference fuel in the hose under atmospheric pressure 
at room temperature for 48 hours.
    (c) Remove fuel and conduct the constriction test in S10.11.
    (d) Attach the hose to a source of vacuum and subject it to a vacuum 
of 26 inches of Hg for 10 minutes. Remove the hose from the vacuum 
source.
    (e) For a vacuum brake hose constructed of two or more layers, 
conduct the test specified in S8.6 using the vacuum brake hose.
    S10.8 [Reserved]
    S10.9 Deformation test. Table VI specifies the test specimen 
dimensions.
    S10.9.1 Apparatus. Utilize a compression device, equipped to measure 
force of at least 100 pounds, and feeler gages of sufficient length to 
be passed completely through the test specimen.
    S10.9.2 Operation. (a) Position the test specimen longitudinally in 
the compression device with the fabric laps not in the line of the 
applied pressure.

  Table VI--Dimensions of Test Specimen and Feeler Gage For Deformation
                                  Test
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Hose inside diameter    Specimen dimensions     Feeler gage dimensions
          *                 (see Fig. 7)      --------------------------
----------------------------------------------
                          Depth      Length       Width      Thickness
    in.         mm       (inch)      (inch)      (inch)        (inch)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  \7/32\          5      \3/64\           1       \1/8\       \3/64\
   \1/4\          6      \1/16\           1       \1/8\       \1/16\
  \9/32\    .........    \1/16\           1       \1/8\       \1/16\
 \11/32\          8      \5/64\           1      \3/16\       \5/64\
   \3/8\         10      \3/32\           1      \3/16\       \3/32\
  \7/16\    .........    \5/64\           1       \1/4\       \5/64\
 \15/32\    .........    \5/64\           1       \1/4\       \5/64\
   \1/2\         12       \1/8\           1       \1/4\        \1/8\
   \5/8\         16      \5/32\           1       \1/4\       \5/32\
   \3/4\    .........    \3/16\           1       \1/4\       \3/16\
       1    .........     \1/4\           1       \1/4\        \1/4\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
*These sizes are listed to provide test values for brake hoses
  manufactured in these sizes. They do not represent conversions.

    (b) Apply gradually increasing force to the test specimen to 
compress its inside diameter to that specified in Table VI (dimension D 
of Figure 7) for the size of hose tested.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.009

             Fig. 7--Deformed Specimen of Vacuum Brake Hose
    (c) After 5 seconds release the force and record the peak load 
applied.
    (d) Repeat the procedure four times permitting a 10-second recovery 
period between load applications.
    S10.10 End fitting corrosion resistance test. Conduct the test 
specified in S6.11 using a vacuum brake hose assembly.
    S10.11 Constriction test. Perform the constriction test in S6.12 
using a vacuum brake hose, except that the spherical diameter ``A'' of 
the plug gauge in Figure 4, or the diameter of the rigid

[[Page 345]]

spherical ball in S6.12.3(a), shall be 75 percent of the nominal inside 
diameter of the vacuum brake hose if it is heavy duty, or 70 percent of 
the nominal inside diameter of the vacuum brake hose if it is light 
duty.
    S11. Requirements--Plastic air brake tubing, plastic air brake 
tubing assemblies, and plastic air brake tubing end fittings.
    11.1 Construction. Each plastic air brake tubing assembly shall be 
equipped with permanently attached end fittings or reusable end 
fittings. Plastic air brake tubing shall conform to the dimensional 
requirements specified in Table VII. (S12.1)

                                                     Table VII--Plastic Air Brake Tubing Dimensions
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Maximum outside   Minimum outside   Nominal inside     Nominal wall     Wall thickness
                                                                    diameter          diameter          diameter          thickness         tolerance
                Nominal tubing outside diameter                -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                   mm     inches     mm     inches     mm     inches     mm     inches     mm     inches
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/8\ inch....................................................     3.25    0.128     3.10    0.122     2.01    0.079     0.58    0.023     0.08    0.003
\5/32\ inch...................................................     4.04    0.159     3.89    0.153     2.34    0.092     0.81    0.032     0.08    0.003
\3/16\ inch...................................................     4.83    0.190     4.67    0.184     2.97    0.117     0.89    0.035     0.08    0.003
\1/4\ inch....................................................     6.43    0.253     6.27    0.247     4.32    0.170     1.02    0.040     0.08    0.003
\5/16\ inch...................................................     8.03    0.316     7.82    0.308     5.89    0.232     1.02    0.040     0.10    0.004
\3/8\ inch....................................................     9.63    0.379     9.42    0.371     6.38    0.251     1.57    0.062     0.10    0.004
\1/2\ inch....................................................    12.83    0.505    12.57    0.495     9.55    0.376     1.57    0.062     0.10    0.004
\5/8\ inch....................................................    16.00    0.630    15.75    0.620    11.20    0.441     2.34    0.092     0.13    0.005
\3/4\ inch....................................................    19.18    0.755    18.92    0.745    14.38    0.566     2.34    0.092     0.13    0.005
6 mm..........................................................     6.10    0.240     5.90    0.232     4.00    0.157     1.00    0.039     0.10    0.004
8 mm..........................................................     8.10    0.319     7.90    0.311     6.00    0.236     1.00    0.039     0.10    0.004
10 mm.........................................................    10.13    0.399     9.87    0.389     7.00    0.276     1.50    0.059     0.10    0.004
12 mm.........................................................    12.13    0.478    11.87    0.467     9.00    0.354     1.50    0.059     0.10    0.004
16 mm.........................................................    16.13    0.635    15.87    0.625    12.00    0.472     2.00    0.079     0.13    0.005
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S11.2 Labeling.
    S11.2.1 Plastic air brake tubing. Plastic air brake tubing shall be 
labeled, or cut from bulk tubing that is labeled, at intervals of not 
more than 6 inches, measured from the end of one legend to the beginning 
of the next, in block capital letters and numerals at least one-eighth 
of an inch high, with the information listed in paragraphs (a) through 
(e) of this section. The information need not be present on tubing that 
is sold as part of a motor vehicle.
    (a) The symbol DOT, constituting a certification by the hose 
manufacturer that the hose conforms to all applicable motor vehicle 
safety standards.
    (b) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of the tubing, 
which shall be filed in writing with: Office of Vehicle Safety 
Compliance, Equipment Division NVS-222, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh St. SW., Washington, DC 20590. The 
designation may consist of block capital letters, numerals, or a symbol.
    (c) The month, day, and year, or the month and year, of manufacture, 
expressed in numerals. For example, 10/1/96 means October 1, 1996.
    (d) The nominal outside diameter expressed in inches or fractions of 
inches or in millimeters followed by the letters OD. The abbreviation 
``mm'' shall follow tubing sizes that are expressed in millimeters. 
(Examples: \3/8\ OD, 6 mm OD.)
    (e) The letter ``A'' shall indicate intended use in air brake 
systems.
    S11.2.2 End fittings. Except for an end fitting that is attached by 
deformation of the fitting about the tubing by crimping or swaging, at 
least one component of each plastic air brake tubing end fitting shall 
be etched, embossed, or stamped in block capital letters and numerals at 
least one-sixteenth of an inch high with the following information:
    (a) The symbol DOT, constituting a certification by the manufacturer 
that the end fitting conforms to all applicable motor vehicle safety 
standards.
    (b) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of the end 
fitting, which shall be filed in writing with: Office of Vehicle Safety 
Compliance, Equipment Division NVS-222, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh St. SW., Washington, DC 20590.

[[Page 346]]

The designation may consist of block capital letters, numerals, or a 
symbol.
    (c) The letter ``A'' shall indicate intended use in air brake 
systems.
    (d) The nominal outside diameter of the plastic tubing to which the 
fitting is properly attached expressed in inches or fractions of inches 
or in millimeters followed by the letters OD. The abbreviation ``mm'' 
shall follow tubing sizes that are expressed in millimeters. (Examples: 
\3/8\ OD, 6 mm OD)
    S11.2.3. Assemblies. Each plastic air brake tubing assembly made 
with end fittings that are attached by crimping or swaging, except those 
sold as part of a motor vehicle, shall be labeled by means of a band 
around the brake tubing assembly as specified in this paragraph or, at 
the option of the manufacturer, by means of labeling as specified in 
S11.2.3.1. The band may at the manufacturer's option be attached so as 
to move freely along the length of the assembly, as long as it is 
retained by the end fittings. The band shall be etched, embossed, or 
stamped in block capital letters, numerals or symbols at least one-
eighth of an inch high, with the following information:
    (a) The symbol DOT, constituting certification by the tubing 
assembler that the tubing assembly conforms to all applicable motor 
vehicle safety standards.
    (b) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of the hose 
assembly, which shall be filed in writing with: Office of Vehicle Safety 
Compliance, Equipment Division NVS-222, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 400 Seventh St. SW., Washington, DC 20590. The 
designation may consist of block capital letters, numerals, or a symbol.
    S11.2.3.1 At least one end fitting of a plastic air brake tubing 
assembly made with end fittings that are attached by crimping or swaging 
shall be etched, stamped, or embossed with a designation at least one-
sixteenth of an inch high that identifies the manufacturer of the tubing 
assembly and is filed in accordance with S11.2.3(b).
    S11.3 Test requirements. Each plastic air brake tubing assembly or 
appropriate part thereof shall be capable of meeting any of the 
requirements set forth under this heading, when tested under the 
conditions of S13 and the applicable procedures of S12. However, a 
particular tubing assembly or appropriate part thereof need not meet 
further requirements after having met the constriction requirement 
(S11.3.1) and then having been subjected to any one of the requirements 
specified in S11.3.2 through S11.3.24. Unless otherwise specified, 
testing is conducted on a sample of tubing 12 inches in length.
    S11.3.1 Constriction. Every inside diameter of any section of a 
plastic air brake tubing assembly shall not be less than 66 percent of 
the nominal inside diameter of the brake tubing. (S12.2)
    S11.3.2 High temperature conditioning and dimensional stability. 
Plastic air brake tubing shall conform to the dimensions in Table VII 
after conditioning in air at 230 degrees Fahrenheit (110 degrees 
Celsius) for four hours. (S12.3)
    S11.3.3 Boiling water conditioning and dimensional stability. 
Plastic air brake tubing shall conform to the dimensions in Table VII 
after conditioning in boiling water for two hours. (S12.4)
    S11.3.4 Burst Strength. Plastic air brake tubing shall not rupture 
when subjected to the burst strength pressure in Table VIII for the size 
of tubing being tested. (S12.5)
    S11.3.5 Moisture absorption and burst strength. Plastic air brake 
tubing shall not rupture when subjected to 80 percent of the burst 
strength pressure in Table VIII, after the tubing has been dried in an 
oven and then conditioned in a 100 percent relative humidity atmosphere 
at 75 degrees Fahrenheit (24 degrees Celsius) for 100 hours. (S12.6)

                           Table VIII--Plastic Air Brake Tubing Mechanical Properties
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                           Burst strength    Supported bend   Unsupported bend     Conditioned
                                              pressure         radius \1\        radius \2\       tensile load
            Nominal tubing OD            -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                            kPa      Psi       Mm     inches     mm     inches     N       lbf
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/8\ inch..............................     6900     1000      9.4     0.37      9.4     0.37      156       35
\5/32\ inch.............................     8300     1200     12.7     0.50     12.7     0.50      178       40
\3/16\ inch.............................     8300     1200     19.1     0.75     19.1     0.75      222       50

[[Page 347]]

 
\1/4\ inch..............................     8300     1200     25.4     1.00     25.4     1.00      222       50
\5/16\ inch.............................     6900     1000     31.8     1.25     38.1     1.50      334       75
\3/8\ inch..............................     9700     1400     38.1     1.50     38.1     1.50      667      150
\1/2\ inch..............................     6600      950     50.8     2.00     63.5     2.50      890      200
\5/8\ inch..............................     6200      900     63.5     2.50     76.2     3.00     1446      325
\3/4\ inch..............................     5500      800     76.2     3.00     88.9     3.50     1557      350
6 mm....................................     7600     1100     20.0     0.75     25.4     1.00      222       50
8 mm....................................     6200      900     31.8     1.25     38.1     1.50      334       75
10 mm...................................     8200     1200     38.1     1.50     38.1     1.50      667      150
12 mm...................................     6900     1000     44.5     1.75     63.5     2.50      890      200
16 mm...................................     6000      875     69.9     2.75     76.2     3.00     1446     325
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Notes: (1) Supported bend radius for tests specifying cylinders around which the tubing is bent. (2) Unsupported
  bend radius for the collapse resistance test in which the tubing is not supported by a cylinder during
  bending.

    S11.3.6 Ultraviolet light resistance. Plastic air brake tubing shall 
not rupture when subjected to 80 percent of the burst strength pressure 
in Table VIII for the size of tubing being tested, after being exposed 
to ultraviolet light for 300 hours and then impacted with a one pound 
weight dropped from a height of 12 inches. (S12.7)
    S11.3.7 Low temperature flexibility. The outer surface of plastic 
air brake tubing shall not show cracks visible without magnification as 
a result of conditioning in air at 230 degrees Fahrenheit (110 degrees 
Celsius) for 24 hours, and then conditioning in air at minus 40 degrees 
Fahrenheit (minus 40 degrees Celsius) for four hours, and then bending 
the tubing 180 degrees around a test cylinder having a radius equal to 
six times the nominal outside diameter of the tubing. (S12.8)
    S11.3.8 High temperature flexibility. Plastic air brake tubing shall 
not rupture or burst when subjected to 80 percent of the burst strength 
pressure in Table VIII for the size of tubing being tested, after the 
tubing has been:
    (a) Conditioned in air at 230 degrees Fahrenheit (110 degrees 
Celsius) for 72 hours while bent 180 degrees around a cylinder having a 
radius equal to the supported bend radius in Table VIII for the size of 
tubing being tested; and
    (b) Cooled to room temperature while remaining on the cylinder, then 
straightened; and
    (c) Bent 180 degrees around the cylinder in the opposite direction 
of the first bending. (S12.9)
    S11.3.9 High temperature resistance. Plastic air brake tubing shall 
not rupture or burst when subjected to 80 percent of the burst strength 
pressure in Table VIII for the size of tubing being tested, after the 
tubing has been conditioned in air at 230 degrees Fahrenheit (110 
degrees Celsius) for 72 hours. (S12.10)
    S11.3.10 High temperature conditioning, low temperature impact 
resistance. Plastic air brake tubing shall not rupture or burst when 
subjected to 80 percent of the burst strength pressure in Table VIII for 
the size of tubing being tested, after the tubing has been conditioned 
in air at 230 degrees Fahrenheit (110 degrees Celsius) for 24 hours, 
then conditioned in air at minus 40 degrees Fahrenheit (minus 40 degrees 
Celsius) for 4 hours and impacted with a one pound weight dropped from a 
height of 12 inches. (S12.11)
    S11.3.11 Boiling water conditioning, low temperature impact 
resistance. Plastic air brake tubing shall not rupture when subjected to 
80 percent of the burst strength pressure in Table VIII for the size of 
tubing being tested, after the tubing has been conditioned in boiling 
water for two hours, then conditioned in air at minus 40 degrees 
Fahrenheit (minus 40 degrees Celsius) for 4 hours, and then impacted 
with a one pound weight dropped from a height of 12 inches. (S12.12)
    S11.3.12 Zinc chloride resistance. The outer surface of plastic air 
brake tubing shall not show cracks visible under 7-power magnification 
after immersion in a 50 percent zinc chloride aqueous

[[Page 348]]

solution for 200 hours while bent around a cylinder having a radius 
equal to the supported bend radius in Table VIII for the size of tubing 
tested. (S12.13)
    S11.3.13 Methyl alcohol resistance. The outer surface of plastic air 
brake tubing shall not show cracks visible under 7-power magnification 
after immersion in a 95 percent methyl alcohol aqueous solution for 200 
hours while bent around a cylinder having a radius equal to the 
supported bend radius in Table VIII for the size of tubing tested. 
(S12.14)
    S11.3.14 High temperature conditioning and collapse resistance. The 
collapse of the outside diameter of plastic air brake tubing shall not 
exceed twenty percent of the original outside diameter when bent 180 
degrees on a holding fixture to the unsupported bend radius specified in 
Table VIII and conditioned in air at 200 degrees Fahrenheit (93 degrees 
Celsius) for 24 hours. (S12.15)
    S11.3.15 Ozone resistance. The outer surface of plastic air brake 
tubing shall not show cracks visible under 7-power magnification after 
exposure to ozone for 70 hours at 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees 
Celsius). (S12.16)
    S11.3.16 Oil resistance. Plastic air brake tubing shall not rupture 
when subjected to 80 percent of the burst strength pressure in Table 
VIII for the size of tubing being tested, after the tubing has been 
conditioned in ASTM IRM 903 oil at 212 degrees Fahrenheit (100 degrees 
Celsius) for 70 hours. (S12.17)
    S11.3.17 Tensile strength. A plastic air brake tubing assembly 
designed for use between frame and axle or between a towed and a towing 
vehicle shall withstand, without separation of the tubing from its end 
fittings, a pull of 250 pounds if it is \3/8\ inch, 10 mm, or less in 
nominal outside diameter, or a pull of 325 pounds if it is larger than 
\3/8\ inch or 10 mm in nominal outside diameter. A plastic air brake 
tubing assembly designed for use in any other application shall 
withstand, without separation of the hose from its end fittings, a pull 
of 35 pounds if it is \1/8\ inch, 3 mm, or less in nominal outside 
diameter, 40 pounds if it is \5/32\ inch or 4 mm in nominal outside 
diameter, 50 pounds if it is \3/16\ to \3/8\ inch or 5 mm to 10 mm in 
nominal outside diameter, 150 pounds if it is \1/2\ to \5/8\ inch or 11 
mm to 16 mm in nominal outside diameter, or 325 pounds if it is larger 
than \5/8\ inch or 16 mm in nominal outside diameter. (S12.18)
    S11.3.18 Boiling water conditioning and tensile strength. A plastic 
air brake tubing assembly when subjected to a tensile pull test shall 
either elongate 50 percent or withstand the conditioned tensile load in 
Table VIII without separation from its end fittings, with one end of the 
assembly conditioned in boiling water for 5 minutes. (S12.19)
    S11.3.19 Thermal conditioning and tensile strength. A plastic air 
brake tubing assembly when subjected to a tensile pull test shall either 
elongate 50 percent or withstand the conditioned tensile load in Table 
VIII without separation from its end fittings after the assembly has 
been subjected to four cycles of conditioning in air at minus 40 degrees 
Fahrenheit (minus 40 degrees Celsius) for thirty minutes, normalizing at 
room temperature, conditioning in boiling water for 15 minutes, and 
normalizing at room temperature. (S12.20)
    S11.3.20 Vibration resistance. A plastic air brake tubing assembly 
with an internal air pressure of 120 psig shall not rupture or leak more 
than 50 cm\3\ per minute at a temperature of minus 40 degrees Fahrenheit 
(minus 40 degrees Celsius) and 25 cm\3\ per minute at a temperature of 
75 degrees Fahrenheit (24 degrees Celsius), after the assembly has been 
subjected to 1,000,000 cycles of vibration testing with one end of the 
assembly fixed and the other end stroked \1/2\-inch at 600 cycles per 
minute. In addition, end fittings that use a threaded retention nut 
shall retain at least 20 percent of the original retention nut 
tightening torque upon completion of the vibration testing. The 
vibration test shall be conducted in an environmental chamber and the 
air temperature shall be cycled between minus 40 degrees Fahrenheit 
(minus 40 degrees Celsius) and 220 degrees Fahrenheit (104 degrees 
Celsius) during the test. (S12.21)

[[Page 349]]

    S11.3.21 End fitting retention. The end fittings of a plastic air 
brake tubing assembly shall not rupture when the assembly is filled with 
water and pressurized to the burst strength pressure in Table VIII. 
(S12.22)
    S11.3.22 Thermal conditioning and end fitting retention. The end 
fittings of a plastic air brake tubing assembly shall not rupture when 
the tubing assembly is filled with ASTM IRM 903 oil and:
    (a) Conditioning in air at 200 degrees Fahrenheit (93 degrees 
Celsius) for 24 hours with atmospheric pressure inside the tubing 
assembly; and
    (b) Increasing the pressure inside the tubing assembly to 450 psi, 
and holding this pressure for five minutes while maintaining an air 
temperature of 200 degrees Fahrenheit (93 degrees Celsius); and
    (c) Reducing the pressure inside the tubing assembly to atmospheric 
and permitting the tubing assembly to cool at 75 degrees Fahrenheit (24 
degrees Celsius) for 1 hour; and
    (d) Conditioning the tubing assembly in air at minus 40 degrees 
Fahrenheit (minus 40 degrees Celsius) for 24 hours with atmospheric 
pressure inside the tubing assembly; and
    (e) Increasing the pressure inside the tubing assembly to 450 psi, 
and holding this pressure for five minutes while maintaining an air 
temperature of minus 40 degrees Fahrenheit (minus 40 degrees Celsius). 
(S12.23)
    S11.3.23 End fitting serviceability. A plastic air brake end fitting 
that uses a threaded retention nut shall not rupture or leak more than 
25 cm\3\ per minute when pressurized to 120 psi after five assembly 
cycles. (S12.24)
    S11.3.24 End fitting corrosion resistance. After 24 hours of 
exposure to salt spray, air brake hose end fittings shall show no base 
metal corrosion on the end fitting surface except where crimping or the 
application of labeling information causes a displacement of the 
protective coating. (S12.25)
    S12. Test procedures--Plastic air brake tubing, plastic air brake 
tubing assemblies, plastic air brake tubing end fittings.
    S12.1 Air brake tubing dimensions. Measure the tubing dimensions 
including wall thickness, inside diameter, and outside diameter, using 
appropriate metrology apparatus such as micrometers, dial indicators and 
gauges, or optical comparators. To account for slight out-of-round 
conditions, diameter measurements may be calculated using the average of 
the major and minor diameters.
    S12.2 Constriction test. Perform the constriction test in S6.12 
using an air brake tubing assembly, except that the spherical diameter 
``A'' of the plug gauge in Figure 4, or the diameter of the rigid 
spherical ball in S6.12.3(a), shall be 66 percent of the nominal inside 
diameter of the tubing as specified in Table VII.
    S12.3 High temperature conditioning and dimensional stability test. 
(a) Condition the tubing at 230 degrees Fahrenheit (110 degrees Celsius) 
for 4 hours in an air oven.
    (b) Remove the tubing from the oven and allow to cool at room 
temperature for 30 minutes.
    (c) Measure the dimensions of the tubing using the procedure in 
S12.1.
    S12.4 Boiling water conditioning and dimensional stability test. (a) 
Utilize a container constructed of a non-reactive material large enough 
so that the tubing to be tested does not touch any surface of the 
container. Fill container with distilled water.
    (b) Slip the tubing over a stainless steel wire for positioning it 
in the pot.
    (c) Bring the water to a boil. Place the tubing in the water and 
position it so that it does not touch the container. Boil the tubing for 
two hours. Replenish the water as necessary, adding it slowly so that 
the water in the pot boils continuously.
    (d) Remove the tubing from the water and allow to cool at room 
temperature for 30 minutes. Wipe off any water that remains on the 
tubing.
    (e) Measure the dimensions of the tubing using the procedure in 
S12.1.
    S12.5 Burst strength test. (a) Utilize an air brake tubing assembly 
or prepare a 12 inch length of tubing and install end fittings according 
to the end fitting manufacturer's instructions.
    (b) Plug one end of the assembly, fill it with water, and connect 
the other end to a source of water pressure. Bleed any air from the 
assembly and water pressure system.
    (c) Increase the water pressure inside the tubing assembly at a rate 
of 3,000

[[Page 350]]

psi per minute to the burst strength pressure for the size of tubing 
being tested as specified in Table VIII.
    S12.6 Moisture absorption and burst strength. (a) Prepare a sample 
of tubing twelve inches in length.
    (b) Condition the tubing at 230 degrees Fahrenheit (110 degrees 
Celsius) for 24 hours in an air oven. Remove the tubing from the oven 
and within 30 seconds, and weigh it to establish the initial weight. The 
weight shall be measured with a resolution of 0.01 gram; if the scale 
has a higher resolution, then values of 0.005 gram and above shall be 
rounded to the nearest 0.01 gram and values below 0.005 gram shall be 
truncated.
    (c) Place the tubing in an environmental chamber and condition it 
for 100 hours at 100 percent relative humidity and a temperature of 75 
degrees Fahrenheit (24 degrees Celsius).
    (d) Remove the tubing from the chamber and within a period of 5 
minutes, remove all surface moisture from the tubing using cloth and 
weigh the tubing to establish the conditioned weight. Weight shall be 
measured to the nearest 0.01 gram as in S12.6(b).
    (e) Calculate percentage of moisture absorption as follows:

([Conditioned Weight--Initial Weight] / [Initial Weight]) x 100
    (f) Install end fittings according to the end fitting manufacturers 
instructions.
    (g) Conduct the burst strength test in S12.5 except use 80 percent 
of the burst strength pressure for the size of tubing being tested as 
specified in Table VIII.
    S12.7 Ultraviolet light resistance test. (a) Apparatus. An 
accelerated weathering test machine for ultraviolet light conditioning 
of plastic air brake tubing. The machine shall be equipped with 
fluorescent UVA-340 light bulbs and automatic irradiance control. Also 
utilize an impact test apparatus as shown in Figure 8.
    (b) Test standards. The testing is in accordance with American 
Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) G154-00 ``Standard Practice for 
Operating Fluorescent Light Apparatus for UV Exposure of Nonmetallic 
Materials;'' ASTM G151-97 ``Standard Practice for Exposing Nonmetallic 
Materials in Accelerated Test Devices that Use Laboratory Light 
Sources,'' and; ASTM D4329-99 ``Standard Practice for Fluorescent UV 
Exposure of Plastics.'' These incorporations by reference were approved 
by the Director of the Federal Register in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 
552(a) and 1 CFR Part 51. Copies may be obtained from the American 
Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) International, 100 Barr Harbor 
Drive, P.O. Box C700, West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959. Copies may be 
inspected at the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
Technical Information Services, 400 Seventh St., SW., Plaza Level, Room 
403, Washington, DC 20590, or at the National Archives and Records 
Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this 
material at NARA, call (202) 741-6030, or go to: http://
www.archives.gov/federal--register/code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--
locations.html.
    (c) Preparation. (1) Utilize a 12 inch length of plastic air brake 
tubing. Mask 1 inch of each end of the tubing where end fittings will be 
attached using opaque tape.
    (2) Attach the tubing to the test rack of the machine, securing it 
at the ends along the masked sections. Wipe the outside surface of the 
tubing with acetone to remove any surface contaminants. Place the tubing 
and rack in the accelerated weathering test machine so that the center 
of the tubing assembly is approximately in the center of the UV light 
exposure area of the test machine. (If multiple plastic brake tubing 
assemblies are tested, then their position in the machine should be 
rotated according to ASTM D4329-99 S7.4.1, except the rotation shall be 
each 96 hours instead of weekly.) The distance from the light bulb to 
the tubing shall be approximately 2 inches. Set the UV irradiance to 
0.85 watts per square meter at 340 nm and maintain this level during the 
testing. Maintain a temperature inside the test chamber of 113 degrees 
Fahrenheit (45 degrees Celsius), and use only atmospheric humidity. 
Expose the tubing at this UV irradiance level for 300 hours 
continuously. Remove the tubing from the test chamber.
    (3) Place the tubing inside the impact test apparatus, and drop the 
impacter

[[Page 351]]

onto the tubing from a height of 12 inches.
    (4) Remove the masking material from the ends of the tubing. Install 
end fittings according to the end fitting manufacturer's instructions. 
Conduct the burst strength test in S12.5 except use 80 percent of the 
burst strength pressure for the size of tubing being tested as specified 
in Table VIII.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20DE04.007


[[Page 352]]



                       Table Accompanying Figure 8
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                          Hole diameter
                                                              ``D''
            Nominal tubing outside diameter            -----------------
                                                           mm     Inches
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/8\ inch............................................     3.96    0.156
\5/32\ inch...........................................     4.75    0.187
\3/16\ inch...........................................     5.54    0.218
\1/4\ inch............................................     7.14    0.281
\5/16\ inch...........................................     8.71    0.343
\3/8\ inch............................................    10.31    0.406
\1/2\ inch............................................    13.49    0.531
\5/8\ inch............................................    16.66    0.656
\3/4\ inch............................................    20.32    0.800
6 mm..................................................     6.80    0.268
8 mm..................................................     8.80    0.346
10 mm.................................................    10.80    0.425
12 mm.................................................    12.80    0.504
16 mm.................................................    16.80    0.661
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S12.8 Low temperature flexibility test. (a) Utilize a cylinder 
having a radius of six times the nominal outside diameter of the tubing.
    (b) Condition the tubing in an air oven at 230 degrees Fahrenheit 
(110 degrees Celsius) for 24 hours. Remove from the oven and cool at 
room temperature for 30 minutes.
    (c) Condition the cylinder and the tubing in an environmental 
chamber at minus 40 degrees Fahrenheit (minus 40 degrees Celsius) for 
four hours.
    (d) With the tubing and test cylinder at minus 40 degrees Fahrenheit 
(minus 40 degrees Celsius), bend the tubing 180 degrees around the 
cylinder at a steady rate in a period of 4 to 8 seconds.
    S12.9 High temperature flexibility test. (a) Utilize a cylinder 
having a radius equal to the supported bend radius in Table VIII for the 
size of tubing being tested.
    (b) Bend the tubing 180 degrees around the cylinder and hold in 
place with a clamp or other suitable support, applying only enough force 
on the tubing to hold it in position.
    (c) Condition the tubing and cylinder in an air oven at 230 degrees 
Fahrenheit (110 degrees Celsius) for 72 hours. Remove the tubing and 
cylinder from the oven and cool at room temperature for two hours.
    (d) Remove the clamps or supports from the tubing and straighten the 
tubing at a steady rate in a period of 4 to 8 seconds.
    (e) Rebend the tubing 180 degrees around the cylinder, at the same 
point but in the opposite direction of the bending in S12.9(b), at a 
steady rate in a period of 4 to 8 seconds.
    (f) Conduct the burst strength test in S12.5 except use 80 percent 
of the burst strength pressure for the size of tubing being tested as 
specified in Table VIII.
    S12.10 High temperature resistance test. Condition the tubing in an 
air oven at 230 degrees Fahrenheit (110 degrees Celsius) for 72 hours. 
Remove the tubing and allow to cool at room temperature for 30 minutes. 
Conduct the burst strength test in S12.5 except use 80 percent of the 
burst strength pressure for the size of tubing being tested as specified 
in Table VIII.
    S12.11 High temperature conditioning, low temperature impact 
resistance test. (a) Apparatus. Utilize an impact test apparatus as 
shown in Figure 8.
    (b) Condition the tubing in an air oven at 230 degrees Fahrenheit 
(110 degrees Celsius) for 72 hours. Remove the tubing and allow to cool 
at room temperature for 30 minutes.
    (c) Condition the tubing and the impact test apparatus in an 
environmental chamber at minus 40 degrees Fahrenheit (minus 40 degrees 
Celsius) for 4 hours.
    (d) With the tubing and impact test apparatus at minus 40 degrees 
Fahrenheit (minus 40 degrees Celsius), place the tubing inside the 
apparatus and drop the impacter onto the tubing from a height of 12 
inches. Remove the tubing from the chamber and allow to warm at room 
temperature for one hour.
    (e) Conduct the burst strength test in S12.5 except use 80 percent 
of the burst strength pressure for the size of tubing being tested as 
specified in Table VIII.
    S12.12 Boiling water conditioning, low temperature impact resistance 
test. (a) Apparatus. Utilize an impact test apparatus as shown in Figure 
8.
    (b) Condition the tubing in boiling water using the test in S12.4 
(a) through (d), except that the length of tubing shall be 12 inches.
    (c) Condition the tubing and the impact test apparatus in an 
environmental chamber at minus 40 degrees Fahrenheit (minus 40 degrees 
Celsius) for 4 hours.
    (d) With the tubing and impact test apparatus at minus 40 degrees 
Fahrenheit (minus 40 degrees Celsius), place

[[Page 353]]

the tubing inside the apparatus and drop the impacter onto the tubing 
from a height of 12 inches. Remove the tubing from the chamber and allow 
to warm at room temperature for one hour.
    (e) Conduct the burst strength test in S12.5 except use 80 percent 
of the burst strength pressure for the size of tubing being tested as 
specified in Table VIII.
    S12.13 Zinc chloride resistance test. (a) Utilize a cylinder having 
a radius equal to the supported bend radius in Table VIII for the size 
of tubing being tested. The cylinder is constructed of a non-reactive 
material or coated to prevent chemical reaction with zinc chloride. The 
length of the tubing sample is long enough so that its ends will not be 
submerged during the immersion in zinc chloride, or the ends of the 
tubing are plugged to keep the zinc chloride from entering the tubing.
    (b) Bend the tubing 180 degrees around the cylinder and hold in 
place with a clamp or other suitable support constructed of non-reactive 
materials, applying only enough force on the tubing to hold it in 
position.
    (c) Immerse the tubing and cylinder in a 50 percent zinc chloride 
aqueous solution at room temperature for 200 hours.
    (d) Remove the tubing and cylinder from the solution. While still on 
the test cylinder, inspect the tubing under 7-power magnification for 
cracks.
    S12.14 Methyl alcohol resistance. (a) Utilize a cylinder having a 
radius equal to the supported bend radius in Table VIII for the size of 
tubing being tested. The cylinder is constructed of a non-reactive 
material or coated to prevent chemical reaction with methyl alcohol.
    (b) Bend the tubing 180 degrees around the cylinder and hold in 
place with a clamp or other suitable support constructed of non-reactive 
materials, applying only enough force on the tubing to hold it in 
position. The ends of the tubing may be shortened so that they will be 
fully submerged in the methyl alcohol.
    (c) Immerse the tubing and cylinder in a 95 percent methyl alcohol 
aqueous solution at room temperature for 200 hours.
    (d) Remove the tubing and cylinder from the solution. While still on 
the test cylinder, inspect the tubing under 7-power magnification for 
cracks.
    S12.15 High temperature conditioning and collapse resistance test. 
(a) Apparatus. A holding device consisting of two vertical pins affixed 
to a flat, horizontal plate. Each pin projects 1 inch above the top 
surface of the plate. The diameter of each pin is approximately equal to 
the inside diameter of the tubing being tested. Using the unsupported 
bend radius for the size of tubing being tested from Table VIII, the 
distance between the pin centerlines is equal to:

[2 x unsupported bend radius] + [nominal OD of tubing]

    (b) Preparation. (1) Use the unsupported bend radius for the size of 
tubing being tested from Table VIII and cut the tubing to the following 
length:

[3.14 x [unsupported bend radius]] + [10 x [nominal tubing OD]] + 2 
    inches

    or

[3.14 x [unsupported bend radius]] + [10 x [nominal tubing OD]] + 50 mm

    (2) Place a reference mark at the center of the sample. At this 
mark, measure the initial outside diameter of the tubing. If the tubing 
is slightly out-of-round, use the elliptical minor diameter as the 
initial outside diameter.
    (3) Install the tubing completely over the pins of the holding 
device so that the tubing is bent 180 degrees. If the tubing has a 
natural curvature, the tubing shall be bent in the direction of the 
natural curvature.
    (4) Condition the holding device and tubing in an air oven at 200 
degrees Fahrenheit (93 degrees Celsius) for 24 hours. Remove the holding 
device and tubing and allow to cool at room temperature for thirty 
minutes.
    (5) With the tubing still mounted to the holding device, measure the 
elliptical minor diameter of the tubing at the reference mark to 
determine the final outside diameter.
    (c) Calculation. Calculate the percentage collapse of the outside 
diameter of the tubing as follows: ([Initial Outside Diameter--Final 
Outside Diameter] / [Initial Outside Diameter]) x 100
    S12.16 Ozone resistance test. Conduct the test specified in S6.8 
using plastic air brake tubing.

[[Page 354]]

    S12.17 Oil resistance test. (a) Utilize a plastic air brake tubing 
assembly or prepare a 12 inch length of tubing and install end fittings 
according to the end fitting manufacturer's instructions.
    (b) Immerse the tubing in ASTM IRM 903 oil at 212 degrees Fahrenheit 
(100 degrees Celsius) for 70 hours. Remove and allow to cool at room 
temperature for 30 minutes. Wipe any excess oil from the tubing 
assembly.
    (c) Conduct the burst strength test in S12.5 except use 80 percent 
of the burst strength pressure for the size of tubing being tested as 
specified in Table VIII and, at the manufacturer's option, oil may be 
used as the test medium instead of water.
    S12.18 Tensile strength test. Conduct the test in S8.9 using a 
plastic air brake tubing assembly or an assembly prepared from a 12 inch 
length of air brake tubing with end fittings installed according to the 
end fitting manufacturer's instructions.
    S12.19 Boiling water conditioning and tensile strength. (a) 
Apparatus. Use a tension testing machine as specified in S8.9. The lower 
attachment point of the machine is equipped with a heated, open-top 
container that is water tight. The inside of the container (lower 
attachment point) and upper attachment point of the machine have 
provisions to quickly attach a brake hose assembly for tensile testing.
    (b) Preparation. Prepare an air brake tubing assembly with a free 
length of 6 inches (six inches of exposed tubing between the end 
fittings), with the end fittings installed in accordance with the end 
fitting manufacturer's instructions. If necessary install adapters on 
the end fittings to permit quick attachment to the machine, to keep 
water from entering the tubing assembly, and to ensure that the tubing 
assembly is in a straight position when installed on the machine. Fill 
the container with distilled water such that the lower 4 inches of 
exposed tubing will be submerged when the brake tubing assembly is 
installed on the machine. Heat the water until it boils. Then quickly 
install the plastic air brake tubing assembly on the machine with the 
lower end of the tubing assembly in the boiling water. After the water 
has boiled continuously for 5 minutes, apply tension to the tubing 
assembly at a rate of 1 inch per minute travel of the moving head until 
either the conditioned tensile load in Table VIII for the size of tubing 
being tested is reached or the free length of the tubing assembly 
reaches 9 inches, whichever occurs first.
    S12.20 Thermal conditioning and tensile strength--(a) Apparatus. Use 
a tension testing machine as specified in S8.9.
    (b) Preparation. Prepare an air brake tubing assembly with a free 
length of 6 inches (six inches of exposed tubing between the end 
fittings), with the end fittings installed in accordance with the end 
fitting manufacturer's instructions. If necessary install adapters on 
the end fittings to permit attachment to the machine, to keep water from 
entering the tubing assembly, and/or to ensure that the tubing assembly 
is in a straight position when installed on the machine. Subject the 
tubing assembly to four complete cycles of the following sequence:
    (1) Condition the tubing assembly in an environmental chamber at 
minus 40 degrees Fahrenheit (minus 40 degrees Celsius) for 30 minutes. 
Remove from the chamber and allow to warm at room temperature for 30 
minutes.
    (2) Condition the tubing assembly by submerging it in boiling water 
for 15 minutes. Remove and allow to cool at room temperature for 30 
minutes. Install the tubing assembly on the tension testing machine and 
apply tension to the tubing assembly at a rate of one inch per minute 
travel of the moving head until either the conditioned tensile load in 
Table VIII for the size of tubing being tested is reached or the free 
length of the tubing assembly reaches 9 inches, whichever occurs first.
    S12.21 Vibration resistance test. (a) Apparatus. A vibration testing 
machine that supports a brake tubing assembly by its end fittings in 
approximately a straight line and includes the following features:
    (1) One tubing assembly attachment point is fixed and the other 
moves in a plane perpendicular to a line projected between the 
attachment points. The movable attachment point moves in a

[[Page 355]]

linear direction and travels \1/2\ inch total and at its midpoint of 
travel falls on a line projected between the attachment points. The 
movable attachment point has a cycle rate of 600 cycles per minute.
    (2) The distance between the attachment points is adjustable to 
compensate for varying lengths of brake tubing assemblies.
    (3) The actuating mechanism for the movable attachment point is 
balanced to prevent introduction of machine vibration into the brake 
tubing assembly.
    (4) The machine has a compressed air supply system that pressurizes 
the air brake tubing assembly through one fitting while the other 
fitting is plugged. The machine's compressed air supply system includes 
a pressure gauge or monitoring system and an air flow meter.
    (5) The machine is constructed so that an air brake tubing assembly 
mounted on it can be conditioned in an environmental test chamber.
    (b) Preparation. (1) Prepare an air brake tubing assembly with a 
free length of 18 inches (18 inches of exposed tubing between the end 
fittings), with the end fittings installed in accordance with the end 
fitting manufacturer's instructions. Record the initial tightening 
torque for an end fitting that uses a threaded retaining nut.
    (2) Install the air brake tubing assembly on the vibration testing 
machine and, with the movable attachment point at the midpoint of its 
travel, adjust the distance between the attachment points so that they 
are \1/2\ inch closer together than the distance at which the tubing 
assembly is taut.
    (3) With the tubing assembly inside the environmental chamber, apply 
compressed air to the tubing assembly at a regulated pressure of 120 psi 
and maintain the supply of air to the tubing assembly for the duration 
of the test. Set the temperature of the environmental chamber to 220 
degrees Fahrenheit (104 degrees Celsius) and initiate cycling of the 
movable attachment point. After 250,000 cycles, set the temperature of 
the environmental chamber to minus 40 degrees Fahrenheit (minus 40 
degrees Celsius). After 500,000 cycles, set the temperature of the 
environmental chamber to 220 degrees Fahrenheit (104 degrees Celsius). 
After 750,000 cycles, set the temperature of the environmental chamber 
to minus 40 degrees Fahrenheit (minus 40 degrees Celsius). Measure the 
air flow rate just prior to 1,000,000 cycles and if the compressed air 
flow rate supplied to the air brake tubing assembly exceeds 50 cubic 
centimeters per minute this constitutes failure of the test. Stop the 
cycling at 1,000,000 cycles and set the environmental chamber 
temperature to 75 degrees Fahrenheit (24 degrees Celsius), while air 
pressure is still supplied to the air brake tubing assembly. After one 
hour, measure the compressed air flow rate supplied to the air brake 
tubing assembly and if the rate exceeds 25 cubic centimeters per minute 
this constitutes failure of the test.
    (4) For end fittings that use a threaded retaining nut, apply 20 
percent of the original tightening torque as recorded in S12.21(b)(1). 
If the retention nut visibly moves, this constitutes a failure of the 
test.
    S12.22 End fitting retention test. (a) Utilize an air brake tubing 
assembly or prepare a 12 inch length of tubing and install end fittings 
according to the end fitting manufacturer's instructions.
    (b) Plug one end of the assembly, fill it with water, and connect 
the other end to a source of water pressure. Bleed any air from the 
assembly and water pressure system.
    (c) Increase the pressure inside the tubing assembly at a rate of 
3,000 psi per minute to 50 percent of the burst strength pressure for 
the size of tubing being tested as specified in Table VIII. Hold the 
pressure constant for 30 seconds.
    (d) Increase the pressure inside the tubing assembly at a rate of 
3,000 psi per minute to the burst strength pressure for the size of 
tubing being tested as specified in Table VIII.
    S12.23 Thermal conditioning and end fitting retention test--(a) 
Apparatus. A source of hydraulic pressure that includes a pressure gauge 
or monitoring system, uses ASTM IRM 903 oil, and is constructed so that 
an air brake tubing

[[Page 356]]

assembly mounted to it can be conditioned in an environmental test 
chamber.
    (b) Preparation. Utilize an air brake tubing assembly or prepare a 
12 inch length of tubing and install end fittings according to the end 
fitting manufacturer's instructions. Attach one end of the assembly to 
the hydraulic pressure supply and plug the other end of the assembly, 
fill the assembly with ASTM IRM 903 oil and bleed any air from the 
assembly, and place the tubing assembly inside an environmental chamber. 
Conduct the following tests:
    (1) With atmospheric pressure applied to the oil inside the tubing 
assembly, set the environmental chamber temperature to 200 degrees 
Fahrenheit (93 degrees Celsius) and condition the tubing assembly for 24 
hours.
    (2) With the temperature maintained at 200 degrees Fahrenheit (93 
degrees Celsius), increase the oil pressure inside the tubing assembly 
at a rate of 3,000 psi per minute to 450 psi, and hold this pressure for 
5 minutes.
    (3) Decrease the oil pressure inside the tubing assembly at a rate 
of 3,000 psi per minute to atmospheric pressure and set the temperature 
of the environmental chamber to 75 degrees Fahrenheit (24 degrees 
Celsius). Condition the tubing assembly at this temperature for 1 hour.
    (4) Set the temperature of the environmental chamber to minus 40 
degrees Fahrenheit (minus 40 degrees Celsius) and condition the tubing 
assembly for 24 hours.
    (5) With the temperature maintained at minus 40 degrees Fahrenheit 
(minus 40 degrees Celsius), increase the hydraulic pressure inside the 
tubing assembly at a rate of 3,000 psi per minute to 450 psi, and hold 
this pressure for 5 minutes.
    S12.24 End fitting serviceability--(a) Apparatus. A source of air 
pressure that includes a pressure gauge or monitoring system and is 
equipped with a mass air flow meter.
    (b) Preparation. Prepare a 12-inch length of tubing and plug one 
end. Assemble the end fitting with the threaded retention nut on the 
other end of the tubing according to the end fitting manufacturer's 
instructions, then disassemble the fitting. Repeat the assembly and 
disassembly sequence three more times, and then reassemble the end 
fitting (five total assembly steps).
    (c) Attach the end fitting with the threaded retention nut to the 
source of air pressure. Pressurize the tubing at a rate of 3,000 psi per 
minute to a pressure of 120 psi. If the end fitting leaks, measure and 
record the leakage rate using the mass air flow meter.
    S12.25 End fitting corrosion resistance. Utilize an air brake tubing 
assembly or prepare a 12-inch length of tubing and install end fittings 
according to the end fitting manufacturer's instructions. Conduct the 
test specified in S6.11 using a plastic air brake tubing assembly.
    S13. Test Conditions. Each hose assembly or appropriate part thereof 
shall be able to meet the requirements of S5, S7, S9, and S11, under the 
following conditions.
    S13.1 The temperature of the testing room is 75 degrees Fahrenheit 
(24 degrees Celsius).
    S13.2 The brake hoses and brake hose assemblies are at least 24 
hours old, and unused.
    S13.3 Specified test pressures are gauge pressures (psig).

[38 FR 31303, Nov. 13, 1973]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.106, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.


<R05>
Sec. 571.107  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 571.108  Standard No. 108; Lamps, reflective devices, and associated 

equipment.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for original and 
replacement lamps, reflective devices, and associated equipment.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce traffic 
accidents and deaths and injuries resulting from traffic accidents, by 
providing adequate illumination of the roadway, and by enhancing the 
conspicuity of motor vehicles on the public roads so that their presence 
is perceived and their signals understood, both in daylight and in 
darkness or other conditions of reduced visibility.

[[Page 357]]

    S3. Application. This standard applies to:
    (a) Passenger cars, multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, buses, 
trailers (except pole trailers and trailer converter dollies), and 
motorcycles;
    (b) Retroreflective sheeting and reflex reflectors manufactured to 
conform to S5.7 of this standard; and
    (c) Lamps, reflective devices, and associated equipment for 
replacement of like equipment on vehicles to which this standard 
applies.
    S4. Definitions.
    Aiming Reference Plane means a plane which is perpendicular to the 
longitudinal axis of the vehicle and tangent to the forwardmost aiming 
pad on the headlamp.
    Axis of reference means the characteristic axis of the lamp for use 
as the direction of reference (H = 0[deg], V = 0[deg]) for angles of 
field for photometric measurements and for installing the lamp on the 
vehicle.
    Beam contributor means an indivisible optical assembly including a 
lens, reflector, and light source, that is part of an integral beam 
headlighting system and contributes only a portion of a headlamp beam.
    Cargo lamp is a lamp that is mounted on a multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, truck, or bus for the purpose of providing illumination to load 
or unload cargo.
    Cutoff means a generally horizontal, visual/optical aiming cue in 
the lower beam that marks a separation between areas of higher and lower 
luminance.
    Direct reading indicator means a device that is mounted in its 
entirety on a headlamp or headlamp aiming or headlamp mounting 
equipment, is part of a VHAD, and provides information about headlamp 
aim in an analog or digital format.
    Effective light-emitting surface means that portion of a lamp that 
directs light to the photometric test pattern, and does not include 
transparent lenses, mounting hole bosses, reflex reflector area, beads 
or rims that may glow or produce small areas of increased intensity as a 
result of uncontrolled light from an area of 1/2 degree radius around a 
test point.
    Effective projected luminous lens area means the area of the 
orthogonal projection of the effective light-emitting surface of a lamp 
on a plane perpendicular to a defined direction relative to the axis of 
reference. Unless otherwise specified, the direction is coincident with 
the axis of reference.
    Filament means that part of the light source or light emitting 
element(s), such as a resistive element, the excited portion of a 
specific mixture of gases under pressure, or any part of other energy 
conversion sources, that generates radiant energy which can be seen.
    Flash means a cycle of activation and deactivation of a lamp by 
automatic means continuing until stopped either automatically or 
manually.
    Fully opened means the position of the headlamp concealment device 
in which the headlamp is in the design open operating position.
    Headlamp concealment device means a device, with its operating 
system and components, that provides concealment of the headlamp when it 
is not in use, including a movable headlamp cover and a headlamp that 
displaces for concealment purposes.
    Headlamp test fixture means a device designed to support a headlamp 
or headlamp assembly in the test position specified in the laboratory 
tests and whose mounting hardware and components are those necessary to 
operate the headlamp as installed in a motor vehicle.
    Integral beam headlamp means a headlamp (other than a standardized 
sealed beam headlamp designed to conform to paragraph S7.3 or a 
replaceable bulb headlamp designed to conform to paragraph S7.5) 
comprising an integral and indivisible optical assembly including lens, 
reflector, and light source, except that a headlamp conforming to 
paragraph S7.8.5.2 or paragraph S7.8.5.3 may have a lens designed to be 
replaceable.
    Multiple compartment lamp means a device which gives its indication 
by two or more separately lighted areas which are joined by one or more 
common parts, such as a housing or lens.
    Multiple lamp arrangement means an array of two or more separate 
lamps on each side of the vehicle which operate together to give a 
signal.
    Remote reading indicator means a device that is not mounted in its 
entirety

[[Page 358]]

on a headlamp or headlamp aiming or headlamp mounting equipment, but 
otherwise meets the definition of a direct reading indicator.
    Replaceable bulb headlamp means a headlamp comprising a bonded lens 
and reflector assembly and one or two replaceable headlamp light 
sources, except that a headlamp conforming to paragraph S7.8.5.2 or 
paragraph S7.8.5.3 may have a lens designed to be replaceable.
    Replaceable light source means an assembly of a capsule, base, and 
terminals that is designed to conform to the requirements of appendix A 
or appendix B of part 564 Replaceable Light Source Information of this 
Chapter.
    Vehicle headlamp aiming device or VHAD means motor vehicle 
equipment, installed either on a vehicle or headlamp, which is used for 
determining the horizontal or vertical aim, or both the vertical and 
horizontal aim of the headlamp.
    Visually/optically aimable headlamp means a headlamp which is 
designed to be visually/optically aimable in accordance with the 
requirements of paragraph S7.8.5.3 of this standard.
    S5. Requirements.
    S5.1 Required motor vehicle lighting equipment.
    S5.1.1 Except as provided in succeeding paragraphs of this S5.1.1, 
each vehicle shall be equipped with at least the number of lamps, 
reflective devices, and associated equipment specified in Tables I and 
III and S7, as applicable. Required equipment shall be designed to 
conform to the SAE Standards or Recommended Practices referenced in 
those tables. Table I applies to multipurpose passenger vehicles, 
trucks, trailers, and buses, 80 or more inches in overall width. Table 
III applies to passenger cars and motorcycles and to multipurpose 
passenger vehicles, trucks, trailers, and buses, less than 80 inches in 
overall width.
    S5.1.1.1 A truck tractor need not be equipped with turn signal lamps 
mounted on the rear if the turn signal lamps at or near the front are so 
constructed (double-faced) and so located that they meet the 
requirements for double-faced turn signals specified in SAE Standard 
J588e, Turn Signal Lamps, September 1970.
    S5.1.1.2 A truck tractor need not be equipped with any rear side 
marker devices, rear clearance lamps, and rear identification lamps.
    S5.1.1.3 Intermediate side marker devices are not required on 
vehicles less than 30 feet in overall length.
    S5.1.1.4 Reflective material conforming to Federal Specification L-
S-300, Sheeting and Tape, Reflective; Non-exposed Lens, Adhesive 
Backing, September 7, 1965, may be used for side reflex reflectors if 
this material as used on the vehicle, meets the performance standards in 
either Table I or Table IA of SAE Standard J594f, Reflex Reflectors, 
January 1977.
    S5.1.1.5 The turn signal operating unit on each passenger car, and 
multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, and bus less than 80 inches in 
overall width shall be self-canceling by steering wheel rotation and 
capable of cancellation by a manually operated control.
    S5.1.1.6 Instead of the photometric values specified in Table 1 of 
SAE Standards J222 December 1970, or J585e September 1977, a parking 
lamp or tail lamp, respectively, shall meet the minimum percentage 
specified in Figure 1a of the corresponding minimum allowable value 
specified in Figure 1b. The maximum candlepower output of a parking lamp 
shall not exceed that prescribed in Figure 1b, or of a taillamp, that 
prescribed in Figure 1b at H or above. If the sum of the percentages of 
the minimum candlepower measured at the test points is not less than 
that specified for each group listed in Figure 1c, a parking lamp or 
taillamp is not required to meet the minimum photometric value at each 
test point specified in SAE Standards J222 or J585e respectively.
    S5.1.1.7 A motorcycle turn signal lamp need meet only one-half of 
the minimum photometric values specified in Table 1 and Table 3 of SAE 
J588 NOV84 Turn Signal Lamps.
    S5.1.1.8 For each motor vehicle less than 30 feet in overall length, 
the photometric minimum candlepower requirements for side marker lamps 
specified in SAE Standard J592e Clearance, Side Marker, and 
Identification Lamps, July 1972, may be met for all inboard test points 
at a distance of 15 feet from the vehicle and on a vertical plane that

[[Page 359]]

is perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the vehicle and located 
midway between the front and rear side marker lamps.
    S5.1.1.9 A boat trailer whose overall width is 80 inches or more 
need not be equipped with both front and rear clearance lamps provided 
an amber (to front) and red (to rear) clearance lamp is located at or 
near the midpoint on each side so as to indicate its extreme width.
    S5.1.1.10 Multiple license plate lamps and backup lamps may be used 
to fufill the requirements of the SAE Standards applicable to such lamps 
referenced in Tables I and III.
    S5.1.1.11 A stop lamp that is not optically combined, as defined by 
SAE Information Report J387 Terminology--Motor Vehicle Lighting NOV87, 
with a turn signal lamp, shall remain activated when the turn signal 
lamp is flashing.
    S5.1.1.12 On a motor vehicle, except a passenger car, whose overall 
width is 2032 mm. (80 inches) or more, measurements of the effective 
projected luminous lens area, and of the photometrics of a multiple 
compartment stop lamp and a multiple compartment turn signal lamp, shall 
be made for the entire lamp and not for the individual compartments.
    S5.1.1.13 Each passenger car, and each multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, truck, and bus of less than 80 inches overall width, shall be 
equipped with a turn signal operating unit designed to complete a 
durability test of 100,000 cycles.
    S5.1.1.14 A trailer that is less than 30 inches in overall width may 
be equipped with only one taillamp, stop lamp, and rear reflex 
reflector, which shall be located at or near its vertical centerline.
    S5.1.1.15 A trailer that is less than 6 feet in overall length, 
including the trailer tongue, need not be equipped with front side 
marker lamps and front side reflex reflectors.
    S5.1.1.16 A lamp designed to use a type of bulb that has not been 
assigned a mean spherical candlepower rating by its manufacturer and is 
not listed in SAE Standard J573d, Lamp Bulbs and Sealed Units, December 
1968, shall meet the applicable requirements of this standard when used 
with any bulb of the type specified by the lamp manufacturer, operated 
at the bulb's design voltage. A lamp that contains a sealed-in bulb 
shall meet these requirements with the bulb operated at the bulb's 
design voltage.
    S5.1.1.17 Except for a lamp having a sealed-in bulb, a lamp shall 
meet the applicable requirements of this standard when tested with a 
bulb whose filament is positioned within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>.010 inch 
of the nominal design position specified in SAE Standard J573d, Lamp 
Bulbs and Sealed Units, December 1968, or specified by the bulb 
manufacturer.
    S5.1.1.18 A backup lamp is not required to meet the minimum 
photometric values at each test point specified in Table I of SAE 
Standard J593c, Backup Lamps, February 1968, if the sum of the 
candlepower measured at the test points within each group listed in 
Figure 2 is not less than the group totals specified in that figure.
    S5.1.1.19 Each variable load turn signal flasher shall comply with 
voltage drop and durability requirements of SAE Standard J590b, Turn 
Signal Flashers, October 1965 with the maximum design load connected, 
and shall comply with starting time, flash rate, and percent current 
``on'' time requirements of J590b both with the minimum and with the 
maximum design load connected.
    S5.1.1.20 The lowest voltage drop for turn signal flashers and 
hazard warning signal flashers measured between the input and load 
terminals shall not exceed 0.8 volt.
    S5.1.1.21 A motor-driven cycle whose speed attainable in 1 mile is 
30 mph or less need not be equipped with turn signal lamps.
    S5.1.1.22 A motor-driven cycle whose speed attainable in 1 mile is 
30 mph or less may be equipped with a stop lamp whose effective 
projected luminous lens area is not less than 3\1/2\ square inches and 
whose photometric output for the groups of test points specified in 
Figure 1 is at least one-half of the minimum values set forth in that 
figure.
    S5.1.1.23-24 [Reserved]
    S5.1.1.25 Each turn signal lamp on a motorcycle shall have an 
effective projected luminous lens area of not less

[[Page 360]]

than 2258 square mm. (3\1/2\ square inches).
    S5.1.1.26 On a motor vehicle whose overall width is less than 80 
inches:
    (a) The effective projected luminous lens area of a single 
compartment stop lamp, and a single compartment rear turn signal lamp, 
shall be not less than 50 square centimeters (7\3/4\ square inches).
    (b) If a multiple compartment lamp or multiple lamps are used to 
meet the photometric requirements for stop lamps and rear turn signal 
lamps, the effective projected luminous lens area of each compartment or 
lamp shall be at least 22 square centimeters, provided the combined area 
is at least 50 square centimeters (7\3/4\ square inches).
    S5.1.1.27 (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, 
each passenger car manufactured on or after September 1, 1985, and each 
multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, and bus, whose overall width is 
less than 80 inches, whose GVWR is 10,000 pounds or less, manufactured 
on or after September 1, 1993, shall be equipped with a high-mounted 
stop lamp which:
    (1) Shall have an effective projected luminous lens area not less 
than 2903 square mm. (4\1/2\ square inches).
    (2) Shall meet the visibility requirements specified in S5.3.2(c).
    (3) Shall have the minimum photometric values in the amount and 
location listed in Figure 10.
    (4) Need not meet the requirements of paragraphs 3.1.6 Moisture 
Test, 3.1.7 Dust Test, and 3.1.8 Corrosion Test of SAE Recommended 
Practice J186a, Supplemental High-Mounted Stop and Rear Turn Signal 
Lamps, September 1977, if it is mounted inside the vehicle.
    (5) Shall provide access for convenient replacement of the bulb 
without the use of special tools.
    (b) Each multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck and bus whose overall 
width is less than 80 inches, whose GVWR is 10,000 pounds or less, whose 
vertical centerline, when the vehicle is viewed from the rear, is not 
located on a fixed body panel but separates one or two movable body 
sections, such as doors, which lacks sufficient space to install a 
single high-mounted stop lamp on the centerline above such body 
sections, and which is manufactured on or after September 1, 1993, shall 
have two high-mounted stop lamps which:
    (1) Are identical in size and shape and have an effective projected 
luminous lens area not less than 1452 square mm. (2\1/4\ square inches) 
each.
    (2) Shall meet the visibility requirements specified in S5.3.2(d).
    (3) Together have the minimum photometric values specified in 
paragraph (a)(3) of this S5.1.1.27.
    (4) Shall provide access for convenient replacement of the bulbs 
without special tools.
    S5.1.1.28 [Reserved]
    S5.1.1.29 A trailer equipped with a conspicuity treatment in 
conformance with paragraph S5.7 of this standard need not be equipped 
with the reflex reflectors required by Table I of this standard if the 
conspicuity material is placed at the locations of the reflex reflectors 
required by Table I.
    S5.1.2 Plastic materials used for optical parts such as lenses and 
reflectors shall conform to SAE Recommended Practice J576 JUL91, except 
that:
    (a) Plastic lenses (other than those incorporating reflex 
reflectors) used for inner lenses or those covered by another material 
and not exposed directly to sunlight shall meet the requirements of 
paragraphs 3.3 and 4.2 of SAE J576 JUL91 when covered by the outer lens 
or other material;
    (b) After the outdoor exposure test, the haze and loss of surface 
luster of plastic materials (other than those incorporating reflex 
reflectors) used for outer lenses shall not be greater than 30 percent 
haze as measured by ASTM D 1003-92, Haze and Luminous Transmittance of 
Transparent Plastic;
    (c) After the outdoor exposure test, plastic materials used for 
reflex reflectors and for lenses used in front of reflex reflectors 
shall not show surface deterioration, crazing, dimensional changes, 
color bleeding, delamination, loss of surface luster, or haze that 
exceeds 7 percent as measured under ASTM D 1003-92.
    (d) The thickness of the test specimens specified in paragraph 3.2.2 
of SAE J576 JUL91 may vary by as much as <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.25 mm.
    (e) After exposure to the heat test as specified in subparagraph (f) 
of this paragraph, and after cooling to room

[[Page 361]]

ambient temperature, a test specimen shall show no change in shape and 
general appearance discernable to the naked eye when compared with an 
unexposed specimen. The trichromatic coefficients of the samples shall 
conform to the requirements of SAE J578c, Color Specification for 
Electric Signal Lighting Devices, February 1977.
    (f) Two samples of each thickness of each plastic material are used 
in the heat test. Each sample is supported at the bottom, with at least 
51 mm. of the sample above the support, in the vertical position in such 
a manner that, on each side, the minimum uninterrupted area of exposed 
surface is not less than 3225 sq. mm. The samples are placed for two 
hours in a circulating air oven at 79 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 degrees C.
    (g) All outdoor exposure tests shall be 3 years in duration, whether 
the material is exposed or protected. Accelerated weathering procedures 
are not permitted.
    S5.1.3 No additional lamp, reflective device or other motor vehicle 
equipment shall be installed that impairs the effectiveness of lighting 
equipment required by this standard.
    5.1.4 Except for multifunction school activity buses, each school 
bus shall be equipped with a system of either:
    (a) Four red signal lamps designed to conform to SAE Standard J887, 
School Bus Red Signal Lamps, July 1964, and installed in accordance with 
that standard; or
    (b) Four red signal lamps designed to conform to SAE Standard J887, 
School Bus Red Signal Lamps, July 1964, and four amber signal lamps 
designed to conform to that standard, except for their color, and except 
that their candlepower shall be at least 2\1/2\ times that specified for 
red signal lamps. Both red and amber lamps shall be installed in 
accordance with SAE Standard J887, except that:
    (i) Each amber signal lamp shall be located near each red signal 
lamp, at the same level, but closer to the vertical centerline of the 
bus; and
    (ii) The system shall be wired so that the amber signal lamps are 
activated only by manual or foot operation, and if activated, are 
automatically deactivated and the red signal lamps automatically 
activated when the bus entrance door is opened.
    S5.1.5 The color in all lamps, reflective devices, and associated 
equipment to which this standard applies shall comply with SAE Standard 
J578c, Color Specification for Electric Signal Lighting Devices, 
February 1977.
    S5.2 Other requirements.
    S5.2.1 The words ``it is recommended that,'' ``recommendations,'' or 
``should be'' appearing in any SAE Standard or Recommended Practice 
referenced or subreferenced in this standard shall be read as setting 
forth mandatory requirements, except that the aiming pads on the lens 
face and the black area surrounding the signal lamp recommended in SAE 
Standard J887, School Bus Red Signal Lamps, July 1964, are not required.
    S5.2.2 The words ``Type 1 (5\3/4\<gr-thn-eq>),'' ``Type 2 (5\3/
4\<gr-thn-eq>),'' ``Type 2 (7<gr-thn-eq>),'' ``Type 1A,'' ``Type 2A,'' 
and ``Type 2B'' appearing in any SAE Standard or Recommended Practice 
referenced or subreferenced in this standard shall also be read as 
setting forth requirements respectively for the following types of 
headlamps: 1C1, 2C1, 2D1, 1A1, 2A1, and 2B1.
    S5.3 Location of required equipment. Except as provided in 
paragraphs S5.3.2, S5.7, and S7, each lamp, reflective device, and item 
of associated equipment shall be securely mounted on a rigid part of the 
vehicle other than glazing that is not designed to be removed except for 
repair, in accordance with the requirements of Table I and Table III, as 
applicable, and in the location specified in Table II (multipurpose 
passenger vehicles, trucks, trailers, and buses 80 or more inches in 
overall width) or Table IV (all passenger cars, and motorcycles, and 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, truck, trailers and buses less than 80 
inches in overall width), as applicable.
    S5.3.1 [Reserved]
    S5.3.1.1 [Reserved]
    S5.3.1.1.1 [Reserved]
    S5.3.1.2 On a truck tractor, the red rear reflex reflectors may be 
mounted on the back of the cab, at a minimum height not less than 4 
inches above the height of the rear tires.
    S5.3.1.3 On a trailer, the amber front side reflex reflectors and 
amber front

[[Page 362]]

side marker lamps may be located as far forward as practicable exclusive 
of the trailer tongue.
    S5.3.1.4 When the rear identification lamps are mounted at the 
extreme height of a vehicle, rear clearance lamps need not meet the 
requirement of Table II that they be located as close as practicable to 
the top of the vehicle.
    S5.3.1.5 [Reserved]
    S5.3.1.6 On a truck tractor, clearance lamps mounted on the cab may 
be located to indicate the width of the cab, rather than the overall 
width of the vehicle.
    S5.3.1.7 On a motor vehicle on which the front turn signal lamp is 
less than 100 mm from the lighted edge of a lower beam headlamp, as 
measured from the optical center of the turn signal lamp, the multiplier 
applied to obtain the required minimum luminous intensities shall be 
2.5.
    S5.3.1.8 (a) Each high-mounted stop lamp installed in or on a 
vehicle subject to S5.1.1.27(a) shall be located as follows:
    (1) With its center at any place on the vertical centerline of the 
vehicle, including the glazing, as the vehicle is viewed from the rear.
    (2) If the lamp is mounted below the rear window, no portion of the 
lens shall be lower than 6 inches below the rear window on convertibles, 
or 3 inches on other passenger cars.
    (3) If the lamp is mounted inside the vehicle, means shall be 
provided to minimize reflections from the light of the lamp upon the 
rear window glazing that might be visible to the driver when viewed 
directly, or indirectly in the rearview mirror.
    (b) The high-mounted stop lamps installed in or on a vehicle subject 
to S5.1.1.27(b) shall be located at the same height, with one vertical 
edge of each lamp on the vertical edge of the body section nearest the 
vertical centerline.
    S5.3.2 Except as provided in S5.3.2.1 through S5.3.2.4 and in 
paragraphs S5.7 and S7, each vehicle must conform to the following 
requirements:
    (a) Each lamp and reflective device must be installed in a location 
where it complies with all applicable photometric requirements and 
visibility requirements, with all obstructions (e.g., mirrors, snow 
plows, wrecker booms, backhoes, and winches) installed on the vehicle.
    (b) A manufacturer must certify compliance of each lamp to one of 
the following visibility requirement options, and it may not thereafter 
choose a different option for that vehicle:
    (1) When a vehicle is equipped with any lamp listed in Figure 19 of 
this standard, each such lamp must provide not less than 12.5 square 
centimeters of unobstructed effective projected luminous lens area in 
any direction throughout the pattern defined by the corner points 
specified in Figure 19 for each such lamp; or
    (2) When a vehicle is equipped with any lamp listed in Figure 20 of 
this standard, each such lamp must provide a luminous intensity not less 
than that specified in Figure 20 in any direction throughout the pattern 
defined by the corner points specified in Figure 20 for each such lamp. 
The luminous intensity must be measured in accordance with the 
photometry test requirements of the applicable SAE Standards and 
Recommended Practices incorporated by reference or subreference in this 
standard.
    (c) A high mounted stop lamp must have a signal visible to the rear 
through a horizontal angle from 45 degrees to the left to 45 degrees to 
the right of the longitudinal axis of the vehicle.
    (d) High mounted stop lamps required to comply with S5.1.1.27(b) 
must together have a signal to the rear as specified in S5.3.2(c).
    (e) Backup lamps must be mounted on the rear so that the optical 
center of at least one lamp is visible from any eye point elevation from 
at least 1828 mm (6 ft) to 610 mm (2 ft) above the horizontal plane on 
which the vehicle is standing; and from any position in the area, 
rearward of a vertical plane perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of 
the vehicle, 914 mm (3 ft) to the rear of the vehicle and extending 914 
mm (3 ft) beyond each side of the vehicle.
    S5.3.2.1 Clearance lamps may be located at a location other than on 
the front and rear if necessary to indicate the overall width of a 
vehicle, or for protection from damage during normal operation of the 
vehicle, and at such a

[[Page 363]]

location they need not meet the photometric output at any test point 
that is 45 degrees inboard.
    S5.3.2.2 If any required lamp or reflective device is obstructed by 
motor vehicle equipment (e.g., mirrors, snow plows, wrecker booms, 
backhoes, winches, etc.), and cannot meet requirements of S5.3.2, the 
vehicle must be equipped with an additional lamp or device of the same 
type which meet all applicable requirements of this standard, including 
S5.3.2.
    S5.3.2.3 For signal lamps and reflective devices mounted less than 
750 mm above the road surface as measured to the lamp axis of reference, 
the vertical test point angles located below the horizontal plane 
subject to photometric and visibility requirements of this standard may 
be reduced to 5 degrees.
    S5.3.2.4 As an alternative to S5.3.2(b), each passenger car and 
motorcycle, and each multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, trailer and 
bus that is of less than 2032 mm overall width, that are manufactured on 
or before September 1, 2011, and each multipurpose passenger vehicle, 
truck, trailer and bus of 2032 mm or more overall width that is 
manufactured on or before September 1, 2014, must have each lamp located 
so that it meets the visibility requirements specified in any applicable 
SAE Standard or Recommended Practice.
    S5.4 Equipment combinations. Two or more lamps, reflective devices, 
or items of associated equipment may be combined if the requirements for 
each lamp, reflective device, and item of associated equipment are met, 
with the following exceptions:
    (a) No high-mounted stop lamp shall be combined with any other lamp 
or reflective device, other than with a cargo lamp.
    (b) No high-mounted stop lamp shall be combined optically, as 
defined by SAE Information Report J387 Terminology--Motor Vehicle 
Lighting NOV87, with any cargo lamp.
    (c) No clearance lamp shall be combined optically, as defined by SAE 
Information Report J387 Terminology--Motor Vehicle Lighting NOV87, with 
any taillamp.
    S5.5 Special wiring requirements.
    S.5.5.1 Each vehicle shall have a means of switching between lower 
and upper beams that conforms to SAE Recommended Practice J564a Headlamp 
Beam Switching, April 1964 or to SAE Recommended Practice J565b, Semi-
Automatic Headlamp Beam Switching Devices, February 1969. Except as 
provided in S5.5.8, the lower and upper beams shall not be energized 
simultaneously except momentarily for temporary signalling purposes or 
during switching between beams.
    S5.5.2 Each vehicle shall have a means for indicating to the driver 
when the upper beams of the headlamps are on that conforms to SAE 
Recommended Practice J564a, April 1964, except that the signal color 
need not be red.
    S5.5.3 The taillamps on each vehicle shall be activated when the 
headlamps are activated in a steady-burning state, but need not be 
activated if the headlamps are activated at less than full intensity as 
permitted by paragraph S5.5.11(a).
    S5.5.4 The stop lamps on each vehicle shall be activated upon 
application of the service brakes. The high-mounted stop lamp on each 
vehicle shall be activated only upon application of the service brakes.
    S5.5.5 The vehicular hazard warning signal operating unit on each 
vehicle shall operate independently of the ignition or equivalent 
switch, and when activated, shall cause to flash simultaneously 
sufficient turn signal lamps to meet, as a minimum, the turn signal lamp 
photometric requirements of this standard.
    S5.5.6 Each vehicle equipped with a turn signal operating unit shall 
also have an illuminated pilot indicator. Failure of one or more turn 
signal lamps to operate shall be indicated in accordance with SAE 
Standard J588e, Turn Signal Lamps, September 1970, except when a 
variable-load turn signal flasher is used on a truck, bus, or 
multipurpose passenger vehicle 80 or more inches in overall width, on a 
truck that is capable of accommodating a slide-in camper, or on any 
vehicle equipped to tow trailers.
    S5.5.7 On each passenger car and motorcycle, and on each 
multipurpose

[[Page 364]]

passenger vehicle, truck, and bus of less than 80 inches overall width:
    (a) When the parking lamps are activated, the taillamps, license 
plate lamps, and side marker lamps shall also be activated; and
    (b) When the headlamps are activated in a steady-burning state, the 
tail lamps, parking lamps, license plate lamps and side marker lamps 
shall also be activated.
    S5.5.8 On a motor vehicle equipped with a headlighting system 
designed to conform to the photometric requirements of Figure 15-1 or 
Figure 15-2, the lamps marked ``L'' or ``LF'' may be wired to remain 
permanently activated when the lamps marked ``U'' or ``UF'' are 
activated. On a motor vehicle equipped with an Integral Beam 
headlighting system meeting the photometric requirements of paragraph 
S7.4(a)(1)(ii), the lower beam headlamps shall be wired to remain 
permanently activated when the upper beam headlamps are activated. On a 
motor vehicle equipped with a headlighting system designed to conform to 
the requirements of Figure 17-1 or Figure 17-2, a lower beam light 
source may be wired to remain activated when an upper beam light source 
is activated if the lower beam light source contributes to compliance of 
the headlighting system with the upper beam requirements of Figure 17-1 
or Figure 17-2.
    S5.5.9 Except as provided in section S5.5.8, the wiring harness or 
connector assembly of each headlamp system shall be designed so that 
only those light sources intended for meeting lower beam photometrics 
are energized when the beam selector switch is in the lower beam 
position, and that only those light sources intended for meeting upper 
beam photometrics are energized when the beam selector switch is in the 
upper beam position.
    S5.5.10 The wiring requirements for lighting equipment in use are:
    (a) Turn signal lamps, hazard warning signal lamps, and school bus 
warning lamps shall be wired to flash;
    (b) Headlamps and side marker lamps may be wired to flash for 
signaling purposes;
    (c) A motorcycle headlamp may be wired to allow either its upper 
beam or its lower beam, but not both, to modulate from a higher 
intensity to a lower intensity in accordance with section S5.6;
    (d) All other lamps shall be wired to be steady-burning.
    S5.5.11(a) Any pair of lamps on the front of a passenger car, 
multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, or bus, whether or not required 
by this standard, other than parking lamps or fog lamps, may be wired to 
be automatically activated, as determined by the manufacturer of the 
vehicle, in a steady burning state as daytime running lamps (DRLs) and 
to be automatically deactivated when the headlamp control is in any 
``on'' position, and as otherwise determined by the manufacturer of the 
vehicle, provided that each such lamp:
    (1) Has a luminous intensity not less than 500 candela at test point 
H-V, nor more than 3,000 candela at any location in the beam, when 
tested in accordance with Section S11 of this standard, unless it is:
    (i) A lower beam headlamp intended to operate as a DRL at full 
voltage, or at a voltage lower than used to operate it as a lower beam 
headlamp; or
    (ii) An upper beam headlamp intended to operate as a DRL, whose 
luminous intensity at test point H-V is not more than 7,000 candela, and 
which is mounted not higher than 864 mm above the road surface as 
measured from the center of the lamp with the vehicle at curb weight;
    (2) Is permanently marked ``DRL'' on its lens in letters not less 
than 3 mm high, unless it is optically combined with a headlamp;
    (3) Is designed to provide the same color as the other lamp in the 
pair, and that is one of the following colors as defined in SAE Standard 
J578 MAY88: White, white to yellow, white to selective yellow, selective 
yellow, or yellow;
    (4) If not optically combined with a turn signal lamp, is located so 
that the distance from its lighted edge to the optical center of the 
nearest turn signal lamp is not less than 100 mm, unless:
    (i) The luminous intensity of the DRL is not more than 2,600 candela 
at any location in the beam and the turn

[[Page 365]]

signal meets the requirements of S5.3.1.7; or
    (ii) (For a passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, or 
bus that is manufactured before October 1, 1995, and which uses an upper 
beam headlamp as a DRL as specified in paragraph S5.5.11(a)(1)(ii)) the 
luminous intensity of the DRL is greater than 2,600 candela at any 
location in the beam and the turn signal lamp meets the requirements of 
S5.3.1.7; or
    (iii) The DRL is optically combined with a lower beam headlamp and 
the turn signal lamp meets the requirements of S5.3.1.7; or
    (iv) The DRL is deactivated when the turn signal or hazard warning 
signal lamp is activated.
    (5) If optically combined with a turn signal lamp, is automatically 
deactivated as a DRL when the turn signal lamp or hazard warning lamp is 
activated, and automatically reactivated as a DRL when the turn signal 
lamp or hazard warning lamp is deactivated.
    (b) Any pair of lamps that are not required by this standard and are 
not optically combined with any lamps that are required by this 
standard, and which are used as DRLs to fulfill the specifications of 
S5.5.11(a), shall be mounted at the same height, which shall be not more 
than 1.067 m above the road surface measured from the center of the lamp 
on the vehicle at curb weight, and shall be symmetrically disposed about 
the vertical centerline of the vehicle.
    S5.6 [Reserved]
    S5.7 Conspicuity Systems. Each trailer of 80 or more inches overall 
width, and with a GVWR over 10,000 lbs., manufactured on or after 
December 1, 1993, except a trailer designed exclusively for living or 
office use, and each truck tractor manufactured on or after July 1, 
1997, shall be equipped with either retroreflective sheeting that meets 
the requirements of S5.7.1, reflex reflectors that meet the requirements 
of S5.7.2, or a combination of retroreflective sheeting and reflex 
reflectors that meet the requirement of S5.7.3.
    S5.7.1 Retroreflective sheeting. Each trailer or truck tractor to 
which S5.7 applies that does not conform to S5.7.2 or S5.7.3 shall be 
equipped with retroreflective sheeting that conforms to the requirements 
specified in S5.7.1.1 through S5.7.1.5.
    S5.7.1.1 Construction. Retroreflective sheeting shall consist of a 
smooth, flat, transparent exterior film with retroreflective elements 
embedded or suspended beneath the film so as to form a non-exposed 
retroreflective optical system.
    S5.7.1.2 Performance requirements. Retroreflective sheeting shall 
meet the requirements of ASTM D 4956-90, Standard Specification for 
Retroreflective Sheeting for Traffic Control, for Type V Sheeting, 
except for the photometric requirements, and shall meet the minimum 
photometric performance requirements specified in Figure 29.
    S5.7.1.3 Sheeting pattern, dimensions, and relative coefficients of 
retroreflection.
    (a) Retroreflective sheeting shall be applied in a pattern of 
alternating white and red color segments to the sides and rear of each 
trailer, and to the rear of each truck tractor, and in white to the 
upper rear corners of each trailer and truck tractor, in the locations 
specified in S5.7.1.4, and Figures 30-1 through 30-4, or Figure 31, as 
appropriate.
    (b) Except for a segment that is trimmed to clear obstructions, or 
lengthened to provide red sheeting near red lamps, each white or red 
segment shall have a length of 300 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>150 mm.
    (c) Neither white nor red sheeting shall represent more than two 
thirds of the aggregate of any continuous strip marking the width of a 
trailer, or any continuous or broken strip marking its length.
    (d) Retroreflective sheeting shall have a width of not less than 50 
mm (Grade DOT-C2), 75 mm (Grade DOT-C3), or 100 mm (Grade DOT-C4).
    (e) The coefficients for retroreflection of each segment of red or 
white sheeting shall be not less than the minimum values specified in 
Figure 29 of this standard for grades DOT-C2, DOT-C3, and DOT-C4.
    S5.7.1.4 Location. (a) Retroreflective sheeting shall be applied to 
each trailer and truck tractor as specified below, but need not be 
applied to discontinuous surfaces such as outside ribs, stake post 
pickets on platform trailers, and external protruding beams, or to items 
of equipment such as door hinges

[[Page 366]]

and lamp bodies on trailers and body joints, stiffening beads, drip 
rails and rolled surfaces on truck tractors.
    (b) The edge of white sheeting shall not be located closer than 75 
mm to the edge of the luminous lens area of any red or amber lamp that 
is required by this standard.
    (c) The edge of red sheeting shall not be located closer than 75 mm 
to the edge of the luminous lens area of any amber lamp that is required 
by this standard.
    S5.7.1.4.1 Rear of trailers. Retroreflective sheeting shall be 
applied to the rear of each trailer as follows, except that Element 2 is 
not required for container chassis or for platform trailers without 
bulkheads, and Element 3 is not required for trailers without underride 
protection devices:
    (a) Element 1: A strip of sheeting, as horizontal as practicable, in 
alternating colors across the full width of the trailer, as close to the 
extreme edges as practicable, and as close as practicable to not less 
than 375 mm and not more than 1525 mm above the road surface at the 
stripe centerline with the trailer at curb weight.
    (b) Element 2: Two pairs of white strips of sheeting, each pair 
consisting of strips 300 mm long of grade DOT-C2, DOT-C3, or DOT-C4, 
applied horizontally and vertically to the right and left upper contours 
of the body, as viewed from the rear, as close to the top of the trailer 
and as far apart as practicable. If the perimeter of the body, as viewed 
from the rear, is other than rectangular, the strips may be applied 
along the perimeter, as close as practicable to the uppermost and 
outermost areas of the rear of the body on the left and right sides.
    (c) Element 3: A strip of sheeting in alternating colors across the 
full width of the horizontal member of the rear underride protection 
device. Grade DOT-C2 material not less than 38 mm wide may be used.
    S5.7.1.4.2 Side of trailers. Retroreflective sheeting shall be 
applied to each side of a trailer as follows:
    (a) A strip of sheeting, as horizontal as practicable, in 
alternating colors, originating and terminating as close to the front 
and rear as practicable, as close as practicable to not less than 375 mm 
and not more than 1525 mm above the road surface at the stripe 
centerline with the trailer at curb weight, except that at the location 
chosen the strip shall not be obscured in whole or in part by other 
motor vehicle equipment or trailer cargo. The strip need not be 
continuous as long as not less than half of the length of the trailer is 
covered and the spaces are distributed as evenly as practicable.
    (b) If necessary to clear rivet heads or other similar obstructions, 
grade DOT-C2 retroreflective sheeting may be separated into two 25 mm 
wide strips of the same length and color, separated by a space of not 
more than 25 mm, and used in place of the retroreflective sheeting that 
would otherwise be applied.
    S5.7.1.4.3 Rear of truck tractors. Retroreflective sheeting shall be 
applied to the rear of each truck tractor as follows:
    (a) Element 1: Two strips of sheeting in alternating colors, each 
not less than 600 mm long, located as close as practicable to the edges 
of the rear fenders, mudflaps, or the mudflap support brackets, to mark 
the width of the truck tractor. The strips shall be mounted as 
horizontal as practicable, in a vertical plane facing the rear, on the 
rear fenders, on the mudflap support brackets, on plates attached to the 
mudflap support brackets, or on the mudflaps. Strips on mudflaps shall 
be mounted not lower than 300 mm below the upper horizontal edge of the 
mudflap. If the vehicle is certified with temporary mudflap support 
brackets, the strips shall be mounted on the mudflaps or on plates 
transferable to permanent mudflap support brackets. For a truck tractor 
without mudflaps, the strips may be mounted outboard of the frame on 
brackets behind the rear axle or on brackets ahead of the rear axle and 
above the top of the tires at unladen vehicle height, or they may be 
mounted directly or indirectly to the back of the cab as close to the 
outer edges as practicable, above the top of the tires, and not more 
than 1525 mm above the road surface at unladen vehicle height. If the 
strips are mounted on the back of the cab, no more than 25 percent of 
their cumulative area may

[[Page 367]]

be obscured by vehicle equipment as determined in a rear orthogonal 
view.
    (b) Element 2: Two pairs of white strips of sheeting, each pair 
consisting of strips 300 mm long, applied as horizontally and vertically 
as practicable, to the right and left upper contours of the cab, as 
close to the top of the cab and as far apart as practicable. No more 
than 25 percent of their cumulative area may be obscured by vehicle 
equipment as determined in a rear orthogonal view. If one pair must be 
relocated to avoid obscuration by vehicle equipment, the other pair may 
be relocated in order to be mounted symmetrically. If the rear window is 
so large as to occupy all the practicable space, the material may be 
attached to the edge of the window itself.
    S5.7.1.5 Certification. The letters DOT-C2, DOT-C3, or DOT-C4, as 
appropriate, constituting a certification that the retroreflective 
sheeting conforms to the requirements of S5.7.1.2, shall appear at least 
once on the exposed surface of each white or red segment of 
retroreflective sheeting, and at least once every 300 mm on 
retroreflective sheeting that is white only. The characters shall be not 
less than 3 mm high, and shall be permanently stamped, etched, molded, 
or printed in indelible ink.
    S5.7.2 Reflex Reflectors. Each trailer or truck tractor to which 
S5.7 applies that does not conform to S5.7.1 or S5.7.3 shall be equipped 
with reflex reflectors in accordance with this section.
    S5.7.2.1 (a) Each reflex reflector shall conform to SAE Standard 
J594f, Reflex Reflectors, January 1977.
    (b) Each red reflex reflector shall also provide, at an observation 
angle of 0.2 degree, not less than 300 millicandelas/lux at any light 
entrance angle between 30 degrees left and 30 degrees right, including 
an entrance angle of 0 degree, and not less than 75 millicandelas/lux at 
any light entrance angle between 45 degrees left and 45 degrees right.
    (c) Each white reflex reflector shall also provide at an observation 
angle of 0.2 degree, not less than 1250 millicandelas/lux at any light 
entrance angle between 30 degrees left and 30 degrees right, including 
an entrance angle of 0 degree, and not less than 300 millicandelas/lux 
at any light entrance angle between 45 degrees left and 45 degrees 
right.
    (d) A white reflex reflector complying with S5.7.2.1(a) and (c) when 
tested in a horizontal orientation may be installed in all orientations 
specified for rear upper locations in S5.7.1.4.1(b) or S5.7.1.4.3(b) if, 
when tested in a vertical orientation, it provides an observation angle 
of 0.2 degree not less than 1680 millicandelas/lux at a light entrance 
angle of 0 degree, not less than 1120 millicandelas/lux at any light 
entrance angle from 10 degrees down to 10 degrees up, and not less than 
560 millicandelas/lux at any light entrance angle from 20 degrees right 
to 20 degrees left.
    S5.7.2.2 Reflex reflectors shall be installed and located as 
specified below:
    (a) In the same locations and in the same length in which 
retroreflective sheeting is required by S5.7.1.4 to be applied in 
alternating colors, reflex reflectors shall be installed in a repetitive 
pattern of two or three white reflex reflectors alternating with two or 
three red reflex reflectors, with the center of each reflector not more 
than 100 mm from the center of each adjacent reflector.
    (b) In the same locations and in the same length in which white 
retroreflective sheeting is required by S5.7.1.4 to be installed, white 
reflex reflectors shall be installed, with the center of each white 
reflex reflector not more than 100 mm from the center of each adjacent 
reflector.
    S5.7.2.3 Certification. The exposed surface of each reflex reflector 
shall be marked with the letters DOT-C which constitutes a certification 
that the reflector conforms to all applicable requirements of Sec. 
571.108 of this part. The certification shall be not less than 3 mm 
high, and permanently stamped, etched, molded or printed in indelible 
ink.
    S5.7.3 Combination of sheeting and reflectors. Each trailer or truck 
tractor to which S5.7 applies that does not conform to S5.7.1 or S5.7.2, 
shall be equipped with retroreflective materials that meet the 
requirements of S5.7.1 except that reflex reflectors that meet the 
requirements of S5.7.2.1, and that

[[Page 368]]

are installed in accordance with S5.7.2.2, may be used instead of any 
corresponding element of retroreflective sheeting located as required by 
S5.7.1.4.
    S5.8 Replacement Equipment.
    S5.8.1 Except as provided below, each lamp, reflective device, or 
item of associated equipment manufactured to replace any lamp, 
reflective device, or item of associated equipment on any vehicle to 
which this standard applies, shall be designed to conform to this 
standard.
    S5.8.2 A Type C replacement headlamp designed to conform to the 
requirements of paragraph S7.3.2(a) through (d) of this standard may be 
marked ``1'' and ``2'' rather than ``1C1'' and ``2C1'' respectively. A 
Type D replacement headlamp designed to conform to S7.3.2(a) through (c) 
and S7.3.5(b) of this standard may be marked ``TOP'' or ``2'' rather 
than ``2D1''.
    S5.8.3 (a) Each stop lamp manufactured to replace a stop lamp that 
was designed to conform to SAE Standard J586b, Stop Lamps, June 1966, 
may also be designed to conform to J586b. It shall meet the photometric 
minimum candlepower requirements for Class A red turn signal lamps 
specified in SAE Standard J575d, Test for Motor Vehicle Lighting Devices 
and Components, August 1967. Each such lamp manufactured for use on a 
passenger car and on a multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, trailer or 
bus less than 2032 mm. (80 inches) in overall width shall have an 
effective projected luminous lens area not less than 2258 square mm. 
(3\1/2\ square inches). If multiple compartment lamps or multiple lamps 
are used, the effective projected luminous lens area of each compartment 
or lamp shall be not less than 2258 square mm. (3\1/2\ square inches); 
however, the photometric requirements may be met by a combination of 
compartments or lamps.
    (b) Each stop lamp manufactured to replace a stop lamp that was 
designed to conform to SAE Standard J586c, Stop Lamps, August 1970, may 
also be designed to conform to J586c.
    S5.8.4 (a) Each turn signal lamp manufactured to replace a turn 
signal lamp that was designed to conform to SAE Standard J588d, Turn 
Signal Lamps, June 1966, may also be designed to conform to J588d, and 
shall meet the photometric minimum candlepower requirements for Class A 
turn signal lamps specified in SAE Standard J575d, Tests for Motor 
Vehicle Lighting Devices and Components, August 1967. Each such lamp 
manufactured for use on a passenger car and on a multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, truck, trailer or bus less than 80 inches in overall width 
shall have an effective projected luminous area not less than 3\1/2\ 
square inches. If multiple compartment lamps or multiple lamps are used, 
the effective projected luminous area of each compartment or lamp shall 
be not less than 3\1/2\ square inches; however, the photometric 
requirements may be met by a combination of compartments or lamps. Each 
such lamp manufactured for use on a multipurpose passenger vehicle, 
truck, trailer or bus 80 inches or more in overall width shall have an 
effective projected luminous area not less than 12 square inches.
    (b) Each turn signal lamp manufactured to replace a turn signal lamp 
that was designed to conform to SAE Standard J588e, Turn Signal Lamps, 
September 1970, may also be designed to conform to SAE Standard J588e.
    S5.8.5 Note 6 of Table 1 of SAE Standard J588e does not apply.
    S5.8.6. Instead of the photometric values specified in SAE Standards 
J586c and J588e, a stop lamp manufactured to replace a stop lamp 
designed to conform to SAE Standard J586c, or a turn signal lamp 
manufactured to replace a turn signal lamp designed to conform to SAE 
Standard J588e, shall meet the minimum percentage specified in Figure 1a 
of the corresponding minimum allowable value specified in Figure 1b. The 
maximum candlepower output of each such stop lamp or turn signal lamp 
shall not exceed that prescribed in Figure 1b. If the sum of the 
percentages of the minimum candlepower measured at the test points is 
not less than that specified for each group listed in Figure 1c, a stop 
lamp or turn signal lamp is not required to meet the minimum photometric 
value at each test point specified in SAE Standards J586c and J588e, 
respectively.

[[Page 369]]

    S5.8.7 Note 6 of Table 1 in SAE Standard J588e, Turn Signal Lamps, 
September 1970, does not apply.
    S5.8.8 Each taillamp manufactured to replace a taillamp designed to 
conform to SAE Standard J585d, Tail Lamps, August 1970, may also be 
designed to conform to J585d.
    S5.8.9 Each turn signal lamp manufactured to replace a turn signal 
lamp (on a motorcycle) that was designed to conform to SAE Standard 
J588d, Turn Signal Lamps, June 1966, may also be designed to conform to 
J588d.
    S5.8.10 Unless otherwise specified in this standard, each lamp, 
reflective device, or item of associated equipment to which paragraph 
S5.8.1 applies may be labeled with the symbol DOT, which shall 
constitute a certification that it conforms to applicable Federal motor 
vehicle safety standards.
    S5.8.11 A replacement lens for a replaceable bulb headlamp or an 
integral beam headlamp that is not required to have a bonded lens shall 
be provided with a replacement seal in a package that includes 
instructions for the removal and replacement of the lens, the cleaning 
of the reflector, and the sealing of the replacement lens to the 
reflector assembly.
    S6. Subreferenced SAE Standards and Recommended Practices
    S6.1 SAE Standards and Recommended Practices subreferenced by the 
SAE Standards and Recommended Practices included in Tables I and III and 
paragraphs S5.1.4 and S5.5.1 are those published in the 1970 edition of 
the SAE Handbook, except that the SAE standard referred to as ``J575'' 
is J575e, Tests for Motor Vehicle Lighting Devices and Components, 
August 1970, for stoplamps designed to conform to SAE Standards J586c, 
J586 FEB84, and J1398 MAY85; for taillamps designed to conform to SAE 
Standards J585d and J585e; for turn signal lamps designed to conform to 
SAE Standards J588e, J588 NOV84, and J1395 APR85; and for high-mounted 
stoplamps designed to conform to SAE Recommended Practice J186a. The 
reference in J585e to J256 does not apply. For headlamps other than 
motorcycle headlamps, unless otherwise specified in this standard, the 
version of SAE Standard J575 is DEC88, and the version of SAE Standard 
J602 is OCT80.The definition of ``optically combined'' in SAE 
Information Report J387 Terminology--Motor Vehicle Lighting NOV87, 
applies to that term as used in J586c and J588e.
    S6.2 Requirements of SAE Standards incorporated by reference in this 
standard, other than J576b and J576c, do not include test for warpage of 
devices with plastic lenses.
    S6.3 The term ``functional lighted lens area'' in any SAE Standard 
or Recommended Practice incorporated by reference or by subreference in 
this standard, has the same meaning as the term ``effective projected 
luminous lens area.''
    S7. Headlighting requirements.
    S7.1 Each passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, and 
bus manufactured on or after September 1, 1994, shall be equipped with a 
headlighting system designed to conform to the requirements of S7.3, 
S7.4, S7.5, or S7.6.
    S7.2(a) The lens of each original and replacement equipment 
headlamp, and of each original equipment and replacement equipment beam 
contributor shall be marked with the symbol ``DOT'' either horizontally 
or vertically which shall constitute the certification required by 49 
U.S.C. 30115.
    (b) The lens of each headlamp and of each beam contributor 
manufactured on or after December 1, 1989, to which paragraph (a) of 
this section applies shall be marked with the name and/or trademark 
registered with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office of the manufacturer 
of such headlamp or beam contributor, or its importer, or any 
manufacturer of a vehicle equipped with such headlamp or beam 
contributor. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to authorize 
the marking of any such name and/or trademark by one who is not the 
owner, unless the owner has consented to it.
    (c) Each headlamp and beam contributor to which paragraph (a) of 
this section applies shall be marked with its voltage and with its part 
or trade number.
    (d) Unless stated otherwise, a tolerance of <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>\1/4\ degree is permitted during photometric performance 
tests for any headlamp or beam contributor, and the

[[Page 370]]

test points 10U-90U shall be measured from the normally exposed surface 
of the lens face. The term `aiming plane' means `aiming reference plane' 
or an appropriate vertical plane defined by the manufacturer as required 
in S7.7.1.
    (e) Each replacement headlamp lens with seal, provided in accordance 
with S5.8.11, when installed according to the lens manufacturer's 
instructions on an integral beam or replaceable bulb headlamp, shall not 
cause the headlamp to fail to comply with any of the requirements of 
this standard. Each replacement headlamp lens shall be marked with the 
symbol ``DOT'', either horizontally or vertically, to constitute 
certification. Each replacement headlamp lens shall also be marked with 
the manufacturer and the part or trade number of the headlamp for which 
it is intended, and with the name and/or trademark of the lens 
manufacturer or importer that is registered with the U.S. Patent and 
Trademark Office. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to 
authorize the marking of any such name and/or trademark by one who is 
not the owner, unless the owner has consented to it.
    S7.3 Sealed beam headlighting system. A sealed beam headlighting 
system shall be designed to meet the requirements of one of the 
following subparagraphs of S7.3.2 through S7.3.9. In references to 
Figures in SAE J1383 APR85 for headlamp dimensional requirements, only 
those dimensions marked ``I'' for interchangeability are applicable.
    S7.3.1 The lens of each sealed beam headlamp designed to conform to 
S7.3.2 through S7.3.6 shall be marked according to paragraph 5.4.3 
through 5.4.5 of SAE Standard J1383 APR85 Performance Requirements for 
Motor Vehicle Headlamps.
    S7.3.2 Type A headlighting system. A Type A headlighting system 
consists of two Type 1A1 and two Type 2A1 headlamps and associated 
hardware, which are designed to conform to the following requirements:
    (a) SAE Standard J1383 APR85 Performance Requirements for Motor 
Vehicle Headlamps, with the following exceptions:
    (1) Paragraphs 1, 2.1.2, 2.8.2, 3, 4.1.1, 4.1.2, 4.1.3, 4.4, 4.6, 
4.8 through 4.18, 5.1.1, 5.1.3, 5.1.5, 5.1.7 through 5.1.16, 5.2.2, 
5.3.5, 5.4.1, 5.4.2, and 6 through 6.4 do not apply.
    (2) In paragraph 5.3.2, the words ``and retaining rings'' are 
omitted.
    (3) In paragraphs 4.5.2 and 5.1.6, the words ``Figure 28-1 or 28-2 
of Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 108'' are substituted for ``Table 
3.''
    (b) SAE Standard J580 DEC86 Sealed Beam Headlamp Assembly (except 
paragraphs 3, 4.1.1, 5.1.1.1, 5.1.2.3, and the second sentence of 
5.1.6); in 5.2.1, delete the words ``and retaining rings;'' the correct 
reference is SAE J1383 Figures 6, 9, 12 and 14.
    (c) After a vibration test conducted in accordance with paragraph 
S8.8, there shall be no evidence of loose or broken parts, other than 
filaments, visible without magnification.
    (d) The maximum wattage at 12.8 volts (design voltage): Single 
filament headlamp, 55 watts on the upper beam; dual filament headlamp, 
43 watts on the upper beam and 65 watts on the lower beam.
    S7.3.3 Type B headlighting system. A Type B headlighting system 
consists of two Type 2B1 headlamps and associated hardware, which are 
designed to conform to the following requirements:
    (a) The requirements of paragraph S7.3.2 (a) through (c), except 
that the words ``Figure 27-1 or Figure 27-2'' are substituted for 
``Table 3'' in paragraph S7.3.2(a)(3).
    (b) The maximum wattage at 12.8 volts (design voltage): 70 watts on 
the upper beam and 60 watts on the lower beam.
    S7.3.4 Type C headlighting system. A Type C headlighting system 
consists of two Type 1C1 and two Type 2C1 headlamps and associated 
hardware, which are designed to conform to the requirements of paragraph 
S7.3.2 (a) through (d), except that the words ``Figure 28-1 or Figure 
28-2'' are substituted for ``Table 3'' in paragraph S7.3.2(a)(3).
    S7.3.5 Type D headlighting system. (a) A Type D headlighting system 
consists of two Type 2D1 headlamps and associated hardware, which are 
designed to conform to the requirements of paragraph S7.3.2 (a) through 
(c), except that

[[Page 371]]

the words ``Figure 27-1 or Figure 27-1'' are substituted for ``Table 3'' 
in paragraph S7.3.2(a)(3).
    (b) The maximum wattage at 12.8 volts (design voltage): 65 watts on 
upper beam, and 55 watts on lower beam.
    S7.3.6 Type E headlighting system. (a) A Type E headlighting system 
consists of two Type 2E1 headlamps and associated hardware, which are 
designed to conform to the requirements of paragraph S7.3.2 (a) through 
(c), except that the words ``Figure 27-1 or Figure 27-1'' are 
substituted for ``Table 3'' in paragraph S7.3.2(a)(3).
    (b) The maximum wattage at 12.8 volts (design voltage): 70 watts on 
upper beam, and 60 watts on lower beam.
    S7.3.7 Type F headlighting system. A Type F headlighting system 
consists of two Type UF and two Type LF headlamps and associated 
hardware, which are designed to conform to the following requirements:
    (a) Figures 11, 12, 13, and 14 as appropriate.
    (b) The photometric requirements of Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2 of 
this standard. A reaim tolerance of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>\1/4\ degree 
is allowed for any test point on the Type LF lamp when tested alone, but 
is not allowed on the Type UF lamp when tested alone. For the test point 
10U-90U, measurement shall be from the normally exposed surface of the 
lens face.
    (c) SAE Standard J1383 APR85 Performance Requirements for Motor 
Vehicle Headlamps, Sections 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 4.1, 4.1.4, and 5.1.4.
    (d) When tested in accordance with section (c), the mounted assembly 
(either Type UF or Type LF headlamps, respective mounting ring, aiming 
ring, and aim adjustment mechanism) shall be designed to conform to the 
requirements of Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2 for upper or lower beams 
respectively without reaim when any conforming Type UF or LF headlamp is 
tested and replaced by another conforming headlamp of the same Type.
    (e) SAE J580 DEC86 Sealed Beam Headlamp Assembly with the following 
exceptions:
    (1) Section 2.2 Mounting Ring reads: ``the adjustable ring upon 
which the sealed beam unit is mounted and which forces the sealed beam 
unit to seat against the aiming ring when assembled into a sealed beam 
assembly.''
    (2) The definition ``2.3 Aiming Ring'' reads: ``The clamping ring 
that retains the sealed beam unit against the mounting ring, and that 
provides an interface between the unit's aiming/seating pads and the 
headlamp aimer adapter (locating plate).''
    (3) Section 4.1.1 Vibration Test does not apply.
    (4) Sections 5.1.1.1 and 5.1.2.3 do not apply.
    (5) Section 5.1.2.1 reads: ``When the headlamp assembly is tested in 
the laboratory, a minimum aiming adjustment of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 
degrees shall be provided in the horizontal plane and <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>4 degrees in the vertical plane.''
    (6) Section 5.1.2.2 concludes: ``* * * through an angle of <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 degrees and <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>4 degrees 
respectively.''
    (7) Section 5.1.6 is retitled ``Retaining Ring/Aiming Ring Tests''. 
The phrase ``92x150 mm * * * 0.340 in (8.6 mm)'' is added at the end of 
the table for flange thickness. The sentence beginning ``The fastening 
means'' is deleted.
    (8) Figures 2, 3, and 4 do not apply, and the reference to them in 
section 4.5 is replaced by ``Figure 16, Deflectometer, of Federal Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standard No. 108.''
    (f) A lens for a Type F headlamp incorporating an upper beam shall 
be labeled ``UF.'' A lens for a Type F headlamp incorporating a lower 
beam shall be labeled ``LF''. The face of letters, numbers, or other 
symbols molded on the surface of the lens shall not be raised more than 
0.020 in (0.5 mm), and shall be placed no closer to the geometric center 
of the lens than 1.375 in. (35 mm). The marking shall be molded in the 
lens and shall be not less than \1/4\ in. (6.35 mm) in size.
    (g) The maximum wattage at 12.8 volts (design voltage): 70 watts on 
the upper beam and 60 watts on the lower beam.
    (h) Type F headlamps may be mounted on common or parallel seating 
and aiming planes to permit simultaneous aiming of both headlamps 
provided that when tested with any conforming Type UF and LF headlamps 
according to Section S10:

[[Page 372]]

    (1) The assembly (consisting of the Type UF and LF headlamps, 
mounting rings, the aiming/seating rings, and aim adjustment mechanism) 
shall be designed to conform to the test points of Figure 15-1 or Figure 
15-2.
    (2) There shall be no provision for adjustment between the common or 
parallel aiming and seating planes of the two lamps.
    (i) After a vibration test conducted in accordance with paragraph 
S8.8, the Type F system shall show no evidence of loose or broken parts, 
other than filaments, visible without magnification.
    S7.3.8 Type G headlighting system. A Type G headlamp system consists 
of two Type 1G1 headlamps and two Type 2G1 headlamps each of which is 
designed to conform to the following requirements:
    (a) Figures 18 and 21.
    (b) SAE Standard J1383 APR85 Performance Requirements for Motor 
Vehicle Headlamps (except paragraphs 1, 2.1.2, 2.8.2,3, 4.1.1, 4.1.2, 
4.1.3, 4.4, 4.6, 4.8 through 4.18, 5.1.1, 5.1.3, 5.1.5 through 5.1.16, 
5.2.2, 5.3.5 through 6.4). In paragraph 5.3.2 the words ``and retaining 
rings'' are omitted. In paragraph 4.5.2, the words ``either Figure 28-1, 
or Figure 28-2'' are substituted for ``Table 3''.
    (c) SAE Standard J580 DEC86 Sealed Beam Headlamp Assembly, with the 
following exceptions:
    (1) Sections 2.2, 2.3, 4.1.1, 5.1.1.1, 5.1.2.3, 5.1.6, and 5.2.1.
    (2) Section 4.5 reads: ``Torque Deflection Test. The headlamp 
assembly to be tested shall be mounted in the designed vehicle position 
and set at nominal aim (0.0). A special adapter (Figure 22) for the 
deflectometer (Figure 16) shall be clamped onto the headlamp assembly. A 
torque of 20 in.-lbs (2.25 N-m) shall be applied to the headlamp 
assembly through the deflectometer, and a reading on the thumb wheel 
shall be taken. The torque shall be removed and a second reading on the 
thumb wheel shall be taken.''
    (d) After a vibration test conducted in accordance with paragraph 
S8.8, there shall be no evidence of loose or broken parts, other than 
filaments, visible without magnification.
    (e) The maximum wattage at 12.8 volts (design voltage) for the 1G1 
and 2G1 upper beam is 55 watts and 43 watts respectively; for the 2G1 
lower beam, 65 watts.
    (f) A lens for a Type G headlamp incorporating only part of an upper 
beam shall be labeled ``1G1.'' A lens for a Type G headlamp 
incorporating both part of an upper beam and a lower beam shall be 
labeled ``2G1.'' The face of letters, numbers, or other symbols molded 
on the surface of the lens shall not be raised more than 0.020 in. (0.5 
mm.), and shall be placed no closer to the geometric center of the lens 
than 1.375 in. (35 mm). The marking shall be molded in the lens and 
shall be not less than \1/4\ in. (6.35 mm) in size.
    S7.3.9 Type H headlighting system. A Type H headlamp system 
consisting of two Type 2H1 headlamps and associated hardware, which are 
designed to conform to the following requirements:
    (a) Paragraphs S7.3.8 (a) through (d) except that in paragraph 
S7.3.8(b), the words ``Figure 27-1 or Figure 27-2'' are substituted for 
``Table 3.''
    (b) The maximum wattage at 12.8 volts (design voltage): 70 watts on 
the upper beam and 60 watts on the lower beam.
    (c) A lens for a Type H headlamp incorporating both an upper beam 
and a lower beam shall be labeled ``2H1.'' The face of letters, numbers, 
or other symbols molded on the surface of the lens shall not be raised 
more than 0.020 in. (0.5 mm), and shall be placed no closer to the 
geometric center of the lens than 1.375 in. (35 mm). The marking shall 
be molded in the lens and shall be not less than \1/4\ in. (6.35 mm) in 
size.
    S7.4 Integral Beam Headlighting System. An integral beam 
headlighting system shall be designed to conform to the following 
requirements:
    (a) The system shall provide in total not more than two upper beams 
and two lower beams of the performance described in one of the 
following:
    (1) In a four-headlamp system, each upper beam headlamp and each 
lower beam headlamp shall be designed to conform to the photometrics of 
one of the following:
    (i) Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2; or
    (ii) Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2, except that the upper beam test 
value at 2.5 D-V and 2.5D-12R and 12L, shall apply to the lower beam 
headlamp and not to

[[Page 373]]

the upper beam headlamp, and the upper beam test point value at 1.5D-9R 
and 9L shall be 1000; or
    (iii) Figure 28-1 or Figure 28-2.
    (2) In a two-headlamp system, each headlamp shall be designed to 
conform to the photometrics of one of the following:
    (i) Figure 17-1 or Figure 17-2; or
    (ii) Figure 27-1 or Figure 27-2.
    (3) In a system in which there is more than one beam contributor 
providing a lower beam, and/or more than one beam contributor providing 
an upper beam, each beam contributor in the system shall be designed to 
meet only the photometric performance requirements of Figure 15-1 or 
Figure 15-2 based upon the following mathematical expression: conforming 
test point value = 2 (Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2 test point value)/total 
number of lower or upper beam contributors for the vehicle, as 
appropriate. The system shall be designed to use the Vehicle Headlamp 
Aiming Device (VHAD) as specified in paragraph S7.8.5.2.
    (b) The lower and upper beams shall be provided only as follows 
where each headlamp contains two light sources:
    (1) The lower beam shall be provided either by the most outboard 
light source (or the uppermost if arranged vertically), or by all light 
sources.
    (2) The upper beam shall be provided either by the most inboard 
light source (or the lowermost if arranged vertically), or by all light 
sources.
    (c) The lower and upper beams shall be provided only as follows 
where each headlamp contains a single light source:
    (1) The lower beam shall be provided by the most outboard headlamps 
(or the uppermost if arranged vertically), and the lens of each such 
headlamp shall be permanently marked with the letter ``L.''
    (2) The upper beam shall be provided by the most inboard headlamps 
(or lowermost if arranged vertically), and the lens of each such 
headlamp shall be permanently marked with the letter ``U.''
    (d) A headlamp or beam contributor designed to meet paragraphs 
(a)(1) or (a)(3) of this section and S7.8.5.1 may be mounted in an 
assembly to permit simultaneous aiming of the beam(s) contributors, 
provided that with any complying contributor the assembly complete with 
all lamps meets the appropriate photometric requirements when tested in 
accordance with S10.
    (e) Each integral beam headlamp system shall be designed to conform 
to the applicable photometric performance requirements in paragraph (a) 
of this section when tested in accordance with sections 4.1 and 4.1.4 of 
SAE Standard J1383 APR85 with any headlamps intended for use in such 
system. The term ``aiming plane'' means ``aiming reference plane,'' or 
an appropriate vertical plane defined by the manufacturer as required in 
paragraph S7.8.1.
    (f) The system shall be aimable in accordance with the requirements 
of paragraph S7.8. A system that incorporates any headlamp or beam 
contributor that does not have a VHAD as an integral and indivisible 
part of the headlamp or beam contributor shall be designed so that the 
appropriate photometrics are met when any correctly aimed and 
photometrically conforming headlamp or beam contributor is removed from 
its mounting and aiming mechanism, and is replaced without reaim by any 
conforming headlamp or beam contributor of the same type.
    (g) A headlamp with a glass lens need not meet the abrasion 
resistance test (S8.2). A headlamp with a nonreplaceable glass lens need 
not meet the chemical resistance test (S8.3). A headlamp with a glass 
lens and a non-plastic reflector need not meet the internal heat test of 
paragraph S8.6.2. A headlamp of sealed design as verified in paragraph 
S8.9 (sealing) need not meet the corrosion (S8.4), dust (S8.5), or 
humidity (S8.7) tests; however, the headlamp shall meet the requirements 
of paragraphs 4.1, 4.1.2, 4.4 and 5.1.4 for corrosion and connector of 
SAE Standard J580 DEC86 Sealed Beam Headlamp Assembly. An integral beam 
headlamp may incorporate light sources that are replaceable and are used 
for purposes other than headlighting.
    (h) When tested according to any of the procedures indicated in 
subparagraphs (1) through (7) each headlamp or beam contributor shall 
meet the appropriate requirement:
    (1) After an abrasion test conducted in accordance with paragraph 
S8.2, the

[[Page 374]]

headlamp shall meet the photometric requirements applicable to the 
headlamp system under test.
    (2) After the chemical resistance tests of paragraphs S8.3 and 
S8.10.1, the headlamp shall have no surface deterioration, coating 
delamination, fractures, deterioration of bonding or sealing materials, 
color bleeding or color pickup visible without magnification, and the 
headlamp shall meet the photometric requirements applicable to the 
headlamp system under test.
    (3) After a corrosion test conducted in accordance with paragraph 
S8.4, there shall be no evidence of external or internal corrosion or 
rust visible without magnification. After a corrosion test conducted in 
accordance with paragraph S8.10.2, there shall be no evidence of 
corrosion or rust visible without magnification on any part of the 
headlamp reflector that receives light from a headlamp light source, on 
any metal light or heat shield assembly, or on a metal reflector of any 
other lamp not sealed from the headlamp reflector. Loss of adhesion of 
any applied coating shall not occur more than 0.l25 in. (3.2 mm) from 
any sharp edge on the inside or outside. Corrosion may occur on 
terminals only if the current produced during the test of paragraph 
S8.4(c) is not less than 9.7 amperes.
    (4) After a dust test conducted in accordance with paragraph S8.5, 
the headlamp shall meet the photometric requirements applicable to the 
headlamp system under test.
    (5) The headlamp shall first meet the requirements of subparagraph 
(i) and then those of subparagraph (ii).
    (i) After a temperature cycle test conducted in accordance with 
paragraph S8.6.1, the headlamp shall show no evidence of delamination, 
fractures, entry of moisture or deterioration of bonding material, color 
bleeding, warpage or deformation visible without magnification or lens 
warpage greater than .118 in. (3 mm) when measured parallel to the 
optical axis at the point of intersection of the axis of each light 
source with the exterior surface of the lens, and it shall meet the 
photometric requirements applicable to the headlamp system under test.
    (ii) After an internal heat test conducted in accordance with 
paragraph S8.6.2, there shall be no lens warpage greater than .118 in. 
(3 mm) when measured parallel to the optical axis at the point of 
intersection of the axis of each light source with the exterior surface 
of the lens, and it shall meet the photometric requirements applicable 
to the headlamp system under test.
    (6) After a humidity test conducted in accordance with paragraph 
S8.7, the inside of the headlamp shall show no evidence of delamination 
or moisture, fogging or condensation visible without magnification.
    (7) After a vibration test conducted in accordance with paragraph 
S8.8, there shall be no evidence of loose or broken parts, other than 
filaments, visible without magnification.
    (i) An integral beam headlamp may incorporate replaceable light 
sources that are used for purposes other than headlighting.
    S7.5 Replaceable bulb headlamp system. Each replaceable bulb 
headlamp system shall be designed to conform to the following 
requirements:
    (a) The system shall provide only two lower beams and two upper 
beams and shall incorporate not more than two replaceable light sources 
in each headlamp.
    (b) The photometrics as specified in subparagraphs (c) through (e) 
of this paragraph (depicted in Figure 26), using any light source of the 
Type intended for use in such system.
    (c) The test requirements of sections 4.1, 4.1.4, and performance 
requirements of section 5.1.4 of SAE J1383 APR85, using the photometric 
requirements specified in subparagraphs (d) and (e) of this paragraph.
    (d) For a headlamp equipped with dual filament replaceable light 
sources, the following requirements apply:
    (1) Headlamps designed to conform to the external aiming 
requirements of S7.8.5.1 shall have no mechanism that allows adjustment 
of an individual light source, or, if there are two light sources, 
independent adjustments of each reflector.
    (2) The lower and upper beams of a headlamp system consisting of two 
lamps, each containing either one or two replaceable light sources, 
shall be provided as follows:

[[Page 375]]

    (i) The lower beam shall be provided in one of the following ways:
    (A) By the outboard light source (or upper one if arranged 
vertically) designed to conform to:
    (1) The lower beam requirements of Figure 27-1 or Figure 27-2, or 
Figure 17-1 or Figure 17-2, if the light sources in the headlamp system 
are any combination of dual filament replaceable light sources other 
than Type HB2; or
    (2) The lower beam requirements of Figure 17-1 or Figure17-2 if the 
light sources are Type HB2, or any dual filament replaceable light 
sources that include Type HB2; or
    (B) By both light sources in the headlamp, designed to conform to 
the lower beam requirements specified above.
    (ii) The upper beam shall be provided in one of the following ways:
    (A) By the inboard light source (or the lower one if arranged 
vertically) designed to conform to:
    (1) The upper beam requirements of Figure 27-1 or Figure 27-2, or 
Figure 17-1 or Figure 17-2 if the light sources in the headlamp system 
are any combination of dual filament replaceable light sources that 
include Type HB2, or
    (2) The upper beam requirements of figure 17-1 or Figure 17-2 if the 
light sources are type HB2, or any combination of replaceable light 
sources that include Type HB2; or
    (B) By both light sources in the headlamp, designed to conform to 
the upper beam requirements specified above.
    (3) The lower and upper beams of a headlamp system consisting of 
four lamps, each containing a single replaceable light source, shall be 
provided as follows:
    (i) The lower beam shall be provided by the outboard lamp (or the 
upper one if arranged vertically), designed to conform to:
    (A) The lower beam requirements of Figure 27-1 or Figure 27-2, or 
Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2 if the light sources in the headlamp system 
are any combination of dual filament light sources other than Type HB2; 
or
    (B) The lower beam requirements of Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2 if the 
light sources are Type HB2, or dual filament light sources other than 
Type HB1 and HB5. The lens of each such headlamp shall be marked with 
the letter ``L''.
    (ii) The upper beam shall be provided by the inboard lamp (or the 
lower one if arranged vertically), designed to conform to:
    (A) The upper beam requirements of Figure 27-1 or Figure 27-2, of 
Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2 if the light sources in the headlamp system 
are any combination of dual filament light sources other than Type HB2; 
or
    (B) The upper beam requirements of Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2 if the 
light sources are Type HB2, or dual filament light sources other tha 
Type HB1 and Type HB5. The lens of each such headlamp shall be marked 
with the letter ``u''.
    (e) The following requirements apply to a headlamp system equipped 
with any combination of replaceable light sources except those specified 
in paragraph (d) of this section:
    (1) Headlamps designed to conform to the external aim requirements 
of S7.8.5.1 shall have no mechanism that allows adjustment of an 
individual light source, or, if there are two replaceable light sources, 
independent adjustment of each reflector.
    (2) The lower and upper beams of a headlamp system consisting of two 
lamps, each containing a combination of two replaceable light sources 
(other than those combinations specified in subparagraph (d) of this 
paragraph) shall be provided only as follows:
    (i) The lower beam shall be provided in one of the following ways:
    (A) By the outboard light source (or the uppermost if arranged 
vertically) designed to conform to the lower beam requirements of Figure 
17-1 or Figure 17-2; or
    (B) By both light sources, designed to conform to the lower beam 
requirements of Figure 17-1 or Figure 17-2.
    (ii) The upper beam shall be provided in one of the following ways:
    (A) By the inboard light source (or the lower one if arranged 
vertically) designed to conform to the upper beam requirements of Figure 
17-1 or Figure 17-2; or
    (B) By both light sources, designed to conform to the upper beam 
requirements of Figure 17-1 or Figure 17-2.

[[Page 376]]

    (3) The lower and upper beams of a headlamp system consisting of 
four lamps, using any combination of replaceable light sources except 
those specified in subparagraph (d) of this paragraph, each lamp 
containing only a single replaceable light source, shall be provided 
only as follows:
    (i) The lower beam shall be produced by the outboard lamp (or upper 
one if arranged vertically), designed to conform to the lower beam 
requirements of Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2. The lens of each headlamp 
shall be permanently marked with the letter ``L''.
    (ii) The upper beam shall be produced by the inboard lamp (or lower 
one of arranged vertically), designed to conform to the upper beam 
requirements of Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2. The lens of each headlamp 
shall be permanently marked with the letter ``U''.
    (f) Each lens reflector unit manufactured as replacement equipment 
shall be designed to conform to the requirements of subparagraphs (d) 
and (e) of this paragraph when any replaceable light source appropriate 
for such unit is inserted in it.
    (g) The lens of each replaceable bulb headlamp shall bear permanent 
marking in front of each replaceable light source with which it is 
equipped that states the HB Type, if the light source is designed to 
conform to subparagraphs (a) through (e) of paragraph S7.7, or the bulb 
marking/ designation provided in compliance with Section VIII of 
appendix A of part 564, if the light source is designed to conform to 
subparagraph (g) of paragraph S.7.7 No marking need be provided if the 
only replaceable light source in the headlamp is Type HB1.
    (h) The system shall be aimable in accordance with paragraph S7.8.
    (i) Each headlamp shall meet the requirements of paragraphs S7.4(g) 
and (h), except that the sentence in paragraph (g) to verify sealing 
according to section S8.9 Sealing does not apply.
    (j) A replaceable bulb headlighting system may incorporate 
replaceable light sources that are used for purposes other than 
headlighting.
    S7.6 Combination Headlighting System. A combination headlighting 
system shall be comprised of either two headlamps designed to conform to 
the requirements of S7.6.2, or any combination of four headlamps 
designed to conform to the requirements of S7.3.7, S7.4, or S7.5 of this 
standard.
    S7.6.1 A combination headlighting system shall provide in total not 
more than two upper beams and two lower beams. When installed on a motor 
vehicle, the headlamps (or parts thereof) that provide the lower beam 
shall be of the same type, and provide a symmetrical effective projected 
luminous lens area when illuminated.
    S7.6.2 In a combination headlighting system consisting of two 
headlamps, each headlamp shall be designed to conform to Figure 17-1 or 
Figure 17-2 and shall be a combination of two different headlamps chosen 
from the following types: a Type F headlamp, an integral beam headlamp, 
and a replaceable bulb headlamp.
    S7.6.2.1 That part of the headlamp which contains an integral beam 
headlamp, or beam contributors used in place of a single headlamp, shall 
be designed to conform to the requirements of S7.4 (c) through (h) of 
this standard.
    S7.6.2.2 That part of the headlamp which contains a replaceable bulb 
headlamp shall be designed to conform to the requirements of S7.5 of 
this standard.
    S7.6.3 In a combination headlighting system consisting of four 
headlamps, each headlamp shall be designed to conform to Figure 15-1 or 
Figure 15-2, or if an integral beam headlamp in which there is more than 
one beam contributor, designed to conform to Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2 
in the manner required by S7.4(a)(3) of this standard.
    S7.7 Replaceable light sources. Each replaceable light source shall 
be designed to conform to the dimensions and electrical specifications 
furnished with respect to it pursuant to part 564 of this chapter, and 
shall conform to the following requirements:
    (a) If other than an HB Type, the light source shall be marked with 
the bulb marking designation specified for it in compliance with 
appendix A or appendix B of part 564 of this chapter. The base of each 
HB Type shall be marked with its HB Type designation. Each replaceable 
light source shall also

[[Page 377]]

be marked with the symbol DOT and with a name or trademark in accordance 
with paragraph S7.2.
    (b) The measurement of maximum power and luminous flux that is 
submitted in compliance with appendix A or appendix B of part 564 of 
this chapter shall be made in accordance with this paragraph. The 
filament or discharge arc shall be seasoned before measurement of 
either. Measurement shall be made with the direct current test voltage 
regulated within one quarter of one percent. The test voltage shall be 
12.8v. The measurement of luminous flux shall be in accordance with the 
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, LM-45, IES Approved 
Method for Electrical and Photometric Measurements of General Service 
Incandescent Filament Lamps (April 1980); shall be made with the black 
cap installed on Type HB1, Type HB2, Type HB4, and Type HB5, and on any 
other replaceable light source so designed; and shall be made with the 
electrical conductor and light source base shrouded with an opaque white 
cover, except for the portion normally located within the interior of 
the lamp housing. The measurement of luminous flux for the Types HB3 and 
HB4 shall be made with the base covered with a white cover as shown in 
the drawings for Types HB3 and HB4 filed in Docket No. NHTSA 98-3397. 
(The white cover is used to eliminate the likelihood of incorrect lumen 
measurement that will occur should the reflectance of the light source 
base and electrical connector be low).
    (c) The capsule, lead wires and/or terminals, and seal on each Type 
HB1, Type HB3, Type HB4, and Type HB5 light source, and on any other 
replaceable light source which uses a seal, shall be installed in a 
pressure chamber as shown in Figure 25 so as to provide an airtight 
seal. The diameter of the aperture in Figure 25 on a replaceable light 
source (other than an HB Type) shall be that dimension furnished for 
such light source in compliance with appendix A or appendix B of part 
564 of this chapter. An airtight seal exists when no air bubbles appear 
on the low pressure (connector) side after the light source has been 
immersed in water for one minute while inserted in a cylindrical 
aperture specified for the light source, and subjected to an air 
pressure of 70kPa (10 P.S.I.G.) on the glass capsule side.
    (d) The measurement of maximum power and luminous flux that is 
submitted in compliance with section VII of appendix A of part 564 of 
this chapter, or section IV of appendix B of part 564 of this chapter, 
shall be made with the direct current test voltage regulated within one 
quarter of one percent. The test voltage shall be 12.8v. The measurement 
of luminous flux shall be in accordance with the Illuminating 
Engineering Society of North America, LM 45; IES Approved Method for 
Electrical and Photometric Measurements of General Service Incandescent 
Filament Lamps (April 1980). The filament of a replaceable light source 
shall be seasoned before such measurement. The white covers are used to 
eliminate the likelihood of incorrect lumens measurement that will occur 
should the reflectance of the light source base and electrical connector 
be low.
    (1) For a light source with a resistive element type filament, 
seasoning of the light source shall be made in accordance with section 
2.9 of SAE Standard J1383 APR85 Performance Requirements for Motor 
Vehicle Headlamps. The measurement of luminous flux shall be made with 
the black cap installed on Type HB1, Type HB2, Type HB4, and Type HB5 
light sources, and on any other replaceable light source so designed, 
and shall be made with the electrical conductor and light source base 
shrouded with an opaque white colored cover, except for the portion 
normally located within the interior of the lamp housing. The 
measurement of luminous flux for Type HB3 and Type HB4 shall be made 
with the base covered with the white cover shown in the drawings for 
Types HB3 and HB4 filed in Docket No. NHTSA 98-3397.
    (2) For a light source using excited gas mixtures as a filament or 
discharge arc, seasoning of the light source system, including any 
ballast required for its operation, shall be made in accordance with 
section 4.0 of SAE Recommended Practice J2009 FEB93 Discharge Forward 
Lighting Systems. With the test voltage applied to the ballast input 
terminals, the measurement of

[[Page 378]]

luminous flux shall be made with the black cap installed, if so 
designed, and shall be made with an opaque white colored cover, except 
for the portion normally located within the interior of the lamp 
housing.
    (e) If a ballast is required for operation, each ballast shall bear 
the following permanent markings:
    (1) Name or logo of ballast manufacturer;
    (2) Ballast part number or unique identification;
    (3) Part number or other unique identification of the light source 
for which the ballast is designed;
    (4) Rated laboratory life of the light source/ballast combination, 
if the information for the light source has been filed in appendix B of 
part 564 of this chapter;
    (5) A warning that ballast output voltage presents the potential for 
severe electrical shock that could lead to permanent injury or death;
    (6) Ballast output power in watts and output voltage in rms volts AC 
or DC; and
    (7) The symbol `DOT'.''
    (f) For light sources that use excited gas mixtures as a filament or 
discharge arc, the ``rated laboratory life'' shall be determined in 
accordance with sections 4.3 and 4.9 of SAE Recommended Practice J2009 
FEB93 Forward Discharge Lighting Systems.
    (g) After the force deflection test conducted in accordance with S9, 
the permanent deflection of the glass envelope shall not exceed 0.13 mm 
in the direction of the applied force.
    S7.8 Aimability Performance Requirements.
    S7.8.1 (a) Each headlamp or beam contributor that is not visually/
optically aimable in accordance with S7.8.5.3 of this standard shall be 
equipped with fiducial marks, aiming pads, or similar references of 
sufficient detail and accuracy, for determination of an appropriate 
vehicle plane to be used with the photometric procedures of SAE J1383 
APR85 for correct alignment with the photometer axis when being tested 
for photometric compliance, and to serve for the aiming reference when 
the headlamp or beam contributor is installed on a motor vehicle. The 
fiducial marks, aiming pads, or similar references are protrusions, 
bubble vials, holes, indentations, ridges, scribed lines, or other 
readily identifiable marks established and described by the vehicle or 
headlamp manufacturer.
    (b) Each motor vehicle manufactured on and after September 1, 1998, 
shall be equipped with headlamps or beam contributors which have a mark 
or markings that are visible from the front of the headlamp when 
installed on the vehicle to identify the optical axis of the headlamp to 
assure proper horizontal and vertical alignment of the aiming screen or 
optical aiming equipment. The manufacturer is free to choose the design 
of the mark or markings. The mark or markings may be on the interior or 
exterior of the lens or indicated by a mark or central structure on the 
interior or exterior of the headlamp.
    (c) Each headlamp that is visually/optically aimable in accordance 
with S7.8.5.3 of this standard shall be marked in accordance with 
S7.8.5.3(f).
    S7.8.2 Except as provided in this paragraph, each headlamp shall be 
installed on a motor vehicle with a mounting and aiming mechanism that 
allows aim inspection and adjustment of both vertical and horizontal 
aim, and is accessible for those purposes without removal of any vehicle 
parts, except for protective covers removable without the use of tools.
    S7.8.2.1 (a) When installed on the vehicle, adjustment of one aim 
axis through its full on-vehicle range shall not cause the aim of the 
other axis to deviate more than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.76 degree.
    (b) If the performance specified in paragraph (a) of this section is 
not achievable, the requirements of S7.8.5.2(b)(3) apply, except that if 
the aiming mechanism is not a VHAD, the requirements specific to VHADs 
are not applicable, and the instruction shall be specific to the aiming 
mechanism installed.
    (c) A visually/optically aimable headlamp that has a lower beam 
shall not have a horizontal adjustment mechanism unless such mechanism 
meets the requirements of paragraph S7.8.5.2 of this standard.
    S7.8.2.2 If the headlamp is aimed by moving the reflector relative 
to the

[[Page 379]]

lens and headlamp housing, or vice versa, it shall:
    (a) Allow movement of the headlamp system, when tested in the 
laboratory, to be not less than the full range of pitch on the vehicle 
on which the headlamp system is installed and for the horizontal aim 
range limits of S7.8.4,
    (b) Conform with the photometrics applicable to it with the lens at 
any position relative to the reflector within the range limits as 
specified in S7.8.2.2(a),
    (c) Be exempted from the aim range limits for testing in a 
laboratory in S7.8.3, and
    (d) Be exempted from S7.8.4 if it is visually/optically aimable and 
has fixed horizontal aim.
    S7.8.3 When a headlamp system is tested in a laboratory, the range 
of its vertical aim shall not be less than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>4 
degrees from the nominal correct aim position for the intended vehicle 
application. When installed on a motor vehicle, the range of vertical 
aim shall be not less than the full range of pitch of the vehicle on 
which the headlamp system is installed. The installed range of static 
pitch angle shall as a minimum be determined from unloaded vehicle 
weight to gross vehicle weight rating, and incorporate pitch angle 
effects from maximum trailer or trunk loadings, the full range of tire 
intermix sizes and suspensions recommended and/or installed by the 
vehicle manufacturer, and the anticipated effects of variable passenger 
loading. The vertical aim adjustment mechanism shall be continuously 
adjustable over the full range.
    S7.8.4 When a headlamp system is tested in a laboratory, the range 
of its horizontal aim shall be not less that <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 
degrees from the nominal correct aim position for the intended vehicle 
application.
    S7.8.5 When activated in a steady-burning state, headlamps shall not 
have any styling ornament or other feature, such as a translucent cover 
or grill, in front of the lens. Headlamp wipers may be used in front of 
the lens provided that the headlamp system is designed to conform with 
all applicable photometric requirements with the wiper stopped in any 
position in front of the lens. When a headlamp system is installed on a 
motor vehicle, it shall be aimable with at least one of the following: 
An externally applied aiming device, as specified in S7.8.5.1; an on-
vehicle headlamp aiming device installed by the vehicle or lamp 
manufacturer, as specified in S7.8.5.2; or by visual/optical means, as 
specified in S7.8.5.3.
    S7.8.5.1 External aiming. Each headlamp system that is capable of 
being mechanically aimed by externally applied headlamp aiming devices 
shall be mechanically aimable using the equipment specified in SAE 
Standard J602 OCT80 Headlamp Aiming Device for Mechanically Aimable 
Sealed Beam Headlamp Units without the removal of any ornamental trim 
rings, covers, wipers or other vehicle parts.
    (a) The aim of the headlamps in each headlamp system, other than a 
headlamp system designed to conform to section S7.3, that is designed to 
use such external aiming devices, shall not deviate more than 0.30 
degree when a downward torque of 20 lb.-in. (2.25 N-m) is removed from 
the headlamp in its design operating position. The downward force used 
to create the torque shall be applied parallel to the aiming reference 
plane, through the aiming pads, and displaced forward using a lever arm 
such that the force is applied on an axis that is perpendicular to the 
aiming reference plane and originates at the center of the aiming pad 
pattern (see Figures 4-1 and 4-3). For headlamps using the aiming pad 
locations of Group 1, the distance between the point of application of 
force and the aiming reference plane shall be not less than 6.625 in. 
(168.3 mm) plus the distance from the aiming reference plane to the 
secondary plane, if used (see section S7.8.5.1(d)(1)). For headlamps 
using the aiming pad locations of Group II, the distance between the 
point of application of force and the aiming reference plane shall be 
not less than 6.609 in. (167.9 mm) plus the distance from the aiming 
reference plane to the secondary plane, if used. For headlamps using the 
nonadjustable Headlamp Aiming Device Locating Plates for the 146 mm 
diameter, the 176 mm diameter, and the 92x150 mm sealed beam units, the 
distance between the point of application of force

[[Page 380]]

and the aiming plane shall, respectively, be not less than 6.984 in. 
(177.4 mm), 6.937 in. (176.2 mm), and 7.625 in (193.7 mm). Each headlamp 
system that is designed to conform to paragraph S7.5 and that is 
designed to use such external aiming devices, and which is manufactured 
on or after September 1, 1990, shall comply with this paragraph.
    (b) When a headlamp is installed on a motor vehicle, its aim in any 
direction shall not change by more than 0.30 degree nor shall the lamp 
recede more than 0.1 in. (2.5 mm.) after being subjected to an inward 
force of 50 pounds (222 newtons) applied evenly to the lens parallel to 
the mechanical axis.
    (c) Each headlamp system mounting and aiming mechanism shall be 
subjected to a salt spray (fog) test in accordance with ASTM B117-73 
Method of Salt Spray (Fog) Testing for a period of 50 hours, consisting 
of two successive 25-hour periods of 24 hours exposure followed by 1 
hour of drying. At the end of 50 hours, the headlamp system shall be 
capable of meeting any of the applicable requirements of paragraph S7.8.
    (d) Each headlamp system which is designed to use the Headlamp 
Aiming Device Locating Plates with adjustable legs for the 100 x 165 mm 
unit and the 142 x 200 mm unit, and which has adjustable length legs, 
shall meet the requirements of subparagraphs (1) and (2) below.
    (1) The lens shall have three aiming pads which meet the 
requirements of Figure 4, Dimensional Specifications for Location of 
Aiming Pads on Replaceable Bulb Headlamp Units. The aiming pads need not 
be centered at the geometric center of the lens, or on the optical axis. 
Except as provided in subparagraph (2), a whole number, which represents 
the distance in tenths of an inch (i.e. 0.3 inch=3) from the aiming 
reference plane to the respective aiming pads which are not in contact 
with that plane, shall be inscribed adjacent to each respective aiming 
pad on the lens. The height of these numbers shall be not less than .157 
inch (4 mm). If there is interference between the plane and the area of 
the lens between the aiming pads, the whole number represents the 
distance to a secondary plane. The secondary plane shall be located 
parallel to the aiming reference plane and as close to the lens as 
possible without causing interference.
    (2) If the most forward aiming pad is the lower inboard aiming pad, 
then the dimensions may be placed anywhere on the lens. The dimension 
for the outboard aiming pad (Dimension F in Figure 4) shall be followed 
by the letter ``H'' and the dimension for the center aiming pad shall be 
followed by the letter ``V.'' The dimensions shall be expressed in 
tenths of an inch.
    (e) Each headlamp may be designed to use the nonadjustable Headlamp 
Aiming Device Locating Plate for the 100x165 mm unit, the 142x200 mm 
unit, the 146 mm diameter unit, or the 178 mm diameter unit of SAE J602, 
or the 92x150 mm Type F unit, and incorporate lens-mounted aiming pads 
as specified for those units in Figures 10, 13, 5, or 7 respectively in 
SAE J1383 APR85, or Figure 11 of this standard for the Type F unit. If 
so designed, no additional lens marking is necessary to designate the 
type of plate or dimensions.
    S7.8.5.2 On-vehicle aiming. Each headlamp system that is capable of 
being aimed by equipment installed on the vehicle shall include a 
Vehicle Headlamp Aiming Device (VHAD) that conforms to the following 
requirements:
    (a) Aim. The VHAD shall provide for headlamp aim inspection and 
adjustment in both the vertical and horizontal axes.
    (1) Vertical aim. The VHAD shall include the necessary references 
and scales relative to the horizontal plane to assure correct vertical 
aim for photometry and aiming purposes. An off-vehicle measurement of 
the angle of the plane of the ground is permitted. In addition, an equal 
number of graduations from the ``O'' position representing angular 
changes in the axis in the upward and downward directions shall be 
provided.
    (i) Each graduation shall represent a change in the vertical 
position of the mechanical axis not larger than 0.19 degree (1 in. at 25 
ft.) to provide for variations in aim at least 1.2 degrees above and 
below the horizontal, and have an accuracy relative to the zero mark of 
less than 0.1 degree.

[[Page 381]]

    (ii) The VHAD shall be marked to indicate headlamp aim movement in 
the upward and downward directions.
    (iii) Each graduation shall indicate a linear movement of the scale 
indicator of not less than 0.05 in. (1.27 mm) if a direct reading analog 
indicator is used. If a remote reading indicator is provided, it shall 
represent the actual aim movement in a clear, understandable format.
    (iv) The vertical indicator shall perform through a minimum range of 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1.2 degrees.
    (v) Means shall be provided in the VHAD for compensating for 
deviations in floor slope less than 1.2 degrees from the horizontal that 
would affect the correct positioning of the headlamp for vertical aim.
    (vi) The graduations shall be legible under an illumination level 
not greater than 30 foot candles, measured at the top of the graduation, 
by an observer having 20/20 vision (Snellen), and shall permit aim 
adjustment to within 0.19 degree (1 in. at 25 ft.).
    (2) Horizontal aim. The VHAD shall include references and scales 
relative to the longitudinal axis of the vehicle necessary to assure 
correct horizontal aim for photometry and aiming purposes. An ``O'' mark 
shall be used to indicate alignment of the headlamps relative to the 
longitudinal axis of the vehicle. In addition, an equal number of 
graduations from the ``O'' position representing equal angular changes 
in the axis relative to the vehicle axis shall be provided.
    (i) Each graduation shall represent a change in the horizontal 
position of the mechanical axis not greater than 0.38 degree (2 in. at 
25 ft.) to provide for variations in aim at least 0.76 degree (4 in. at 
25 ft.) to the left and right of the longitudinal axis of the vehicle, 
and shall have an accuracy relative to the zero mark of less than 0.1 
degree.
    (ii) The VHAD shall be marked to indicate headlamp aim movement in 
the left and right directions.
    (iii) The graduations shall be legible under an illumination level 
not greater than 30 foot candles, measured at the top of the graduation, 
by an observer having 20/20 vision (Snellen), and shall permit aim 
adjustment to within 0.38 degree (2 in. at 25 ft.).
    (iv) The horizontal indicator shall perform through a minimum range 
of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.76 degree (4 in. at 25 ft.); however, the 
indicator itself shall be capable of recalibration over a movement of 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 degrees relative to the longitudinal axis of 
the vehicle to accommodate any adjustment necessary for recalibrating 
the indicator after vehicle repair from accident damage.
    (b) Aiming instructions. (1) The instructions for properly aiming 
the headlighting system using the VHAD shall be provided on a label 
permanently affixed to the vehicle adjacent to the VHAD, or in the 
vehicle operator's manual. The instructions shall advise that the 
headlighting system is properly aimed if the appropriate vertical plane 
(as defined by the vehicle manufacturer) is perpendicular to both the 
longitudinal axis of the vehicle, and a horizontal plane when the 
vehicle is on a horizontal surface, and the VHAD is set at ``O'' 
vertical and ``O'' horizontal.
    (2) Should a remote indicator or a remote indicator and adjuster be 
provided, the instructions shall be placed in the operator's manual, and 
may also be placed on a label adjacent to the VHAD.
    (3) Should the mechanism not meet the requirements of S7.8.2.1, on 
each motor vehicle manufactured on or after September 1, 1990, a 
cautionary label shall be placed adjacent to the mechanism stating the 
caution and including either the reason for the caution or the 
corrective action necessary. Each such label shall also refer the reader 
to the vehicle operator's manual for complete instructions. Each such 
vehicle shall be equipped with an operator's manual containing the 
complete instructions appropriate for the mechanism installed.
    (c) Each headlamp equipped with a VHAD that is manufactured for use 
on motor vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1998, shall be 
manufactured with its calibration permanently fixed by its manufacturer. 
Calibration in this case means the process of accurately aligning the 
geometry of the VHAD devices with the beam pattern for the purposes of 
compliance with the standard.

[[Page 382]]

    (d) Testing the VHAD. (1) The headlamp assembly (the headlamp(s), 
and the VHAD(s)) shall be mounted on a level goniometer, aligned to a 
photometer located not less than 60 ft. (18.3 m) from the VHAD assembly. 
The assembly shall be mechanically aimed using the VHAD in accordance 
with the manufacturer's instructions as provided with the vehicle on 
which the VHAD is intended to be used. A \1/4\ degree reaim is permitted 
in any direction at any test point to allow for variations in readings 
between laboratories. The test shall be conducted in accordance with the 
procedures of paragraphs 4.1 and 4.1.4 of SAE J1383 APR85. Under these 
conditions the mounted headlamp assembly shall be designed to conform to 
the photometric requirements appropriate for the headlamp system under 
test.
    (2) When tested in accordance with subsection (1) of this section, 
with any replacement headlamp unit(s) or light sources intended for use 
in the system under test, the VHAD and headlamp system shall be designed 
to conform to the photometric performance requirements appropriate for 
the system under test.
    (3) The same VHAD and associated headlamp(s) (or headlamp assembly) 
shall be rigidly mounted in a headlamp test fixture and comply with the 
following laboratory test procedures:
    (i) Each graduation on the horizontal and vertical aim scales shall 
be checked and any variation from the correct aim shall not exceed 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 degree, and <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 degree 
respectively.
    (ii) With the aiming plane horizontal and vertical and with the 
scale on the device set at 0, the aimer shall be adjusted before each of 
the following tests to assure that the indicators are centered at 0.
    (A) The VHAD and an unlighted headlamp assembly shall be stabilized 
at 20 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees F (-7 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 
degrees C) in a circulating air environmental test chamber. After a 
period of 30 minutes, when measured at that soak temperature, the 
variation from correct horizontal of vertical aim shall not exceed 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 degree, and <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 degree, 
respectively.
    (B) The VHAD, and the headlamp assembly with its highest wattage 
filament (or combination of filaments intended to be used 
simultaneously) energized at its design voltage, shall then be 
stabilized at 100 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees F (38 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3 degrees C) in a circulating air environmental test 
chamber. After a period of 30 minutes, when measured at that soak 
temperature, the variation from correct horizontal and vertical aim 
shall not exceed <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 degree, and <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 degree, respectively.
    (C) The VHAD and an unlighted headlamp assembly shall then be placed 
in a circulating air environmental test chamber and exposed to a 
temperature of 140 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees F (60 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3 degrees C) for 24 hours, followed by a temperature of 
-40 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees F (-40 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 
degrees C) for 24 hours and then permitted to return to room 
temperature, after which the VHAD and headlamp assembly shall show no 
damage which would impair its ability to perform as specified herein. 
The variation from correct horizontal or vertical aim shall not exceed 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 degree, and <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 degree, 
respectively.
    (D) The VHAD and headlamp assembly shall then be tested according to 
the corrosion test procedure of paragraph S7.8.5.1(c).
    (E) The VHAD and headlamp assembly shall then be tested for 
photometric compliance as specified in paragraphs S7.8.5.2(c)(1) and 
(2).
    S7.8.5.3 Visual/optical aiming. Each visually/optically aimable 
headlamp shall be designed to conform to the following requirements:
    (a) Vertical aim, lower beam. Each lower beam headlamp shall have a 
cutoff in the beam pattern. It may be either on the left side or the 
right side of the optical axis, but once chosen for a particular 
headlamp system's design, the side chosen for the cutoff shall not be 
changed for any headlamps intended to be used as replacements for those 
system's headlamps.
    (1) Vertical position of cutoff. The headlamp shall be aimed 
vertically so that the cutoff is on the left side, at 0.4 degree down 
from the H-H line, or on the right side, at the H-H line.
    (2) Vertical gradient. The gradient of the cutoff measured at either 
2.5 degrees L or 2.0 degrees R shall be not less than 0.13 based on the 
procedure of S7.8.5.3, paragraph (a)(5).

[[Page 383]]

    (3) Horizontal position of the cutoff. The width shall be not less 
than two degrees, with not less than two degrees of its actual width 
centered at either 2.5 degrees L, or 2.0 degrees R.
    (4) Maximum inclination of cutoff. The vertical location of the 
highest gradient at the ends of the minimum width shall be within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 degree of the vertical location of the maximum 
gradient measured at the appropriate vertical line (at either 2.5 
degrees L for a left side cutoff, or 2.0 degrees R for a right side 
cutoff.)
    (5) Measuring the cutoff parameter. (i) The headlamp shall be 
mounted on a fixture which simulates its actual design location on any 
vehicle for which the headlamp is intended. The fixture, with the 
headlamp installed shall be attached to the goniometer table in such a 
way that the fixture alignment axes are coincident with the goniometer 
axes. The headlamp shall be energized at the specified test voltage.
    (ii) The headlamp beam pattern shall be aimed with the cutoff at the 
H-H axis. There shall be no adjustment, shimming, or modification of the 
horizontal axis of the headlamp or test fixture, unless the headlamp is 
equipped with a VHAD. In this case the VHAD shall be adjusted to zero.
    (iii) A vertical scan of the beam pattern shall be conducted for a 
headlamp with a left side gradient by aligning the goniometer on a 
vertical line at 2.5 degrees L and scanning from 1.5 degrees U to 1.5 
degrees D. For a headlamp with a right side gradient, a vertical scan of 
the beam pattern shall be conducted by aligning the goniometer on a 
vertical line at 2.0 degrees R and scanning from 1.5 degrees U to 1.5 
degrees D.
    (iv) Determine the maximum gradient within the range of the scan by 
using the formula: G = log E(a)-log E(a+0.1), where ``G'' is the 
gradient, ``E'' is illumination and ``a'' is vertical angular position. 
The maximum value of the gradient ``G'' determines the vertical angular 
location of the cutoff. Perform vertical scans at 1.0 degree L and R of 
the measurement point of the maximum gradient to determine the 
inclination.
    (b) Horizontal aim, lower beam. There shall be no adjustment of 
horizontal aim unless the headlamp is equipped with a horizontal VHAD. 
If the headlamp has a VHAD, it shall be set to zero.
    (c) Vertical aim, upper beam. (1) If the upper beam is combined in a 
headlamp with a lower beam, the vertical aim of the upper beam shall not 
be changed from the aim set using the procedures of paragraphs 
S7.8.5.3(a) and (b) used for the lower beam.
    (2) If the upper beam is not combined in a headlamp with a lower 
beam, the vertical aim of the upper beam shall be adjusted so that the 
maximum beam intensity is located on the H-H axis.
    (d) Horizontal aim, upper beam. (1) If the upper beam is combined in 
a headlamp with a lower beam, the horizontal aim of the upper beam shall 
not be changed from the aim set using the procedures of paragraphs 
S7.8.5.3 (a) and (b) used for the lower beam.
    (2) If the upper beam is not combined in a headlamp with the lower 
beam and has fixed horizontal aim or has a horizontal VHAD, then the 
headlamp shall be mounted on a fixture which simulates its actual design 
location on any vehicle for which the headlamp is intended. The fixture, 
with the headlamp installed shall be attached to the goniometer table in 
such a way that the fixture alignment axes are coincident with the 
goniometer axes. The headlamp shall be energized at 12.8 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.20 mV. There shall be no adjustment, shimming, or 
modification of the horizontal axis of the headlamp or test fixture, 
unless the headlamp is equipped with a VHAD. In this case the VHAD shall 
be adjusted to zero.
    (3) If the upper beam is not combined in a headlamp with a lower 
beam, and it does not have a VHAD, the horizontal aim of the upper beam 
shall be adjusted so that the maximium beam intensity is located on the 
V-V axis.
    (e) Photometric Requirements and Measurement. (1) Instead of being 
designed to conform to the photometric requirements of Figures 15-1, 17-
1, 27-1 or 28-1, a visually/optically aimable headlamp shall be designed 
to conform to the requirements of Figures 15-2, 17-2, 27-2 or 28-2 when 
tested in accordance with paragraph (2) and SAE J575

[[Page 384]]

DEC88, with the distance from the photometer to the headlamp no less 
than 18.3 m.
    (2) If the lower beam has a left side cutoff, reaim the headlamp 
vertically to place the maximum gradient found in paragraph S7.8.5.3 at 
0.4 degree below the H-H line. For a headlamp with a lower beam right 
side cutoff, place the maximum gradient found in paragraph S7.8.5.3 at 
the H-H line. For an upper beam, the headlamp would already be aimed at 
the end of the procedure found in paragraph S7.8.5.3. A 0.25 degree 
reaim is permitted in any direction at any test point.
    (f) Marking--(1) Headlamp optical axis mark. There shall be a mark 
or markings identifying the optical axis of the headlamp visible from 
the front of the headlamp when installed on the vehicle, to assure 
proper horizontal and vertical alignment of the aiming screen or optical 
aiming equipment with the headlamp being aimed. The manufacturer is free 
to choose the design of the mark or markings. The mark or markings may 
be on the interior or exterior of the lens or indicated by a mark or 
central structure on the interior or exterior of the headlamp.
    (2) Visual/optical aimability identification marks. (i) The lens of 
a lower beam headlamp shall be marked ``VOL'' if the headlamp is 
intended to be visually/optically aimed using the left side of the lower 
beam pattern.
    (ii) The lens of a lower beam headlamp shall be marked ``VOR'' if 
the headlamp is intended to be visually/optically aimed using the right 
side of the lower beam pattern.
    (iii) The lens of each sealed beam or integral beam headlamp shall 
be marked ``VOR'' if the headlamp is of a type that was manufactured 
before May 1, 1997, and if such headlamp type has been redesigned since 
then to be visually/optically aimable.
    (iv) The lens of a headlamp that is solely an upper beam headlamp 
and intended to be visually/optically aimed using the upper beam shall 
be marked ``VO''.
    (v) Each letter used in marking according to this paragraph shall be 
not less than 3 mm. high.
    S7.9 Motorcycles. Each motorcycle shall be equipped with a 
headlighting system designed to conform to the following requirements.
    S7.9.1 A motorcycle manufactured before September 1, 2000, may be 
equipped with--
    (a) A headlighting system designed to conform to SAE Standard J584 
Motorcycle Headlamps April 1964, or to SAE Standard J584 April 1964 with 
the photometric specifications of Figure 32 and the upper beam 
aimability specifications of paragraph S7.9.3; or
    (b) One half of any headlighting system specified in S7.1 through 
S7.6 which provides both a full upper beam and full lower beam. Where 
more than one lamp must be used, the lamps shall be mounted vertically, 
with the lower beam as high as practicable.
    S7.9.2 A motorcycle manufactured on or after September 1, 2000, 
shall be equipped with--
    (a) A headlighting system designed to conform to SAE Standard J584 
Motorcycle Headlamps April 1964 with the photometric specifications of 
Figure 32 and the upper beam aimability specifications of paragraph 
S7.9.3; or
    (b) A headlighting system that conforms to S7.9.1(b).
    S7.9.3 The upper beam of a multiple beam headlamp designed to 
conform to the photometric requirements of Figure 32 shall be aimed 
photoelectrically during the photometric test in the manner prescribed 
in SAE Standard J584 OCT93 Motorcycle Headlamps.
    S7.9.4 Motorcycle headlamp modulation system.
    S7.9.4.1 A headlamp on a motorcycle may be wired to modulate either 
the upper beam or the lower beam from its maximum intensity to a lesser 
intensity, provided that:
    (a) The rate of modulation shall be 240 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>40 
cycles per minute.
    (b) The headlamp shall be operated at maximum power for 50 to 70 
percent of each cycle.
    (c) The lowest intensity at any test point shall be not less than 17 
percent of the maximum intensity measured at the same point.
    (d) The modulator switch shall be wired in the power lead of the 
beam filament being modulated and not in the ground side of the circuit.
    (e) Means shall be provided so that both the lower beam and upper 
beam

[[Page 385]]

remain operable in the event of a modulator failure.
    (f) The system shall include a sensor mounted with the axis of its 
sensing element perpendicular to a horizontal plane. Headlamp modulation 
shall cease whenever the level of light emitted by a tungsten filament 
light operating at 3000[deg] Kelvin is either less than 270 lux (25 
foot-candles) of direct light for upward pointing sensors or less than 
60 lux (5.6 foot-candles) of reflected light for downward pointing 
sensors. The light is measured by a silicon cell type light meter that 
is located at the sensor and pointing in the same direction as the 
sensor. A Kodak Gray Card (Kodak R-27) is placed at ground level to 
simulate the road surface in testing downward pointing sensors.
    (g) When tested in accordance with the test profile shown in Figure 
9, the voltage drop across the modulator when the lamp is on at all test 
conditions for 12 volt systems and 6 volt systems shall not be greater 
than .45 volt. The modulator shall meet all the provisions of the 
standard after completion of the test profile shown in Figure 9.
    (h) Means shall be provided so that both the lower and upper beam 
function at design voltage when the headlamp control switch is in either 
the lower or upper beam position when the modulator is off.
    S7.9.4.2(a) Each motorcycle headlamp modulator not intended as 
original equipment, or its container, shall be labeled with the maximum 
wattage, and the minimum wattage appropriate for its use. Additionally, 
each such modulator shall comply with S7.9.4.1 (a) through (g) when 
connected to a headlamp of the maximum rated power and a headlamp of the 
minimum rated power, and shall provide means so that the modulated beam 
functions at design voltage when the modulator is off.
    (b) Instructions, with a diagram, shall be provided for mounting the 
light sensor including location on the motorcycle, distance above the 
road surface, and orientation with respect to the light.
    S7.9.5 Each replaceable bulb headlamp that is designed to meet the 
photometric requirements of paragraph S7.9.1(a) or paragraph S7.9.2(a) 
and that is equipped with a light source other than a replaceable light 
source meeting the requirements of paragraph S7.7, shall have the word 
``motorcycle'' permanently marked on the lens in characters not less 
than 0.114 in. (3 mm) in height.
    S7.9.6 A headlamp system shall be installed on a motorcycle in 
accordance with the requirements of this paragraph.
    S7.9.6.1 The headlamp system shall be located on the front of the 
motorcycle.
    S7.9.6.2 (a) If the system consists of a single headlamp, it shall 
be mounted on the vertical centerline of the motorcycle. If the headlamp 
contains more than one light source, each light source shall be mounted 
on the vertical centerline with the upper beam no higher than the lower 
beam, or horizontally disposed about the vertical centerline and mounted 
at the same height. If the light sources are horizontally disposed about 
the vertical centerline, the distance between the closest edges of the 
effective projected luminous lens area in front of the light sources 
shall not be greater than 200 mm (8 in.).
    (b) If the system consists of two headlamps, each of which provides 
both an upper and lower beam, the headlamps shall be mounted either at 
the same height and symmetrically disposed about the vertical centerline 
or mounted on the vertical centerline. If the headlamps are horizontally 
disposed about the vertical centerline, the distance between the closest 
edges of their effective projected luminous lens areas shall not be 
greater than 200 mm (8 in.).
    (c) If the system consists of two headlamps, one of which provides 
an upper beam and one of which provides the lower beam, the headlamps 
shall be located on the vertical centerline with the upper beam no 
higher than the lower beam, or horizontally disposed about the vertical 
centerline and mounted at the same height. If the headlamps are 
horizontally disposed about the vertical centerline, the distance 
between the closest edges of their effective projected luminous lens 
areas shall not be greater than 200 mm (8 in.).

[[Page 386]]

    S8 Tests and Procedures for Integral Beam and Replaceable Bulb 
Headlighting Systems. When tested in accordance with the following 
procedures, each integral beam headlamp shall meet the requirements of 
paragraph S7.4, and each replaceable bulb headlamp shall meet the 
requirements of paragraph S7.5. Ballasts required to operate specific 
gas mixture light sources shall be included in the tests specified in 
paragraphs S8.1 and S8.4 though S8.7.
    S8.1 Photometry. Each headlamp to which paragraph S8 applies shall 
be tested according to paragraphs 4.1 and 4.1.4 of SAE Standard J1383 
APR85 for meeting the applicable photometric requirements, after each 
test specified in paragraphs S8.2, S8.3, S8.5, S8.6.1, S8.6.2, S8.7, and 
S8.10.1 and S8.10.2, if applicable. A \1/4\ degree reaim is permitted in 
any direction at any test point.
    S8.2 Abrasion. (a) A headlamp shall be mounted in the abrasion test 
fixture in the manner indicated in Figure 5 with the lens facing upward.
    (b) An abrading pad meeting the requirements in paragraphs (c)(1) 
through (c)(4) of this section shall be cycled back and forth (1 cycle) 
for 11 cycles at 4 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.8 in. (10 cm <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 cm) per second over at least 80 percent of the lens 
surface, including all the area between the upper and lower aiming pads, 
but not including lens trim rings and edges.
    (c)(1) The abrading pad shall be not less than 1.0 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>.04 in. (2.5 cm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>.1 cm) wide, 
constructed of 0000 steel wool, and rubber cemented to a rigid base 
shaped to the same vertical contour of the lens. The ``grain'' of the 
pad shall be perpendicular to the direction of motion.
    (2) The abrading pad support shall be equal in size to the pad and 
the center of the support surface shall be within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>.08 in. ( <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 mm) of parallel to the 
lens surface.
    (3) The density of the abrading pad shall be such that when the pad 
is mounted to its support and is resting unweighted on the lens, the 
base of the pad shall be no closer than .125 in. (3.2 mm) to the lens at 
its closest point.
    (4) When mounted on its support and resting on the lens of the test 
headlamp, the abrading pad shall then be weighted such that a pad 
pressure of 2.0 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>.15 psi (14 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1 KPa) exists at the center and perpendicular to the 
face of the lens.
    (d) A pivot shall be used if it is required to follow the contour of 
the lens.
    (e) Unused steel wool shall be used for each test.
    S8.3 Chemical resistance. (a) The entire exterior lens surface of 
the headlamp in the headlamp test fixture and top surface of the lens-
reflector joint shall be wiped once to the left and once to the right 
with a 6-inch square soft cotton cloth (with pressure equally applied) 
which has been saturated once in a container with 2 ounces of a test 
fluid as listed in paragraph (b). The lamp shall be wiped within 5 
seconds after removal of the cloth from the test fluid.
    (b) The test fluids are:
    (1) ASTM Reference Fuel C, which is composed of Isooctane 50% volume 
and Toluene 50% volume. Isooctane must conform to A2.7 in Annex 2 of the 
Motor Fuels Section of the 1985 Annual Book of ASTM Standards, Vol. 
05.04, and Toluene must conform to ASTM specification D362-84, Standard 
Specification for Industrial Grade Toluene. ASTM Reference Fuel C must 
be used as specified in:
    (i) Paragraph A2.3.2 and A2.3.3 of Annex 2 to Motor Fuels, Section 1 
in the 1985 Annual Book of ASTM Standards; and
    (ii) OSHA Standard 29 CFR 1910.106--Handling Storage and Use of 
Flammable Combustible Liquids.
    (2) Tar remover (consisting by volume of 45% xylene and 55% 
petroleum base mineral spirits).
    (3) Power steering fluid (as specified by the vehicle manufacturer 
for use in the motor vehicle on which the headlamp is intended to be 
installed).
    (4) Windshield washer fluid consisting of 0.5% monoethanolamine with 
the remainder 50% concentration of methanol/distilled water by volume.
    (5) Antifreeze (50% concentration of ethylene glycol/distilled water 
by volume).
    (c) After the headlamp has been wiped with the test fluid, it shall 
be stored in its designed operating attitude for 48 hours at a 
temperature of 73

[[Page 387]]

[deg]F <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>7[deg] (23 [deg]C <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>4[deg]) and a relative humidity of 30 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 percent. At the end of the 48-hour period, the 
headlamp shall be wiped clean with a soft dry cotton cloth and visually 
inspected.
    S8.4 Corrosion. (a) A connector test shall be performed on each 
filament circuit prior to the test in subparagraph (b) according to 
Figure 1 and SAE Standard J580 DEC86. The power source shall be set to 
provide 12. 8 volts and the resistance shall be set to produce 10 
amperes.
    (b) The headlamp with connector attached to the terminals, 
unfixtured and in its designed operating attitude with all drain holes, 
breathing devices or other designed openings in their normal operating 
positions, shall be subjected to a salt spray (fog) test in accordance 
with ASTM B117-73, Method of Salt Spray (Fog) Testing, for 240 hours, 
consisting of ten successive 24-hour periods. During each period, the 
headlamp shall be mounted in the middle of the chamber and exposed for 
23 hours to the salt spray. The spray shall not be activated during the 
24th hour. The bulb shall be removed from the headlamp and from the test 
chamber during the one hour of salt spray deactivation and reinserted 
for the start of the next test period, at the end of the first and last 
three 23-hour periods of salt spray exposure, and at the end of any two 
of the fourth through seventh 23-hour periods of salt-spray exposure. 
The test chamber shall be closed at all times except for a maximum of 2 
minutes which is allowed for removal or replacement of a bulb during 
each period. After the ten periods, the lens reflector unit without the 
bulb shall be immersed in deionized water for 5 minutes, then secured 
and allowed to dry by natural convection only.
    (c) Using the voltage, resistance and pretest set up of paragraph 
(a) the current in each filament circuit shall be measured after the 
test conducted in paragraph (b).
    S8.5 Dust. The headlamp, mounted on a headlamp test fixture, with 
all drain holes, breathing devices or other designed openings in their 
normal operating positions, shall be positioned within a cubical box, 
with inside measurements of 35.4 in. (900 mm) on each side or larger if 
required for adequate wall clearance, i.e., a distance of at least 5.9 
in. (150 mm) between the headlamp and any wall of the box. The box shall 
contain 9.9 lb. (4.5 kg) of fine powdered cement which conforms to the 
ASTM C150-77 specification for Portland Cement. Every 15 minutes, the 
cement shall be agitated by compressed air or fan blower(s) by 
projecting blasts of air for a two-second period in a downward direction 
so that the cement is diffused as uniformly as possible throughout the 
entire box. This test shall be continued for five hours after which the 
exterior surfaces of the headlamp shall be wiped clean.
    S8.6 Temperature and internal heat test. A headlamp with one or more 
replaceable light sources shall be tested according to paragraphs S8.6.1 
and S8.6.2. Tests shall be made with all filaments lighted at design 
voltage that are intended to be used simultaneously in the headlamp and 
which in combination draw the highest total wattage. These include but 
are not limited to filaments used for turn signal lamps, fog lamps, 
parking lamps, and headlamp lower beams lighted with upper beams when 
the wiring harness is so connected on the vehicle. If a turn signal is 
included in the headlamp assembly, it shall be operated at 90 flashes a 
minute with a 75 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2% current ``on time.'' If the 
lamp produces both the upper and lower beam, it shall be tested in both 
the upper beam mode and the lower beam mode under the conditions above 
described, except for a headlamp with a single Types HB1 or HB2 light 
source.
    S8.6.1 Temperature cycle. A headlamp, mounted on a headlamp test 
fixture, shall be subjected to 10 complete consecutive cycles having the 
thermal cycle profile shown in Figure 6. During the hot cycle, the lamp, 
shall be energized commencing at point ``A'' of Figure 6 and de-
energized at point ``B.'' Separate or single test chambers may be used 
to generate the environment of Figure 6. All drain holes, breathing 
devices or other openings or vents of the headlamps shall be in their 
normal operating positions.
    S8.6.2 Internal Heat Test. (a) The headlamp lens surface that would 
normally be exposed to road dirt shall be

[[Page 388]]

uniformly sprayed with any appropriate mixture of dust and water or 
other materials to reduce the photometric output at the H-V test point 
of the upper beam (or the \1/2\D-1\1/2\R test point of the lower beam as 
appropriate) to 25 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2% of the output originally 
measured in the photometric test conducted pursuant to paragraphs 
S7.4(i), or S7.5 (a) through (e), as applicable. A headlamp with a 
single Types HB1 or HB2 light source shall be tested on the upper beam 
only. Such reduction shall be determined under the same conditions as 
that of the original photometric measurement.
    (b) After the photometric output of the lamp has been reduced as 
specified in paragraph (a), the lamp and its mounting hardware shall be 
mounted in an environmental chamber in a manner similar to that 
indicated in Figure 7 ``Dirt/Ambient Test Setup.'' The headlamp shall be 
soaked for one hour at a temperature of 95 + 7 -0 degrees F (35 + 4 -0 
degrees C) and then the lamp shall be energized according to paragraph 
S8.6 for one hour in a still air condition, allowing the temperature to 
rise from the soak temperature.
    (c) The lamp shall be returned to a room ambient temperature of 73 + 
7 -0 degrees F (23 + 4 -0 degrees C) and a relative humidity of 30 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10% and allowed to stabilize to the room ambient 
temperature. The lens shall then be cleaned.
    S8.7 Humidity. (a) The test fixture consists of a horizontal steel 
plate to which three threaded steel or aluminum rods of \1/2\ inch 
diameter are screwed vertically behind the headlamp. The headlamp 
assembly is clamped to the vertical rods, which are behind the headlamp. 
All attachments to the headlamp assembly are made behind the lens and 
vents or openings, and are not within 2 inches laterally of a vent inlet 
or outlet.
    (b) The mounted headlamp assembly is oriented in its design 
operating position, and is placed in a controlled environment at a 
temperature of 100+7-0 degrees F (38+4-0 degrees C) with a relative 
humidity of not less than 90 percent. All drain holes, breathing 
devices, and other openings are in their normal operation positions for 
all phases of the humidity test. The headlamp shall be subjected to 24 
consecutive 3-hour test cycles. In each cycle, it shall be energized for 
1 hour at design voltage with the highest combination of filament 
wattages that are intended to be used, and then de-energized for 2 
hours. If the headlamp incorporates a turn signal, it shall flash at 90 
flashes per minute with a 75<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent current 
``on-time.''
    (c) Within 3 minutes after the completion of the 24th cycle, the air 
flow test will begin. The following shall occur: the mounted assembly 
shall be removed, placed in an insulating box and covered with foam 
material so that there is no visible air space around the assembly; the 
box shall be closed, taken to the air flow test chamber, and placed 
within it. Inside the chamber, the assembly with respect to the air 
flow, shall be oriented in its design operating position. The assembly 
is positioned in the chamber so that the center of the lens is in the 
center of the opening of the air flow entry duct during the test. The 
headlamp has at least 3 inches clearance on all sides, and at least 4 
inches to the entry and exit ducts at the closest points. If vent tubes 
are used which extend below the lamp body, the 3 inches are measured 
from the bottom of the vent tube or its protection. The temperature of 
the chamber is 73+7-0 degrees F (23+4-0 degrees C) with a relative 
humidity of 30+10-0 percent. The headlamp is not energized.
    (d) Before the test specified in paragraph (e) of this section, the 
uniformity of the air flow in the empty test chamber at a plane 4 inches 
downstream of the air entry duct shall have been measured over a 4-inch 
square grid. The uniformity of air flow at each grid point is <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 percent of the average air flow specified in 
paragraph (e) of this section.
    (e) The mounted assembly in the chamber shall be exposed, for one 
hour, to an average air flow of 330+0-30 ft/min. as measured with an air 
velocity measuring probe having an accuracy of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 
percent in the 330 ft/min range. The average air flow is the average of 
the velocity recorded at six points around the perimeter of the lens. 
The six points are determined as follows: At

[[Page 389]]

the center of the lens, construct a horizontal plane. The first two 
points are located in the plane, 1 inch outward from the intersection of 
the plane and each edge of the lens. Then, trisect the distance between 
these two points and construct longitudinal vertical planes at the two 
intermediate locations formed by the trisection. The four remaining 
points are located in the vertical planes, one inch above the top edge 
of the lens, and one inch below the bottom edge of the lens.
    (f) After one hour, the headlamp is removed and inspected for 
moisture.
    S8.8 Vibration. A vibration test shall be conducted in accordance 
with the procedures of SAE Standard J575e Tests for Motor Vehicle 
Lighting Devices and Components August 1970, and the following: the 
table on the adapter plate shall be of sufficient size to completely 
contain the test fixture base with no overhang. The vibration shall be 
applied in the vertical axis of the headlamp system as mounted on the 
vehicle. The filament shall not be energized.
    S8.9 Sealing. An unfixtured headlamp in its design mounting position 
shall be placed in water at a temperature of 176 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 
degrees F (60 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 degrees C) for one hour. The 
headlamp shall be energized in its highest wattage mode, with the test 
voltage at 12.8 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 V. during immersion. The lamp 
shall then be de-energized and immediately submerged in its design 
mounting position into water at 32 +5 -0 degrees F (0 +3 -0 degrees C). 
The water shall be in a pressurized vessel, and the pressure shall be 
increased to 10 psi (70 kPa), upon placing the lamp in the water. The 
lamp shall remain in the pressurized vessel for a period of thirty 
minutes. This entire procedure shall be repeated for four cycles. Then 
the lamp shall be inspected for any signs of water on its interior. 
During the high temperature portion of the cycles, the lamp shall be 
observed for signs of air escaping from its interior. If any water 
occurs on the interior or air escapes, the lamp is not a sealed lamp.
    S8.10 Chemical and corrosion resistance of reflectors of replaceable 
lens headlamps.
    S8.10.1 Chemical resistance. (a) With the headlamp in the headlamp 
test fixture and the lens removed, the entire surface of the reflector 
that receives light from a headlamp light source shall be wiped once to 
the left and once to the right with a 6-inch square soft cotton cloth 
(with pressure equally applied) which has been saturated once in a 
container with 2 ounces of one of the test fluids listed in paragraph 
(b). The lamp shall be wiped within 5 seconds after removal of the cloth 
from the test fluid.
    (b) The test fluids are:
    (1) Tar remover (consisting by volume of 45% xylene and 55% 
petroleum base mineral spirits);
    (2) Mineral spirits; or
    (3) Fluids other than water contained in the manufacturer's 
instructions for cleaning the reflector.
    (c) After the headlamp has been wiped with the test fluid, it shall 
be stored in its designed operating attitude for 48 hours at a 
temperature of 73 [deg]F <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>7[deg] (23 [deg]C <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>4[deg]) and a relative humidity of 30 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 percent. At the end of the 48-hour period, the 
headlamp shall be wiped clean with a soft dry cotton cloth and visually 
inspected.
    S8.10.2 Corrosion. (a) The headlamp with the lens removed, 
unfixtured and in its designed operating attitude with all drain holes, 
breathing devices or other designed openings in their normal operating 
positions, shall be subjected to a salt spray (fog) test in accordance 
with ASTM B117-73, Method of Salt Spray (Fog) Testing, for 24 hours, 
while mounted in the middle of the chamber.
    (b) Afterwards, the headlamp shall be stored in its designed 
operating attitude for 48 hours at a temperature of 73 [deg]F <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>7[deg] (23 [deg]C <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>4[deg]) and a 
relative humidity of 30 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 percent and allowed to 
dry by natural convection only. At the end of the 48-hour period, the 
reflector shall be cleaned according to the instructions supplied with 
the headlamp manufacturer's replacement lens, and inspected. The lens 
and seal shall then be attached according to these instructions and the 
headlamp tested for photometric performance.
    S9. Deflection test for replaceable light sources. With the light 
source rigidly mounted in a fixture in a manner indicated in Figure 8, a 
force 4.0 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1

[[Page 390]]

pounds (17.8 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4N) is applied at a distance ``A'' 
from the reference plane perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the 
glass capsule and parallel to the smallest dimension of the pressed 
glass capsule seal. The force shall be applied (using a rod with a hard 
rubber tip with a minimum spherical radius of .039 in (1 mm)) radially 
to the surface of the glass capsule in four locations in a plane 
parallel to the reference plane and spaced at a distance ``A'' from that 
plane. These force applications shall be spaced 90 degrees apart 
starting at the point perpendicular to the smallest dimension of the 
pressed seal of the glass capsule. The bulb deflection shall be measured 
at the glass capsule surface at 180 degrees opposite to the force 
application. Distance ``A'' for a replaceable light source other than an 
HB Type shall be the dimension provided in accordance with appendix A of 
part 564 of this chapter, section I.A.1 if the light source has a lower 
beam filament, or as specified in section I.B.1 if the light source has 
only an upper beam filament.
    S10 Simultaneous Aim Photometry Tests--(a) Type F Headlamp Systems. 
The assembly shall be located on a goniometer placed not less than 60 
feet (18.3m) from the photometer. The LF unit shall be aimed 
mechanically by centering the unit on the photometer axis and by 
aligning the aiming plane of the lens perpendicular to the photometer 
axis. Then the assembly shall be moved in a plane parallel to the 
established aiming plane of the LF headlamp until the UF headlamp is 
centered on the photometer axis. Photometry measurements of the UF 
photometry unit shall be completed using the aiming plane so 
established, and the procedures of section 4.1 and 4.1.4 Standard J1383 
APR85, and Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2. A reaim tolerance of <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>\1/4\ degree is permitted in any direction at any test 
point.
    (b) Integral Beam Headlamp Systems. The assembly used for 
simultaneously aiming more than one integral beam headlamp shall be 
placed on a test fixture on a goniometer located not less than 60 feet 
(18.3 m.) from the photometer. The assembly shall be aimed by centering 
the geometric center of the lower beam lens(es) on the photometer axis 
and by aligning the photometer axis to be perpendicular to the aiming 
reference plane or appropriate vertical plane defined by the 
manufacturer of any lower beam contributor. Photometric compliance of 
the lower beam shall be determined with all lower beam contributors 
illuminated and in accordance with sections 4.1 and 4.1.6 of SAE 
Standard J1383 APR85, and Figure 15-1 or Figure 15-2. The assembly shall 
then be moved in a plane parallel to the established aiming plane of the 
lower beam until the assembly is located with the geometric center of 
the upper lens(es) on the photometer axis. Photometric compliance for 
upper beam shall now be determined using the figure and procedure 
specified for the lower beam. During photometric testing, a \1/4\ degree 
reaim is permitted in any direction at any test point.
    S11. Photometric Test. A lamp that is wired in accordance with 
paragraph S5.5.11 of this standard, shall be tested for compliance with 
S5.5.11(a)(1) in accordance with the test method specified for 
photometric testing in SAE Standard J575 DEC88 when a test voltage of 
12.8V <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>20 mV is applied to the input terminals of 
the lamp switch module or voltage-reducing equipment, whichever is 
closer to the electrical source on the vehicle. The test distance from 
the lamp to the photometer shall be not less than 18.3 m, if the lamp is 
optically combined with a headlamp, or is a separate lamp, and not less 
than 3 m, if the lamp is optically combined with a lamp, other than a 
headlamp, that is required by this standard.
    S12. Headlamp Concealment Devices.
    S12.1 While the headlamp is illuminated, its fully opened headlamp 
concealment device shall remain fully opened should any loss of power to 
or within the headlamp concealment device occur.
    S12.2 Whenever any malfunction occurs in a component that controls 
or conducts power for the actuation of the concealment device, each 
closed headlamp concealment device shall be capable of being fully 
opened by a means not requiring the use of any tools. Thereafter, the 
headlamp concealment device must remain fully opened until intentionally 
closed.

[[Page 391]]

    S12.3 Except for malfunctions covered by S12.2, each headlamp 
concealment device shall be capable of being fully opened and the 
headlamps illuminated by actuation of a single switch, lever, or similar 
mechanism, including a mechanism that is automatically actuated by a 
change in ambient light conditions.
    S12.4 Each headlamp concealment device shall be installed so that 
the headlamp may be mounted, aimed, and adjusted without removing any 
component of the device, other than components of the headlamp assembly.
    S12.5 Except for cases of malfunction covered by S12.2, each 
headlamp concealment device shall, within an ambient temperature range 
of -20 [deg]F. to +120 [deg]F., be capable of being fully opened in not 
more than 3 seconds after the actuation of a driver-operated control.
    S12.6 As an alternative to complying with the requirements of S12.1 
through S12.5, a vehicle with headlamps incorporating VHAD or visual/
optical aiming in accordance with paragraph S7 may meet the requirements 
for Concealable lamps in paragraph 5.14 of the following version of the 
Economic Commission for Europe Regulation 48 ``Uniform Provisions 
Concerning the Approval of Vehicles With Regard to the Installation of 
Lighting and Light-Signalling Devices'': E/ECE/324-E/ECE/TRANS/505, 
Rev.1/Add.47/Rev.1/Corr.2, 26 February 1996 (page 17), in the English 
language version. A copy of paragraph 5.14 may be reviewed at the DOT 
Docket Management Facility, U.S. Department of Transportation, Room PL-
01, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, D.C. 20590-0001. Copies of E/
ECE/324-E/ECE/TRANS/505, Rev.1/Add.47/Rev.1/Corr.2, 26 February 1996 may 
be obtained from the ECE internet site:

www.unece.org/trans/main/wp29/wp29regs.html or by writing to:

    United Nations, Conference Services Division, Distribution and Sales 
Section, Office C.115-1, Palais des Nations, CH-1211, Geneva 10, 
Switzerland.
    S12.7 Manufacturers of vehicles with headlamps incorporating VHAD or 
visual/optical aiming shall elect to certify to S12.1 through S12.5 or 
to S12.6 prior to, or at the time of certification of the vehicle, 
pursuant to 49 CFR part 567. The selection is irrevocable.

                   Figures and Tables to Sec. 571.108

                       Figure 1a--Required Percentages of Minimum Candlepower of Figure 1b
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Turn
            Test points (deg)                                              signal     Stop     Parking    Tail
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
10U, 10D.................................  5L, 5R.......................        20        20        20        20
5U, 5D...................................  20L, 20R.....................      12.5      12.5        10        15
                                           10L, 10R.....................      37.5      37.5        20        40
                                           V............................      87.5      87.5        70        90
H........................................  10L, 10R.....................        50        50        35        40
                                           5L, 5R.......................       100       100        90       100
                                           V............................       100       100       100       100
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note--Minimum design candlepower requirements are determined by multiplying the percentages given in this Figure
  by the minimum allowable candlepower values in Figure 1b. The resulting values shall be truncated after one
  digit to the right of the decimal point.


       Figure 1b--Minimum and Maximum Allowable Candlepower Values
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                Lighted sections
                 Lamp                 ----------------------------------
                                            1          2           3
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Stop.................................     80/300      95/360    110/420
Tail \1\.............................      2/18       3.5/20    5.0/25
Parking \2\..........................    4.0/125
Red turn signal......................     80/300      95/360    110/420
Yellow turn signal rear..............    130/750     150/900    175/1050
Yellow turn signal front.............    200/-          240-    275/-
Yellow turn signal front \3\.........    500/-         600/-    685/-
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Maximum at H or above.
\2\ The maximum candlepower value of 125 applies to all test points at H
  or above. The maximum allowable candlepower value below H is 250.

[[Page 392]]

 
\3\ Values apply when the optical axis (filament center) of the front
  turn signal is at a spacing less than 4 in. (10 cm.) from the lighted
  edge of the headlamp unit providing the lower beam, or from the
  lighted edge of any additional lamp installed as original equipment
  and which supplements the lower beam.


    Figure 1c--Sum of the Percentages of Grouped Minimum Candlepower
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Turn
    Group and test points       signal      Stop     Parking      Tail
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1 10U-5L, 5U-20L, 5D-20L,            65         65         60         70
 10D-5L.....................
2 5U-10L, H-10L, 5D-10L.....        125        125         75        120
3 H-5L, 5U-V, H-V, 5D-V, H-         475        475        420        480
 5R.........................
4 5U-10R, H-10R, 5D-10R.....        125        125         75        120
5 10U-5R, 5U-20R, 5D-20R,            65         65         60         70
 10D-5R.....................
------------------------------------------------------------------------


   Figure 2--Minimum Luminous Intensity Requirements for Backup Lamps
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Total for
                                                                group,
 Group                   Test point, degrees                    candela
                                                               (see note
                                                                  1)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 1 \1\  45L-5U, 45L-H, 45L-5D...............................          45
 2 \1\  30L-H, 30L-5D.......................................          50
     3  10L-10U, 10L-5U, V-10U, V-5U, 10R-10U, 10R-5U.......         100
     4  10L-H, 10L-5D, V-H, V-5D, 10R-H, 10R-5D.............         360
 5 \1\  30R-H, 30R-5D.......................................          50
 6 \1\  45R-5U, 45R-H, 45R-5D...............................          45
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ When 2 lamps of the same or symmetrically opposite design are used,
  the reading along the vertical axis and the averages of the readings
  for the same angles left and right of vertical for 1 lamp shall be
  used to determine compliance with the requirements. If 2 lamps of
  differing designs are used, they shall be tested individually and the
  values added to determine that the combined units meet twice the
  candela requirements.
When only 1 backup lamp is used on the vehicle, it shall be tested to
  twice the candela equirements.

                           Figure 3 [Reserved]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.010


[[Page 393]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.011


[[Page 394]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.012


[[Page 395]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.013


[[Page 396]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.014


[[Page 397]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.015


[[Page 398]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.016


[[Page 399]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.017


[[Page 400]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.018


                     Figure 10--Photometric Requirements for Center High-Mounted Stop Lamps
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                       Minimum
                                                  Minimum     Zones (test points within zones, see    total for
            Individual test points               intensity                   note 2)                     zone
                                                 (candela)                                            (canadela)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
10U-10L.......................................            8  Zone I (5U-V, H-5L, H-V, H-5R, 5D-V)..          125
-V............................................           16
-10R..........................................            8
5U-10L........................................           16  Zone II (5U-5R, 5U-10R, H-10R, 5D-10R,           98
                                                              5D-5R).
-5L...........................................           25
-V............................................           25
-5R...........................................           25

[[Page 401]]

 
-10R..........................................           16
5D-10L........................................           16  Zone III (5U-5L, 5U-10L, H-10L, 5D-              98
                                                              10L, 5D-5L).
-5L...........................................           25
-V............................................           25
-5R...........................................           25
-10R..........................................           16
H-10L.........................................           16  Zone IV (10U-10L, 10U-V, 10U-10R).....           32
-5L...........................................           25
-V............................................           25
-5R...........................................           25
-10R..........................................           16
See Note 1....................................      \1\ 160
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note 1: The listed maximum shall not occur over any area larger than that generated by a \1/4\ degree radius
  within a solid cone angle within the rectangle bounded by test points 10U-10L, 10U-10R, 5D-10L, and 5D-10R.
Note 2: The measured values at each test point shall not be less than 60% of the value listed.
\1\ Maximum intensity (Candela).

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.019


[[Page 402]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.020


[[Page 403]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.021


[[Page 404]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.022


[[Page 405]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR97.024


[[Page 406]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR97.025


[[Page 407]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.024


[[Page 408]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR97.026


[[Page 409]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR97.027


[[Page 410]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.025


           Figure 19--Visibility of Installed Lighting Devices
                     [Lens area measurement method]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Item                     Corner points \1\ (degrees)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Front Turn Signal Lamp \2\.............  (15U,-45H \5\), (15U,+45H),
                                          (15D,-45H \5\), (15D,+45H).
Rear Turn Signal Lamp..................  (15U,-45H \5\), (15U,+45H),
                                          (15D,-45H \5\), (15D,+45H).
Stop Lamp \3\..........................  (15U,-45H), (15U,+45H), (15D,-
                                          45H), (15D,+45H).
Parking Lamp...........................  (15U,-45H), (15U,+45H), (15D,-
                                          45H), (15D,+45H).
Taillamp \4\...........................  (15U,-45H), (15U,+45H), (15D,-
                                          45H), (15D,+45H).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ In the horizontal (H) direction, a minus (-) indicates an inwards
  direction (toward the vehicle's longitudinal centerline) and a plus
  (+) sign indicates an outward direction.
\2\ Where more than one lamp or optical area is lighted at the front on
  each side of a multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck trailer, or bus,
  of 2032 mm. or more overall width, only one such area need comply.
\3\ If a multiple lamp arrangement is used for a motorcycle stop lamp,
  the inboard angle for each lamp shall be 10 degrees.

[[Page 411]]

 
\4\ If a multiple lamp arrangement is used for a motorcycle tail lamp,
  the inboard angle for each lamp shall be 45 degrees.
\5\ Front and Rear Turn Signal Lamps mounted on a motorcycle, the
  inboard angle shall be 20 degrees.


                               Figure 20--Visibility of Installed Lighting Devices
                                     [Luminous intensity measurement method]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                               Minimum luminous
                      Item                               Corner points \1\ (degrees)               intensity
                                                                                                   (candela)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Front Turn Signal Lamp \2\.....................  (15U,-45H \5\), (15U,+80H), (15D,-45H \5\),                0.3
                                                  (15D,+80H).
Rear Turn Signal Lamp..........................  (15U,-45H \5\), (15U,+80H), (15D,-45H \5\),                0.3
                                                  (15D,+80H).
Stop Lamp \3\..................................  (15U,-45H), (15U,+45H), (15D,-45H),                        0.3
                                                  (15D,+45H).
Parking Lamp...................................  (15U,-45H), (15U,+80H), (15D,-45H),                        0.05
                                                  (15D,+80H).
Taillamp \4\...................................  (15U,-45H \2\), (15U,+80H), (15D,-45H \2\),                0.05
                                                  (15D,+80H).
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ In the horizontal (H) direction, a minus (-) indicates an inwards direction (toward the vehicle's
  longitudinal centerline) and a plus (+) sign indicates an outward direction.
\2\ -80H[deg] for motorcycles incorporating a single lamp.
\3\ If a multiple lamp arrangement is used for a motorcycle stop lamp, the inboard angle for each lamp shall be
  10 degrees.
\4\ If a multiple lamp arrangement is used for a motorcycle tail lamp, the inboard angle for each lamp shall be
  45 degrees.
\5\ Front and Rear Turn Signal Lamps mounted on a motorcycle, the inboard angle shall be 20 degrees.


[[Page 412]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.026


[[Page 413]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.027

                      Figures 23 and 24 [Reserved]

[[Page 414]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.028


[[Page 415]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR97.028


[[Page 416]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR97.029


[[Page 417]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR97.030


[[Page 418]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR97.031


[[Page 419]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR97.032


[[Page 420]]



        Figure 29--Minimum Photometric Performance of Retroflective Sheeting in Candela/Lux/Square Meter
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                        Observation angle
                                                          --------------------------------------------
                      Entrance angle                            0.2 Degree            0.5 Degree         Grade
                                                          --------------------------------------------
                                                             White       Red       White       Red
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-4 degree................................................        250         60         65         15     DOT-C2
30 degree................................................        250         60         65         15     DOT-C2
45 degree................................................         60         15         15          4     DOT-C2
-4 degree................................................        165         40         43         10     DOT-C3
30 degree................................................        165         40         43         10     DOT-C3
45 degree................................................         40         10         10          3     DOT-C3
-4 degree................................................        125         30         33          8     DOT-C4
30 degree................................................        125         30         33          8     DOT-C4
45 degree................................................         30          8          8          2     DOT-C4
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 421]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.031


[[Page 422]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.032


[[Page 423]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.033


[[Page 424]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.034


[[Page 425]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP97.019


[[Page 426]]


                 Figure 32--Motorcycle and Motor-Driven Cycle Headlamp Photometric Requirements
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Test Points (deg.)                                                           Motor-Driven Cycle
----------------------------------------------------     Motorcycle      Motor-Driven Cycle    with Single Lamp
           Up or Down               Left or Right         (candela)           (candela)       System  (candela)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   Lower Beam
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.5U...........................  1R to R...........  1400-MAX..........  1400-MAX
1.5U...........................  1R to 3R..........  ..................  ..................  1400-MAX.
1U.............................  1.5L to L.........  700-MAX...........  700-MAX...........  700-MAX.
0.5U...........................  1.5L to L.........  1000-MAX..........  1000-MAX..........  1000-MAX.
0.5U...........................  1R to 3R..........  2700-MAX..........  2700-MAX..........  2700-MAX.
1.5D...........................  9L and 9R.........  700-MIN
2D.............................  0.0R..............  7000-MIN..........  5000-MIN..........  4000-MIN.
2D.............................  3L and 3R.........  4000-MIN..........  3000-MIN..........  3000-MIN.
2D.............................  6L and 6R.........  1500-MIN..........  1500-MIN..........  1500-MIN.
2D.............................  12L and 12R.......  700-MIN
3D.............................  6L and 6R.........  800-MIN...........  800-MIN
4D.............................  0.0R..............  2000-MIN..........  2000-MIN..........  1000-MIN.
4D.............................  4R................  12500-MAX.........  12500-MAX.........  12500-MAX.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   Upper Beam
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2U.............................  0.0R..............  1000-MIN
1U.............................  3L and 3R.........  2000-MIN..........  2000-MIN.
0.0U...........................  0.0R..............  12500-MIN.........  10000-MIN.
0.5D...........................  0.0R..............  20000-MIN.........  20000-MIN.
0.5D...........................  3L and 3R.........  10000-MIN.........  5000-MIN.
0.5D...........................  6L and 6R.........  3300-MIN..........  2000-MIN.
0.5D...........................  9L and 9R.........  1500-MIN
0.5D...........................  12L and 12R.......  800-MIN
1D.............................  0.0R..............  17500-MIN.........  15000-MIN.
2D.............................  0.0R..............  5000-MIN..........  5000-MIN.
3D.............................  0.0R..............  2500-MIN..........  2500-MIN.
3D.............................  6L and 6R.........  ..................  800-MIN.
3D.............................  9L and 9R.........  1500-MIN
3D.............................  12L and 12R.......  300-MIN
4D.............................  0.0R..............  1500-MIN
4D.............................  0.0R..............  7500-MAX..........  7500-MAX.
ANYWHERE.......................  ANYWHERE..........  75000-MAX.........  75000-MAX.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                     Table I--Required Motor Vehicle Lighting Equipment Other Than Headlamps
        Multipurpose Passenger Vehicles, Trucks, Trailers, and Buses, of 80 or More Inches Overall Width
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                              Applicable SAE
                                                                                                standard or
                                        Multipurpose passenger                             recommended practice
                Item                 vehicles, trucks, and buses         Trailers               (See S5 for
                                                                                             subreferenced SAE
                                                                                                materials)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Taillamps..........................  2 red......................  2 red.................  J585e, September 1977.
Stoplamps..........................  2 red......................  2 red.................  SAE J1398, May 1985.
License plate lamp.................  1 white....................  1 white...............  J587 October 1981.
Reflex reflectors..................  4 red; 2 amber.............  4 red; 2 amber........  J594f, January 1977.
Side marker lamps..................  2 red; 2 amber.............  2 red; 2 amber........  J592e, July 1972.
Backup lamp........................  1 white....................  None..................  J593c, February 1968.
Turn signal lamps..................  2 red or amber; 2 amber....  2 red or amber........  SAE J1395, April 1985.
Turn signal operating unit.........  1..........................  None..................  J589, April 1964.
Turn signal flasher................  1..........................  None..................  J590b, October 1965.
Vehicular hazard warning signal      1..........................  None..................  J910, January 1966.
 operating unit.
Vehicular hazard warning signal      1..........................  None..................  J945, February 1966.
 flasher..
Identification lamps...............  3 amber; 3 red.............  3 red.................  J592e, July 1972.
Clearance lamps....................  2 amber; 2 red.............  2 amber, 2 red........  J592e, July 1972.
Intermediate side marker lamps.      2 amber....................  2 amber...............  J592e, July 1972.
Intermediate side reflex             2 amber....................  2 amber...............  J594f, January 1977.
 reflectors.
Conspicuity........................  See S5.7...................  See S5.7..............  See S5.7
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 427]]


                                    Table II--Location of Required Equipment
        Multipurpose Passenger Vehicles, Trucks, Trailers, and Buses, of 80 or More Inches Overall Width
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         Location on--                        Height above road
                                   --------------------------------------------------------   surface measured
               Item                   Multipurpose passenger                                 from center of item
                                       vehicles, trucks, and             Trailers            on vehicle at curb
                                               buses                                               weight
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Headlamps.........................  On the front, each          Not required..............  Not less than 22
                                     headlamp providing the                                  inches (55.9 cm)
                                     upper beam, at the same                                 nor more than 54
                                     height, 1 on each side of                               inches (137.2 cm).
                                     the vertical centerline,
                                     each headlamp providing
                                     the lower beam, at the
                                     same height, 1 on each
                                     side of the vertical
                                     centerline, as far apart
                                     as practicable. See also
                                     S7.
Taillamps.........................  On the rear, 1 on each      On the rear, 1 on each      Not less than 15
                                     side of the vertical        side of the vertical        inches, nor more
                                     centerline, at the same     centerline, at the same     than 72 inches.
                                     height, and as far apart    height, and as far apart
                                     as practicable.             as practicable.
Stop lamps........................  ......do..................  ......do..................   Do.
License plate lamp................  At rear license plate, to   At rear license plate, to   No requirement.
                                     illuminate the plate from   illuminate the plate from
                                     the top or sides.           the top or sides.
Backup lamp.......................  On the rear...............  Not required..............   Do.
Turn signal lamps.................  At or near the front--1     On the rear--1 red or       Not less than 15
                                     amber on each side of the   amber on each side of the   inches, nor more
                                     vertical centerline, at     vertical centerline, at     than 83 inches.
                                     the same height, and as     the same height, and as
                                     far apart as practicable.   far apart as practicable.
                                    On the rear--1 red or
                                     amber on each side of the
                                     vertical centerline, at
                                     the same height, and as
                                     far apart as practicable.
Identification lamps..............  On the front and rear--3    On the rear--3 lamps as     No requirement.
                                     lamps, amber in front,      close as practicable to
                                     red in rear, as close as    the top of the vehicle at
                                     practicable to the top of   the same height, as close
                                     the vehicle, at the same    as practicable to the
                                     height, as close as         vertical centerline, with
                                     practicable to the          lamp centers spaced not
                                     vertical centerline, with   less than 6 inches or
                                     lamp centers spaced not     more than 12 inches apart.
                                     less than 6 inches or
                                     more than 12 inches
                                     apart. Alternatively, the
                                     front lamps may be
                                     located as close as
                                     practicable to the top of
                                     the cab.
Clearance lamps...................  On the front and rear--2    On the front and rear--2     Do.
                                     amber lamps on front, 2     amber lamps on front, 2
                                     red lamps on rear, to       red lamps on rear, to
                                     indicate the overall        indicate the overall
                                     width of the vehicle, one   width of the vehicle, one
                                     on each side of the         on each side of the
                                     vertical centerline, at     vertical centerline, at
                                     the same height, and as     the same height, and as
                                     near the top as             near the top thereof as
                                     practicable.                practicable \2,3,4\.
Intermediate side marker lamps....  On each side--1 amber lamp  On each side--1 amber lamp  Not less than 15
                                     located at or near the      located at or near the      inches.
                                     midpoint between the        midpoint between the
                                     front and rear side         front and rear side
                                     marker lamps.               marker lamps.
Intermediate side reflex            On each side--1 amber       On each side--1 amber       Not less than 15
 reflectors.                         located at or near the      located at or near the      inches nor more
                                     midpoint between the        midpoint between the        than 60 inches.
                                     front and rear side         front and rear side
                                     reflex reflectors.          reflex reflectors.
Conspicuity.......................  See S5.7..................  See S5.7..................  See S5.7
Reflex reflectors.................  On the rear--1 red on each  On the rear--1 red on each   Do.
                                     side of the vertical        side of the vertical
                                     centerline, as far apart    centerline, as far apart
                                     as practicable, and at      as practicable, and at
                                     the same height.            the same height.
                                    On each side--1 red as far  On each side--1 red as far
                                     to the rear as              to the rear as
                                     practicable, and 1 amber    practicable, and 1 amber
                                     as far to the front as      as far to the front as
                                     practicable.                practicable.
Side marker lamps.................  ......do..................  ......do..................  Not less than 15
                                                                                             inches, and on the
                                                                                             rear of trailers
                                                                                             not more than 60
                                                                                             inches.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 428]]


                              Table III--Required Motor Vehicle Lighting Equipment
  [All Passenger Cars and Motorcycles, and Multipurpose Passenger Vehicles, Trucks, Buses and Trailers of Less
                                    Than 80 (2032) Inches (mm) Overall Width]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                               Applicable SAE
                                   Passenger cars,                                              standard or
                                    multipurpose                                            recommended practice
             Item                passenger vehicles,       Trailers         Motorcycles         (See S5 for
                                  trucks, and buses                                          subreferenced SAE
                                                                                                 materials)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Headlamps.....................  See S7..............  None.............  See S7.9........  J566 January 1960.
Taillamps.....................  2 red...............  2 red............  1 red...........  J585e, September
                                                                                            1977.
Stoplamps.....................  2 red...............  2 red............  1 red...........  SAE J586, February
                                                                                            1984.
High-mounted stoplamp.........  1 red...............  Not required.....  Not required....  J186a, September
                                                                                            1977.
License plate lamp............  1 white.............  1 white..........  1 white.........  J587, October 1981.
Parking lamps.................  2 amber or white....  None.............  None............  J222, December 1970.
Reflex reflectors.............  4 red; 2 amber......  4 red; 2 amber...  3 red; 2 amber..  J594f, January 1977.
Intermediate side reflex        2 amber.............  2 amber..........  None............  J594f, January 1977.
 reflectors.
Intermediate side marker lamps  2 amber.............  2 amber..........  None............  J592e, July 1972.
Side marker lamps.............  2 red; 2 amber......  2 red; 2 amber...  None............  J592e, July 1972.
Backup lamp...................  1 white.............  None.............  None............  J593c, February 1968.
Turn signal lamps.............  2 red or amber; 2     2 red or amber...  2 amber; 2 red    SAE J588, November
                                 amber.                                   or amber.         1984.
Turn signal operating unit.     1...................  None.............  1...............  J589, April 1964.
 \3,4\.
Turn signal flasher...........  1...................  None.............  1...............  J590b, October 1965.
Vehicular hazard warning        1...................  None.............  None............  J910, January 1966.
 signal operating unit.
Vehicular hazard warning        1...................  None.............  None............  J945, February 1966.
 signal flasher.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                    Table IV--Location of Required Equipment
  [All Passenger Cars and Motorcycles, and Multipurpose Passenger Vehicles, Trucks, Trailers, and Buses of Less
                                    than 80 (2032) Inches (MM) Overall Width]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         Location on--
                                    ------------------------------------------------------   Height above road
                                         Passenger cars,                                   surface measured from
                Item                  multipurpose passenger                                 center of item on
                                        vehicles, trucks,             Motorcycles             vehicle at curb
                                       trailers, and buses                                         weight
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Headlamps..........................  On the front, each       See S7.9...................  Not less than 22
                                      headlamp providing the                                inches (55.9 cm) nor
                                      lower beam, at the                                    more than 54 inches
                                      same height, 1 on each                                (137.2 cm).
                                      side of the vertical
                                      centerline, each
                                      headlamp providing the
                                      upper beam, at the
                                      same height, 1 on each
                                      side of the vertical
                                      center-line, as far
                                      apart as practicable.
                                      See also S7.
Taillamps..........................  On the rear--1 on each   On the rear--on the          Not less than 15
                                      side of the vertical     vertical centerline except   inches, nor more
                                      centerline, at the       that if two are used, they   than 72 inches.
                                      same height, and as      shall be symmetrically
                                      far apart as             disposed about the
                                      practicable.             vertical centerline.
Stoplamps..........................  On the rear--1 on each   On the rear--on the          Not less than 15
                                      side of the vertical     vertical centerline except   inches, nor more
                                      centerline, at the       that if two are used, they   than 72 inches.
                                      same height, and as      shall be symmetrically
                                      far apart as             disposed about the
                                      practicable.             vertical centerline.
High-mounted stoplamp..............  On the rear, on the      Not required...............  See S5.3.1.8 for
                                      vertical centerline                                   passenger cars. Not
                                      [See S5.1.1.27,                                       less than 34 inches
                                      S5.3.1.8, and Table                                   for multipurpose
                                      III], effective                                       passenger vehicles,
                                      September 1, 1985, for                                trucks, and buses.
                                      passenger cars only.

[[Page 429]]

 
License plate lamp.................  At rear license plate,   At rear license plate......  No requirement.
                                      to illuminate the
                                      plate from the top or
                                      sides.
Parking lamps......................  On the front--1 on each  Not required...............  Not less than 15
                                      side of the vertical                                  inches, nor more
                                      centerline, at the                                    than 72 inches.
                                      same height, and as
                                      far apart as
                                      practicable.
Reflex reflectors..................  On the rear--1 red on    On the rear--1 red on the    Not less than 15
                                      each side of the         vertical centerline except   inches, nor more
                                      vertical centerline,     that, if two are used on     than 60 inches.
                                      at the same height,      the rear, they shall be
                                      and as far apart as      symmetrically disposed
                                      practicable.             about the vertical
                                                               centerline.
                                     On each side--1 red as   On each side--1 red as far
                                      far to the rear as       to the rear as
                                      practicable, and 1       practicable, and 1 amber
                                      amber as far to the      as far to the front as
                                      front as practicable.    practicable.
Backup lamp........................  On the rear............  Not required...............  No requirement.
Turn signal lamps..................  At or near the front--1  At or near the front--1      Not less than 15
                                      amber on each side of    amber on each side of the    inches, nor more
                                      the vertical             vertical centerline at the   than 83 inches.
                                      centerline, at the       same height, and having a
                                      same height, and as      minimum horizontal
                                      far apart as             separation distance
                                      practicable.             (centerline of lamps) of
                                     On the rear--1 red or     16 inches. Minimum edge to
                                      amber on each side of    edge separation distance
                                      the vertical             between lamp and headlamp
                                      centerline, at the       is 4 inches.
                                      same height, and as     At or near the rear--1 red
                                      far apart as             or amber on each side of
                                      practicable.             the vertical centerline,
                                                               at the same height and
                                                               having a minimum
                                                               horizontal separation
                                                               distance (centerline to
                                                               centerline of lamps) of 9
                                                               inches. Minimum edge to
                                                               edge separation distance
                                                               between lamp and tail or
                                                               stop lamp is 4-inches,
                                                               when a single stop and
                                                               taillamp is installed on
                                                               the vertical centerline
                                                               and the turn signal lamps
                                                               are red..
Side marker lamps..................  On each side--1 red as   Not required...............  Not less than 15
                                      far to the rear as                                    inches.
                                      practicable, and 1
                                      amber as far to the
                                      front as practicable.
Intermediate side marker lamps.....  On each side--1 amber    Not required...............  Not less than 15
                                      located at or near the                                inches.
                                      midpoint between the
                                      front and rear side
                                      marker lamps.
Intermediate side marker reflectors  On each side--1 amber    Not required...............  Not less than 15
                                      located at or near the                                inches, nor more
                                      midpoint between the                                  than 60 inches.
                                      front and rear side
                                      marker reflectors.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: (1) The term overall width refers to the nominal design dimension of the widest part of the vehicle,
  exclusive of signal lamps, marker lamps, outside rearview mirrors, flexible fender extensions, and mud flaps,
  determine with doors and windows closed, and the wheels in the straight-ahead position.
This supersedes the interpretation of the term ``overall width'' appearing in the Federal Register of March 1,
  1967 (32 FR 3390).
(2) Paragraph S3.1 and Tables I and III of Sec.  571.108 as amended (32 FR 18033, Dec. 16, 1967), specify that
  certain lamp assemblies shall conform to applicable SAE Standards. Each of these basically referenced
  standards subreferences both SAE Standard J575 (tests for motor vehicle lighting devices and components) which
  in turn references SAE Standard J573 on bulbs, and SAE Standard J567 on bulb sockets.
(3) Paragraph C of SAE Standard J575 states in part: ``Where special bulbs are specified, they should be
  submitted with the devices and the same or similar bulbs used in the tests and operated at their rated mean
  spherical candlepower.'' The Administrator has determined that this provision of SAE Standard J575 permits the
  use of special bulbs, including tubular-type bulbs, which do not conform to the detailed requirements of Table
  I of SAE Standard J573. It follows that the sockets for special bulbs need not conform to the detailed
  requirements of SAE Standard J567. These provisions for special bulbs in no way except the lamp assemblies
  from meeting all performance requirements specified in Federal Standard No. 108, including those specified in
  the basically referenced SAE Standards, and in the subreferenced SAE Standard J575.


[41 FR 35522, Aug. 23, 1976]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.108, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.

[[Page 430]]


    Effective Date Note: At 72 FR 68269, Dec. 4, 2007, Sec. 571.108 was 
revised, effective Sept 1, 2008. At 73 FR 50730, Aug. 28, 2008, the 
revision was delayed until Dec. 1, 2009. At 74 FR 58214, Nov. 12, 2009, 
the revision was further delayed until Dec. 1, 2012. At 76 FR 23510, 
Apr. 27, 2011, Figures V-b and V-c were revised, effective Dec. 1, 2012.
    At 76 FR 48024, Aug. 8, 2011, Sec. 571.108 was amended by: revising 
entry 17 in S5.2, paragraphs S6.1.1.4, S6.1.3.2, S6.2.3.1, S6.4.4, 
S6.5.3, S6.5.3.3.1, S6.5.3.6, S7.1.1.9, S7.1.1.10.4(a), S7.1.1.11, 
S7.1.1.11.1, S7.1.1.12.4, S7.1.2.9, S7.2.9, S7.3.9, S7.4.9, S7.5.9, 
S7.6.9, S7.7.4, S7.7.9, S7.8.9, S7.9.9, S7.9.14, S7.11.9, S8.1.9, 
S8.2.1.5, S10.1.2, S10.13.4.1, S10.14.7.1, S10.15.7.1, S10.18, 
S14.2.1.5.2, S14.2.4.3, S14.3.1, S14.6.9.1.1, Table I-a, Table I-b, 
Table I-c, Table III, Table IV-a, Table IV-b, Table IV-c, Table V-a, 
Table V-d, Table VIII, Table IX, Table XII, Table XIV, Table XV, Table 
XIX-a, Table XIX-b, Table XIX-c; adding a definition of ``Combination 
headlamp system'' in S4, entry 18 in S5.2, paragraph S6.5.3.1; removing 
paragraph S6.1.3.5.1.3; removing and reserving paragraph S10.2; removing 
paragraph S13.3; removing paragraphs S7.9.14.1.1 and S7.9.14.1.2 and 
adding paragraphs S7.9.14.1 and S7.9.14.2 in their place, effective Dec. 
1, 2012.
    For the convenience of the user, the added and revised text is set 
forth as follows:


<R05>
Sec. 571.108  Standard No. 108; Lamps, reflective devices, and 

associated equipment.

    S1 Scope. This standard specifies requirements for original and 
replacement lamps, reflective devices, and associated equipment.
    S2 Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce traffic 
accidents and deaths and injuries resulting from traffic accidents, by 
providing adequate illumination of the roadway, and by enhancing the 
conspicuity of motor vehicles on the public roads so that their presence 
is perceived and their signals understood, both in daylight and in 
darkness or other conditions of reduced visibility.
    S3 Application. This standard applies to:
    S3.1 Passenger cars, multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, buses, 
trailers (except pole trailers and trailer converter dollies), and 
motorcycles;
    S3.2 Retroreflective sheeting and reflex reflectors manufactured to 
conform to S8.2 of this standard; and
    S3.3 Lamps, reflective devices, and associated equipment for 
replacement of like equipment on vehicles to which this standard 
applies.
    S4 Definitions.
    Aiming plane means a plane defined by the surface of the three 
aiming pads on the lens.
    Aiming reference plane means a plane which is perpendicular to the 
longitudinal axis of the vehicle and tangent to the forwardmost aiming 
pad on the headlamp.
    Aiming screws are the horizontal and vertical adjusting screws with 
self-locking features used to aim and retain a headlamp unit in the 
proper position.
    Axis of reference means the characteristic axis of the lamp for use 
as the direction of reference (H = 0[deg], V = 0[deg]) for angles of 
field for photometric measurements and for installing the lamp on the 
vehicle.
    Backup lamp means a lamp or lamps which illuminate the road to the 
rear of a vehicle and provide a warning signal to pedestrians and other 
drivers when the vehicle is backing up or is about to back up.
    Beam contributor means an indivisible optical assembly including a 
lens, reflector, and light source, that is part of an integral beam 
headlighting system and contributes only a portion of a headlamp beam.
    Cargo lamp is a lamp that is mounted on a multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, truck, or bus for the purpose of providing illumination to load 
or unload cargo.
    Clearance lamps are lamps which show to the front or rear of the 
vehicle, mounted on the permanent structure of the vehicle as near as 
practicable to the upper left and right extreme edges to indicate the 
overall width and height of the vehicle.
    Coated materials means a material which has a coating applied to the 
surface of the finished sample to impart some protective properties. 
Coating identification means a mark of the manufacturer's name, 
formulation designation number, and recommendations for application.
    Color Fundamental definitions of color are expressed by Chromaticity 
Coordinates according to the International Commission on Illumination 
(C.I.E.) 1931 Standard Colorimetric System, as described in the CIE 1931 
Chromaticity Diagram (incorporated by reference, see 571.108 S5.2 of 
this title).
    Color bleeding means the migration of color out of a plastic part 
onto the surrounding surface.
    Combination clearance and side marker lamps are single lamps which 
simultaneously fulfill the requirements of clearance and side marker 
lamps.
    Combination headlamp means a headlamp that is a combination of two 
different headlamp types chosen from a type F sealed beam headlamp, an 
integral beam headlamp, or a replaceable bulb headlamp.
    Cracking means a separation of adjacent sections of a plastic 
material with penetration into the specimen.
    Crazing means a network of apparent fine cracks on or beneath the 
surface of materials.
    Cutoff means a generally horizontal, visual/optical aiming cue in 
the lower beam that marks a separation between areas of higher and lower 
luminance.
    Daytime running lamps (DRLs) are steady burning lamps that are used 
to improve the conspicuity of a vehicle from the front and

[[Page 431]]

front sides when the regular headlamps are not required for driving.
    Delamination means a separation of the layers of a material 
including coatings.
    Design voltage means the voltage used for design purposes.
    Direct reading indicator means a device that is mounted in its 
entirety on a headlamp or headlamp aiming or headlamp mounting 
equipment, is part of a VHAD, and provides information about headlamp 
aim in an analog or digital format.
    Effective light-emitting surface means that portion of a lamp that 
directs light to the photometric test pattern, and does not include 
transparent lenses, mounting hole bosses, reflex reflector area, beads 
or rims that may glow or produce small areas of increased intensity as a 
result of uncontrolled light from an area of \1/2\[deg] radius around a 
test point.
    Effective projected luminous lens area means the area of the 
orthogonal projection of the effective light-emitting surface of a lamp 
on a plane perpendicular to a defined direction relative to the axis of 
reference. Unless otherwise specified, the direction is coincident with 
the axis of reference.
    Exposed means material used in lenses or optical devices exposed to 
direct sunlight as installed on the vehicle.
    Filament means that part of the light source or light emitting 
element(s), such as a resistive element, the excited portion of a 
specific mixture of gases under pressure, or any part of other energy 
conversion sources, that generates radiant energy which can be seen.
    Flash means a cycle of activation and deactivation of a lamp by 
automatic means continuing until stopped either automatically or 
manually.
    Fully opened means the position of the headlamp concealment device 
in which the headlamp is in the design open operating position.
    H-V axis means the line from the center of the principal filament of 
a lamp to the intersection of the horizontal (H) and vertical (V) lines 
of a photometric test screen.
    Haze means the cloudy or turbid appearance of an otherwise 
transparent specimen caused by light scattered from within the specimen 
or from its surface.
    Headlamp means a lighting device providing an upper and/or a lower 
beam used for providing illumination forward of the vehicle.
    Headlamp concealment device means a device, with its operating 
system and components, that provides concealment of the headlamp when it 
is not in use, including a movable headlamp cover and a headlamp that 
displaces for concealment purposes.
    Headlamp mechanical axis means the line formed by the intersection 
of a horizontal and a vertical plane through the light source parallel 
to the longitudinal axis of the vehicle. If the mechanical axis of the 
headlamp is not at the geometric center of the lens, then the location 
will be indicated by the manufacturer on the headlamp.
    Headlamp test fixture means a device designed to support a headlamp 
or headlamp assembly in the test position specified in the laboratory 
tests and whose mounting hardware and components are those necessary to 
operate the headlamp as installed in a motor vehicle.
    High-mounted stop lamp means a lamp mounted high and possibly 
forward of the tail, stop, and rear turn signal lamps intended to give a 
steady stop warning through intervening vehicles to operators of 
following vehicles.
    Identification lamps are lamps used in groups of three, in a 
horizontal row, which show to the front or rear or both, having lamp 
centers spaced not less than [6 in] 15.2 mm nor more than [12 in] 30.4 
mm apart, mounted on the permanent structure as near as practicable to 
the vertical centerline and the top of the vehicle to identify certain 
types of vehicles.
    Integral beam headlamp means a headlamp (other than a standardized 
sealed beam headlamp designed to conform to paragraph S10.13 or a 
replaceable bulb headlamp designed to conform to paragraph S10.15) 
comprising an integral and indivisible optical assembly including lens, 
reflector, and light source, except that a headlamp conforming to 
paragraph S10.18.8 or paragraph S10.18.9 may have a lens designed to be 
replaceable.
    License plate lamp means a lamp used to illuminate the license plate 
on the rear of a vehicle.
    Lower beam means a beam intended to illuminate the road and its 
environs ahead of the vehicle when meeting or closely following another 
vehicle.
    Material means the type and grade of plastics, composition, and 
manufacturer's designation number and color.
    Mechanically aimable headlamp means a headlamp having three pads on 
the lens, forming an aiming plane used for laboratory photometric 
testing and for adjusting and inspecting the aim of the headlamp when 
installed on the vehicle.
    Motor driven cycle means every motorcycle, including every motor 
scooter, with a motor which produces not more than 5 horsepower, and 
every bicycle with motor attached.
    Motorcycle or motor driven cycle headlamp means a major lighting 
device used to produce general illumination ahead of the vehicle.
    Mounting ring means the adjustable ring upon which a sealed beam 
unit is mounted.
    Mounting ring (type F sealed beam) means the adjustable ring upon 
which a sealed beam unit is mounted and which forces the sealed beam 
unit to seat against the aiming

[[Page 432]]

ring when assembled into a sealed beam assembly.
    Multiple compartment lamp means a device which gives its indication 
by two or more separately lighted areas which are joined by one or more 
common parts, such as a housing or lens.
    Multiple lamp arrangement means an array of two or more separate 
lamps on each side of the vehicle which operate together to give a 
signal.
    Optically combined means a lamp having a single or two filament 
light source or two or more separate light sources that operate in 
different ways, and has its optically functional lens area wholly or 
partially common to two or more lamp functions.
    Overall width means the nominal design dimension of the widest part 
of the vehicle, exclusive of signal lamps, marker lamps, outside 
rearview mirrors, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, and outside 
door handles determined with doors and windows closed, and the wheels in 
the straight-ahead position. Running boards may also be excluded from 
the determination of overall width if they do not extend beyond the 
width as determined by the other items excluded by this definition.
    Parking lamps are lamps on both the left and right of the vehicle 
which show to the front and are intended to mark the vehicle when parked 
or serve as a reserve front position indicating system in the event of 
headlamp failure.
    Protected means material used in inner lenses for optical devices 
where such lenses are protected from exposure to the sun by an outer 
lens made of materials meeting the requirements for exposed plastics.
    Rated voltage means the nominal circuit or vehicle electrical system 
voltage classification.
    Reflex reflectors are devices used on vehicles to give an indication 
to approaching drivers using reflected light from the lamps of the 
approaching vehicle.
    Remote reading indicator means a device that is not mounted in its 
entirety on a headlamp or headlamp aiming or headlamp mounting 
equipment, but otherwise meets the definition of a direct reading 
indicator.
    Replaceable bulb headlamp means a headlamp comprising a bonded lens 
and reflector assembly and one or two replaceable light sources, except 
that a headlamp conforming to paragraph S10.18.8 or paragraph S10.18.9 
may have a lens designed to be replaceable.
    Replaceable light source means an assembly of a capsule, base, and 
terminals that is designed to conform to the requirements of appendix A 
or appendix B of 49 CFR part 564 Replaceable Light Source Information of 
this Chapter.
    Retaining ring means the clamping ring that holds a sealed beam unit 
against a mounting ring.
    Retaining ring (type F sealed beam) means the clamping ring that 
holds a sealed beam unit against a mounting ring, and that provides an 
interface between the unit's aiming/seating pads and the headlamp aimer 
adapter (locating plate).
    School bus signal lamps are alternately flashing lamps mounted 
horizontally both front and rear, intended to identify a vehicle as a 
school bus and to inform other users of the highway that such vehicle is 
stopped on the highway to take on or discharge school children.
    Sealed beam headlamp means an integral and indivisible optical 
assembly including the light source with ``SEALED BEAM'' molded in the 
lens.
    Sealed beam headlamp assembly means a major lighting assembly which 
includes one or more sealed beam units used to provide general 
illumination ahead of the vehicle.
    Seasoning means the process of energizing the filament of a headlamp 
at design voltage for a period of time equal to 1% of design life, or 
other equivalent method.
    Semiautomatic headlamp beam switching device is one which provides 
either automatic or manual control of beam switching at the option of 
the driver. When the control is automatic the headlamps switch from the 
upper beam to the lower beam when illuminated by the headlamps on an 
approaching vehicle and switch back to the upper beam when the road 
ahead is dark. When the control is manual, the driver may obtain either 
beam manually regardless of the conditions ahead of the vehicle.
    Side marker lamps are lamps which show to the side of the vehicle, 
mounted on the permanent structure of the vehicle as near as practicable 
to the front and rear edges to indicate the overall length of the 
vehicle. Additional lamps may also be mounted at intermediate locations 
on the sides of the vehicle.
    Stop lamps are lamps giving a steady light to the rear of a vehicle 
to indicate a vehicle is stopping or diminishing speed by braking.
    Taillamps are steady burning low intensity lamps used to designate 
the rear of a vehicle.
    Test voltage means the specified voltage and tolerance to be used 
when conducting a test.
    Turn signal lamps are the signaling element of a turn signal system 
which indicates the intention to turn or change direction by giving a 
flashing light on the side toward which the turn will be made.
    Turn signal flasher means a device which causes a turn signal lamp 
to flash as long as it is turned on.
    Turn signal operating unit means an operating unit that is part of a 
turn signal system by which the operator of a vehicle causes the signal 
units to function.

[[Page 433]]

    Upper beam means a beam intended primarily for distance illumination 
and for use when not meeting or closely following other vehicles.
    Vehicle headlamp aiming device or VHAD means motor vehicle 
equipment, installed either on a vehicle or headlamp, which is used for 
determining the horizontal or vertical aim, or both the vertical and 
horizontal aim of the headlamp.
    Vehicular hazard warning signal flasher means a device which, as 
long as it is turned on, causes all the required turn signal lamps to 
flash.
    Vehicular hazard warning signal operating unit means a driver 
controlled device which causes all required turn signal lamps to flash 
simultaneously to indicate to approaching drivers the presence of a 
vehicular hazard.
    Visually/optically aimable headlamp means a headlamp which is 
designed to be visually/optically aimable in accordance with the 
requirements of paragraph S10.18.9 of this standard.
    S5 References to SAE publications.
    S5.1 Each required lamp, reflective device, and item of associated 
equipment must be designed to conform to the requirements of applicable 
SAE publications as referenced and subreferenced in this standard. The 
words ``it is recommended that,'' ``recommendations,'' or ``should be'' 
appearing in any SAE publication referenced or subreferenced in this 
standard must be read as setting forth mandatory requirements.
    S5.2 Incorporation by reference. The Director of the Federal 
Register approves the incorporation by reference of the following 
material in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR Part 51. All 
material is available for inspection at the NHTSA Reading Room, 1200 New 
Jersey Avenue, SE., Washington, DC 20590, or at NARA. For information on 
the availability of this material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: 
http://www.archives.gov/federal--register/code--of--federal--
regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    The material is also available at the publisher whose name and 
address follow the standard number:
    1. Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Standard J602, revised AUG 
1963, ``Headlamp Aiming Device for Mechanically Aimable Sealed Beam 
Headlamp Units.'' Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc., 400 
Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096.
    2. Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Standard J941b, revised FEB 
1969, ``Motor Vehicle Driver's Eye Range.'' Society of Automotive 
Engineers, Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096.
    3. Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Standard J602, revised OCT 
1980, ``Headlamp Aiming Device for Mechanically Aimable Sealed Beam 
Headlamp Units.'' Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc., 400 
Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096.
    4. Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Standard J2009, revised FEB 
1993, ``Forward Discharge Lighting Systems.'' Society of Automotive 
Engineers, Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096.
    5. Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Standard J573d, revised DEC 
1968, ``Lamp Bulbs and Sealed Units.'' Society of Automotive Engineers, 
Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096.
    6. Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Standard J567b, revised APR 
1964, ``Bulb Sockets.'' Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc., 400 
Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096.
    7. International Commission on Illumination (C.I.E.) 1931 
Chromaticity Diagram. CIE Central Bureau, Kegelgasse 27, A-1030 Vienna, 
Austria.
    8. General Services Administration (GSA) Federal Specification L-S-
300, approved September 1965, ``Sheeting and Tape, Reflective: 
Nonexposed Lens, Adhesive Backing.'' Superintendent of Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402, telephone 202-512-
1800.
    9. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) D4956-90, 
published December 1990, ``Standard Specification for Retroreflective 
Sheeting for Traffic Control.'' ASTM International, 100 Barr Harbor 
Drive, PO Box C700, Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959.
    10. ECE 48 E/ECE/324-E/ECE/TRANS/505, Rev.1/ADD.47/Rev.1/Corr.2, 26 
February 1996, ``Uniform Provisions Concerning the Approval of Vehicles 
with Regard to the Installation of Lighting and Light-Signaling 
Devices.'' United Nations, Conference Services Division, Distribution 
and Sales Section, Office C.115-1, Palais des Nations, CH-1211, Geneva 
10, http://www.unece.org/trans/main/wp29/wp29regs.html.
    11. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) D1003-92, 
published December 1992, ``Standard Test Method for Haze and Luminous 
Transmittance of Transparent Plastics.'' ASTM International, 100 Barr 
Harbor Drive, PO Box C700, Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959.
    12. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) E308-66, 
reapproved 1981, ``Standard Practice for Spectrophotometry and 
Description of Color in CIE 1931 System.'' ASTM International, 100 Barr 
Harbor Drive, PO Box C700, Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959.
    13. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) B117-73, 
reapproved 1979, ``Standard Method of Salt Spray (Fog) Testing.'' ASTM 
International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, PO Box C700, Conshohocken, PA 
19428-2959.
    14. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Co. 05.04 
1985, ``Annual Book of

[[Page 434]]

ASTM Standards: Test Methods for Rating Motor, Diesel, Aviation Fuels,'' 
Section I, parts A2.3.2, A2.3.3, and A2.7 in Annex 2. ASTM 
International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, PO Box C700, Conshohocken, PA 
19428-2959.
    15. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) D362-84, 
published March 1984, ``Standard Specification for Industrial Grade 
Toluene.'' ASTM International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, PO Box C700, 
Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959.
    16. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) C150-77, 
published April 1977, ``Standard Specification for Portland Cement.'' 
ASTM International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, PO Box C700, Conshohocken, PA 
19428-2959.
    17. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) C150-56, 
published 1956, ``Standard Specifications for Portland Cement.'' ASTM 
International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, PO Box C700, Conshohocken, PA 
19428-2959.
    18. Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IES) LM 45, 
approved April 1980, ``IES Approved Method for Electrical and 
Photometric Measurements of General Service Incandescent Filament 
Lamps.'' Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, 345 East 
47th St., New York, NY 10017.
    S6 Vehicle requirements.
    S6.1 Required lamps, reflective devices, and associated equipment by 
vehicle type.
    S6.1.1 Quantity. Except as provided in succeeding paragraphs of this 
S6.1.1 each vehicle must be equipped with at least the number of lamps, 
reflective devices, and items of associated equipment specified for that 
vehicle type and size in Table I and Section 6.6, designed to conform to 
the requirements of this standard. Multiple license plate lamps and 
backup lamps may be used to fulfill photometric requirements for those 
functions.
    S6.1.1.1 Conspicuity systems. Each trailer of 2032 mm or more in 
overall width, and with a GVWR over 10,000 lbs., except a trailer 
designed exclusively for living or office use, and each truck tractor 
must be equipped with retroreflective sheeting, reflex reflectors, or a 
combination of retroreflective sheeting and reflex reflectors as 
specified in S8.2.
    S6.1.1.2 High-mounted stop lamps. Each multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, truck, and bus required by this standard to be equipped with a 
high-mounted stop lamp, whose vertical centerline, when the vehicle is 
viewed from the rear, is not located on a fixed body panel but separates 
one or two moveable body sections, such as doors, which lacks sufficient 
space to install a single high-mounted stop lamp on the centerline above 
such body sections, must have two high-mounted stop lamps identical in 
size and shape.
    S6.1.1.2.1 The two lamps must be located at the same height, with 
one vertical edge of each lamp on the vertical edge of the body section 
nearest the vehicle centerline.
    S6.1.1.3 Truck tractor rear turn signal lamps. A truck tractor need 
not be equipped with turn signal lamps mounted on the rear if the turn 
signal lamps installed at or near the front are of double face 
construction and are located such that they meet the photometric 
requirements for double faced turn signal lamps specified in Footnote 6 
of Table VII.
    S6.1.1.3.1 The flashing signal from a double faced signal lamp must 
not be obliterated when subjected to external light rays from either in 
front or behind, at any and all angles.
    S6.1.1.4 Daytime running lamps. Any pair of lamps on the front of a 
passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, or bus, whether or 
not required by this standard, other than parking lamps or fog lamps, 
may be wired to be automatically activated, as determined by the 
manufacturer of the vehicle, in a steady burning state as daytime 
running lamps (DRLs) in accordance with S7.10.5.
    S6.1.2 Color. The color in all lamps and reflective devices to which 
this standard applies must be as specified in Table I. The color 
identified as amber is identical to the color identified as yellow.
    S6.1.3 Mounting location.
    S6.1.3.1 Each lamp, reflective device, and item of associated 
equipment must be securely mounted on a rigid part of the vehicle, other 
than glazing, that is not designed to be removed except for repair, 
within the mounting location and height limits as specified in Table I, 
and in a location where it complies with all applicable photometric 
requirements, effective projected luminous lens area requirements, and 
visibility requirements with all obstructions considered.
    S6.1.3.2 When multiple lamp arrangements for rear turn signal lamps, 
stop lamps, or taillamps are used, with only a portion of the lamps 
installed on a fixed part of the vehicle, the lamp or lamps that are 
installed to the non-fixed part of the vehicle will be considered 
auxiliary lamps.
    S6.1.3.3 License plate lamp. The license plate lamp or lamps 
installed on vehicles other than motorcycles and motor driven cycles 
must be mounted so as to illuminate the license plate without 
obstruction from any designed feature unless the lamp or lamps is (are) 
designed to comply with all the photometric requirements with these 
obstructions considered.
    S6.1.3.4 High-mounted stop lamps.
    S6.1.3.4.1 Interior mounting. A high-mounted stop lamp mounted 
inside the vehicle must have means provided to minimize reflections from 
the light of the lamp upon the rear window glazing that might be visible 
to

[[Page 435]]

the driver when viewed directly, or indirectly in the rearview mirror.
    S6.1.3.4.2 Accessibility. Each high-mounted stop lamp must provide 
access for convenient replacement of bulbs without special tools.
    S6.1.3.5 Headlamp beam mounting.
    S6.1.3.5.1 Vertical headlamp arrangement.
    S6.1.3.5.1.1 Where multiple headlamps with single light sources are 
installed in a vertical orientation the lower beam must be provided by 
the uppermost headlamp.
    S6.1.3.5.1.2 Where headlamps with two vertically oriented light 
sources are installed the lower beam must be provided by the uppermost 
light source or by all light sources.
    S6.1.3.5.2 Horizontal headlamp arrangement.
    S6.1.3.5.2.1 Where multiple headlamps with single light sources are 
installed in a horizontal orientation the lower beam must be provided by 
the most outboard headlamp.
    S6.1.3.5.2.2 Where headlamps with two horizontally oriented light 
sources are installed the lower beam must be provided by the outboard 
light source or by all light sources.
    S6.1.3.6 Auxiliary lamps mounted near identification lamps. Each 
auxiliary lamp must be located at least twice the distance from any 
required identification lamp as the distance between two adjacent 
required identification lamps.
    S6.1.4 Mounting height. The mounting height of each lamp and 
reflective device must be measured from the center of the item, as 
mounted on the vehicle at curb weight, to the road surface.
    S6.1.4.1 High-mounted stop lamps.
    S6.1.4.1.1 A high-mounted stop lamp mounted below the rear window 
must have no lens portion lower than 153 mm [6 in] below the lower edge 
of the rear glazing on convertibles, or 77 mm [3 in] on other passenger 
cars.
    S6.1.5 Activation. Each lamp must be activated as specified, in the 
combinations specified, and in response to the inputs specified in Table 
I and Table II.
    S6.1.5.1 Hazard warning signal. In all passenger cars, multipurpose 
passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses, the activation of the vehicular 
hazard warning signal operating unit must cause to flash simultaneously 
sufficient turn signal lamps to meet, as a minimum, the turn signal 
photometric requirements of this standard.
    S6.1.5.2 Simultaneous beam activation.
    S6.1.5.2.1 On any vehicle to which this standard applies where the 
headlighting system is designed to conform to the photometric 
requirements of UB1 of Table XVIII and LB1M or LB1V of Table XIX-a, the 
lamps marked ``L'' or ``LF'' may remain permanently activated when the 
lamps marked ``U'' or ``UF'' are activated.
    S6.1.5.2.2 On any vehicle to which this standard applies where an 
integral beam headlighting system is designed to conform to the 
photometric requirements of UB6 of Table XVIII and LB5M of Table XIX-b 
or LB4V of Table XIX-c, the lower beam headlamps must remain permanently 
activated when the upper beam headlamps are activated.
    S6.1.5.2.3 On any vehicle to which this section applies where the 
headlighting system is designed to conform to the photometric 
requirements of UB2 of Table XVIII and LB2M or LB2V of Table XIX-a, a 
lower beam light source may remain permanently activated when an upper 
beam light source is activated if the lower beam light source 
contributes to the upper beam photometric compliance of the headlighting 
system.
    S6.2 Impairment.
    S6.2.1 No additional lamp, reflective device, or other motor vehicle 
equipment is permitted to be installed that impairs the effectiveness of 
lighting equipment required by this standard.
    S6.2.2 If any required lamp or reflective device is obstructed by 
motor vehicle equipment (e.g., mirrors, snow plows, wrecker booms, 
backhoes, winches, etc.) including dealer installed equipment, and 
cannot meet the applicable photometry and visibility requirements, the 
vehicle must be equipped with an additional lamp or device of the same 
type which meet all applicable requirements of this standard, including 
photometry and visibility.
    S6.2.3 Headlamp obstructions.
    S6.2.3.1 When activated in the steady burning state, headlamps 
(excluding headlamps mounted on motorcycles) must not have any styling 
ornament or other feature, such as a translucent cover or grill, in 
front of the lens
    S6.2.3.2 Headlamp wipers may be used in front of the lens provided 
that the headlamp system is designed to conform with all applicable 
photometric requirements with the wiper stopped in any position in front 
of the lens.
    S6.3 Equipment combinations. Two or more lamps, reflective devices, 
or items of associated equipment may be combined if the requirements for 
each lamp, reflective device, and item of associated equipment are met 
with the following exceptions:
    S6.3.1 No high-mounted stop lamp is permitted to be combined with 
any other lamp or reflective device, other than with a cargo lamp.
    S6.3.2 No high-mounted stop lamp is permitted to be optically 
combined with any cargo lamp.
    S6.3.3 No clearance lamp is permitted to be optically combined with 
any taillamp.
    S6.4 Lens area, visibility and school bus signal lamp aiming.

[[Page 436]]

    S6.4.1 Effective projected luminous lens area. Each turn signal 
lamp, stop lamp, high-mounted stop lamp, and school bus signal lamp must 
meet the applicable effective projected luminous lens area requirement 
specified in Tables IV-a, IV-b, and IV-c.
    S6.4.2 Visibility. Each backup lamp, single or combination of dual 
high-mounted stop lamp(s), and school bus signal lamp must meet the 
applicable visibility requirement specified in Table V-a.
    S6.4.3 Visibility options. A manufacturer must certify compliance of 
each lamp function to one of the following visibility requirement 
options, and it may not thereafter choose a different option for that 
vehicle:
    (a) Lens area option. When a vehicle is equipped with any lamp 
listed in Table V-b each such lamp must provide not less than 1250 sq mm 
of unobstructed effective projected luminous lens area in any direction 
throughout the pattern defined by the corner points specified in Table 
V-b for each such lamp; or
    (b) Luminous intensity option. When a vehicle is equipped with any 
lamp listed in Table V-c each such lamp must provide a luminous 
intensity of not less than that specified in Table V-c in any direction 
throughout the pattern defined by the corner points specified in Table 
V-c for each such lamp when measured in accordance with the photometry 
test requirements of this standard.
    S6.4.4 Legacy visibility alternative. As an alternative to S6.4.3, 
each passenger car and motorcycle, and each multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, truck, trailer, and bus that is of less than 2032 mm overall 
width, that is manufactured on or before September 1, 2011, and each 
multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, trailer, and bus that is of 2032 
mm or more overall width, that is manufactured on or before September 1, 
2014, must have each lamp located so that it meets the visibility 
requirements specified in Table V-d.
    S6.4.5 School bus signal lamp aiming. Each school bus signal lamp 
must be mounted on the vehicle with their aiming plane vertical and 
normal to the vehicle longitudinal axis. Aim tolerance must be no more 
than 5 in vertically and 10 in horizontally at 25 ft from the lamp. If 
the lamps are aimed or inspected by use of the SAE J602, Headlamp Aiming 
Device for Mechanically Aimable Sealed Beam Headlamp Units, (August 
1963) (incorporated by reference, see 571.108 S5.2 of this title), the 
graduation settings for aim must be 2[deg] D and 0[deg] sideways for 
aiming and the limits must be 3[deg] U to 7[deg] D and from 10[deg] R to 
10[deg] L for inspection.
    S6.5 Marking. A summary of the marking requirements of this standard 
and their location in the standard is contained in Table III.
    S6.5.1 DOT marking. The lens of each original equipment and 
replacement headlamp, and of each original equipment and replacement 
beam contributor, and each replacement headlamp lens for an integral 
beam or replaceable bulb headlamp, must be marked with the symbol 
``DOT'' either horizontally or vertically to indicate certification 
under 49 U.S.C. 30115.
    S6.5.1.1 The DOT marking requirements for conspicuity materials are 
specified in S8.2 of this standard.
    S6.5.1.2 Each original equipment or replacement lamp or reflective 
device specified in Table I, except for a headlamp, or an item of 
associated equipment specified in S9 may be marked with the symbol 
``DOT'' which constitutes a certification that it conforms to the 
requirements of this standard.
    S6.5.2 DRL marking. Each original equipment and replacement lamp 
used as a daytime running lamp (DRL), unless optically combined with a 
headlamp, must be permanently marked ``DRL'' on its lens in letters not 
less than 3 mm high.
    S6.5.3 Headlamp markings.
    S6.5.3. Trademark. The lens of each original and replacement 
equipment headlamp, and of each original and replacement equipment beam 
contributor must be marked with the name and/or trademark registered 
with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office of the manufacturer of such 
headlamp or beam contributor, of its importer, or any manufacturer of a 
vehicle equipped with such headlamp or beam contributor. Nothing in this 
standard authorizes the marking of any such name and/or trademark by one 
who is not the owner, unless the owner has consented to it.
    S6.5.3.1 Trademark. The lens of each original and replacement 
equipment headlamp, and of each original and replacement equipment beam 
contributor must be marked with the name and/or trademark registered 
with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office of the manufacturer of such 
headlamp or beam contributor, of its importer, or any manufacturer of a 
vehicle equipped with such headlamp or beam contributor. Nothing in this 
standard authorizes the marking of any such name and/or trademark by one 
who is not the owner, unless the owner has consented to it.
    S6.5.3.2 Voltage and trade number. Each original and replacement 
equipment headlamp, and each original and replacement equipment beam 
contributor must be marked with its voltage and with its part or trade 
number.
    S6.5.3.3 Sealed beam headlamp markings.
    S6.5.3.3.1 Each sealed beam headlamp lens must be molded with 
``sealed beam'' and the appropriate designation code as shown in Table 
II in characters no less than 6.35 mm in size.
    S6.5.3.3.2 The face of any character molded on the surface of the 
lens must not be raised more than 0.5 mm above the lens surface.

[[Page 437]]

    S6.5.3.3.3 Type 1C1, 2C1, and 2D1 headlamps must have no raised 
markings on the outside surface of the lens between the diameters of 40 
mm and 90 mm about the lens center.
    S6.5.3.3.4 Type 1A1, 2A1, 2B1, and 2E1 headlamps must have no raised 
markings on the outside surface of the lens within a diameter of 70 mm 
about the lens center.
    S6.5.3.3.5 Type LF, UF, 1G1, 2G1, and 2H1 headlamps must have no 
raised markings on the outside surface of the lens within a diameter of 
35 mm about the lens center.
    S6.5.3.3.6 A Type 1C1 replacement headlamp may be marked ``1'' 
rather than ``1C1''. A Type 2C1 replacement headlamp may be marked ``2'' 
rather than ``2C1''. A Type 2D1 replacement headlamp may be marked 
``TOP'' or ``2'' rather than ``2D1''.
    S6.5.3.4 Replaceable bulb headlamp markings.
    S6.5.3.4.1 The lens of each replaceable bulb headlamp must bear 
permanent marking in front of each replaceable light source with which 
it is equipped that states either: The HB Type, if the light source 
conforms to S11 of this standard for filament light sources, or the bulb 
marking/designation provided in compliance with Section VIII of appendix 
A of 49 CFR Part 564 (if the light source conforms to S11 of this 
standard for discharge light sources).
    S6.5.3.4.1.1 No marking need be provided if the only replaceable 
light source in the headlamp is type HB1.
    S6.5.3.5 Additional headlamp markings. Additional marking 
requirements for headlamps are found in, S10.14.4, S10.15.4, S10.17.2, 
S10.18.5, S10.18.7, and S10.18.9 of this standard.
    S6.5.3.6 Each replacement headlamp lens must also be marked with the 
manufacturer and the part or trade number of the headlamp for which it 
is intended, and with the name and/or trademark of the lens manufacturer 
or importer that is registered with the U.S. Patent and Trademark 
Office. Nothing in this standard authorizes the marking of any such name 
and/or trademark by one who is not the owner, unless the owner has 
consented to it.
    S6.6 Associated equipment.
    S6.6.1 All vehicles to which this standard applies, except trailers, 
must be equipped with a turn signal operating unit, a turn signal 
flasher, a turn signal pilot indicator, a headlamp beam switching 
device, and an upper beam headlamp indicator meeting the requirements of 
S9.
    S6.6.2 All vehicles to which this standard applies except trailers 
and motorcycles must be equipped with a vehicular hazard warning 
operating unit, a vehicular hazard warning signal flasher, and a 
vehicular hazard warning signal pilot indicator meeting the requirements 
of S9.
    S6.6.3 License plate holder. Each rear license plate holder must be 
designed and constructed to provide a substantial plane surface on which 
to mount the plate. The plane of the license plate mounting surface and 
the plane on which the vehicle stands must be perpendicular within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 15[deg].
    S6.7 Replacement equipment.
    S6.7.1 General.
    S6.7.1.1 Each replacement lamp, reflective device, or item of 
associated equipment, including a combination lamp, must:
    (a) Be designed to conform to meet all requirements specified in 
this standard for that type of lamp, reflective device, or other item of 
equipment (in the case of a combination lamp, it must meet these 
requirements for each function); and
    (b) Include all of the functions of the lamp, reflective device, or 
item of associated equipment, including a combination lamp, it is 
designed to replace or is capable of replacing (other than functions not 
required by this standard).
    S6.7.1.2 Each replacement lamp, reflective device, or item of 
associated equipment, including a combination lamp, which is designed or 
recommended for particular vehicle models must be designed so that it 
does not take the vehicle out of compliance with this standard when the 
individual device is installed on the vehicle. Except as provided in 
S6.7.1.3, the determination of whether a vehicle would be taken out of 
compliance with this standard when an individual device is installed on 
the vehicle is made without regard to whether additional devices, 
including separate lamps or reflective devices sold together with the 
device, would also be installed.
    S6.7.1.3 In the case of a lamp or other device that is used on each 
side of the vehicle in pairs, the determination (for the purposes of 
S6.7.1.2) of whether a vehicle would be taken out of compliance with 
this standard when an individual device is installed on the vehicle is 
made assuming that the other matched paired device would be installed on 
the other side of the vehicle, whether or not the matched paired devices 
are sold together. This provision does not limit the responsibilities of 
manufacturers, distributors, dealers or motor vehicle repair businesses 
under 49 U.S.C. 30122, Making safety devices and elements inoperative.
    S6.7.2 Version of this standard. The requirements of S6.7.1 must be 
met, at the option of the manufacturer, using either the current version 
of this standard or the standard in effect at the time of manufacture of 
the original equipment being replaced.
    S7 Signal lamp requirements.
    S7.1 Turn signal lamps.
    S7.1.1 Front turn signal lamps.
    S7.1.1.1 Number. See Tables I-a and I-c.
    S7.1.1.2 Color of light. See Tables I-a and I-c.

[[Page 438]]

    S7.1.1.3 Mounting location. See Tables I-a and I-c.
    S7.1.1.4 Mounting height. See Tables I-a and I-c.
    S7.1.1.5 Activation. See Tables I-a and I-c.
    S7.1.1.6 Effective projected luminous lens area. See Table IV-a.
    S7.1.1.7 Visibility. See S6.4.
    S7.1.1.8 Indicator. See S9.3.
    S7.1.1.9 Markings. See S6.5.1.2.
    S7.1.1.10 Spacing to other lamps.
    S7.1.1.10.1 Each front turn signal lamp must also be designed to 
comply with any additional photometry requirements based on its 
installed spacing to other lamps as specified by this section. Where 
more than one spacing relationship exists for a turn signal lamp the 
requirement must be the one that specifies the highest luminous 
intensity multiplier of Tables VI-a and VI-b.
    S7.1.1.10.2 Spacing measurement for non-reflector lamps. For any 
front turn signal lamp that does not employ a reflector to meet 
photometric requirements, the spacing must be measured from the light 
source of the turn signal lamp to the lighted edge of any lower beam 
headlamp, or any lamp such as an auxiliary lower beam headlamp or fog 
lamp used to supplement the lower beam headlamp.
    S7.1.1.10.3 Spacing measurement for lamps with reflectors. For any 
front turn signal lamp which employs a reflector, such as a parabolic 
reflector, to meet photometric requirements, the spacing must be 
measured from the geometric centroid of the turn signal lamp effective 
projected luminous lens area to the lighted edge of any lower beam 
headlamp, or any lamp such as an auxiliary lower beam headlamp or fog 
lamp used to supplement the lower beam headlamp.
    S7.1.1.10.4 Spacing based photometric multipliers.
    (a) where the spacing measurement as measured from the optical 
center of the turn signal lamp, to the lighted edge of a lower beam 
headlamp is less than 100 mm the photometric multiplier must be 2.5.
    (b) where the spacing measurement of S7.1.1.10.2 or S7.1.1.10.3 
between a turn signal lamp and the lighted edge of any lamp such as an 
auxiliary lower beam headlamp or fog lamp used to supplement the lower 
beam headlamp is at least 75 mm but less than 100 mm the photometric 
multiplier of Table VI must be 1.5.
    (c) where the spacing measurement of S7.1.1.10.2 or S7.1.1.10.3 
between a turn signal lamp and the lighted edge of any lamp such as an 
auxiliary lower beam headlamp or fog lamp used to supplement the lower 
beam headlamp is at least 60 mm but less than 75 mm the photometric 
multiplier must be 2.0.
    (d) where the spacing measurement of S7.1.1.10.2 or S7.1.1.10.3 
between a turn signal lamp and the lighted edge of any lamp such as an 
auxiliary lower beam headlamp or fog lamp used to supplement the lower 
beam headlamp is less than 60 mm the photometric multiplier must be 2.5.
    S7.1.1.11 Multiple compartment lamps and multiple lamps.
    S7.1.1.11.1 A multiple compartment lamp or multiple lamps may be 
used to meet the photometric requirements of a front turn signal lamp 
provided the requirements of S6.1.3.2 are met.
    S7.1.1.11.2 If a multiple compartment lamp or multiple lamps are 
used on a passenger car or on a multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, 
bus, or trailer of less than 2032 mm in overall width, and the distance 
between adjacent light sources does not exceed 560 mm for two 
compartment or lamp arrangements and does not exceed 410 mm for three 
compartments or lamp arrangements, then the combination of the 
compartments or lamps must be used to meet the photometric requirements 
for the corresponding number of lighted sections specified in Tables VI-
a or VI-b.
    S7.1.1.11.3 If the distance between adjacent light sources exceeds 
the previously stated dimensions, each compartment or lamp must comply 
with the photometric requirements for one lighted section specified in 
Tables VI-a or VI-b
    S7.1.1.11.4 Lamps installed on vehicles 2032 mm or more in overall 
width. Multiple compartment front turn signal lamps installed on 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses 2032 mm or more in 
overall width require measurement of the photometrics for the entire 
lamp and not for individual compartments.
    S7.1.1.12 Ratio to parking lamps and clearance lamps.
    S7.1.1.12.1 When a parking lamp, or a clearance lamp on a 
multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, trailer, or bus of 2032 mm or 
more in overall width, is combined with a front turn signal lamp, the 
luminous intensity of the front turn signal lamp at each identified test 
point must not be less than the luminous intensity of the parking lamp 
or clearance lamp at that same test point times the multiplier shown for 
that test point in Tables VI-a or VI-b.
    S7.1.1.12.2 If a multiple compartment or multiple lamp arrangement 
is used on a passenger car or on a multipurpose passenger vehicle, 
truck, bus, or trailer of less than 2032 mm in overall width, and the 
distance between the optical axes for both the parking lamp and turn 
signal lamp is within 560 mm for two compartment or lamp arrangements or 
410 mm for three compartment or lamp arrangements, then the ratio must 
be computed with all compartments or lamps lighted.
    S7.1.1.12.3 If a multiple compartment or multiple lamp arrangement 
is used and the distance between optical axes for one of the

[[Page 439]]

functions exceeds 560 mm for two compartment or lamp arrangements or 410 
mm for three compartments or lamp arrangements, then the ratio must be 
computed for only those compartments or lamps where the parking lamp and 
turn signal lamp are optically combined.
    S7.1.1.12.4 Where the clearance lamp is combined with the turn 
signal lamp, and the maximum luminous intensity of the clearance lamp is 
located below horizontal and within an area generated by a 1.0 degree 
radius around a test point, the ratio for the test point may be computed 
using the lowest value of the clearance lamp luminous intensity within 
the generated area.
    S7.1.1.13 Photometry.
    S7.1.1.13.1 When tested according to the procedure of S14.2.1, each 
front turn signal lamp must be designed to conform to the base 
photometry requirements plus any applicable multipliers as shown in 
Tables VI-a and VI-b for the number of lamp compartments or individual 
lamps and the type of vehicle it is installed on.
    S7.1.1.13.2 As an alternative to S7.1.1.13.1, a front turn signal 
lamp installed on a motorcycle may be designed to conform to the 
photometry requirements of Table XIII-a when tested according to the 
procedure of S14.2.1.
    S7.1.1.14 Physical tests. Each front turn signal lamp must be 
designed to conform to the performance requirements of the vibration 
test, moisture test, dust test, and corrosion test of S14.5, and the 
color test and plastic optical material test of S14.4.
    S7.1.2 Rear turn signal lamps.
    S7.1.2.1 Number. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S7.1.2.2 Color of light. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S7.1.2.3 Mounting location. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c and 
S6.1.3.2.
    S7.1.2.4 Mounting height. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S7.1.2.5 Activation. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S7.1.2.6 Effective projected luminous lens area. See Table IV-a.
    S7.1.2.7 Visibility. See S6.4.
    S7.1.2.8 Indicator. See S9.3.
    S7.1.2.9 Markings. See S6.5.1.2.
    S7.1.2.10 Spacing to other lamps. No requirement.
    S7.1.2.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps.
    S7.1.2.11.1 A multiple compartment lamp or multiple lamps may be 
used to meet the photometric requirements of a rear turn signal lamp 
provided the requirements of S6.1.3.2 are met
    S7.1.2.11.2 If a multiple compartment lamp or multiple lamps are 
used on a passenger car or on a multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, 
bus, or trailer of less than 2032 mm in overall width, and the distance 
between adjacent light sources does not exceed 560 mm for two 
compartment or lamp arrangements and does not exceed 410 mm for three 
compartment or lamp arrangements, then the combination of the 
compartments or lamps must be used to meet the photometric requirements 
for the corresponding number of lighted sections specified in Table VII.
    S7.1.2.11.3 If the distance between adjacent light sources exceeds 
the previously stated dimensions, each compartment or lamp must comply 
with the photometric requirements for one lighted section specified in 
Table VII.
    S7.1.2.11.4 Lamps installed on vehicles 2032 mm or more in overall 
width. Multiple compartment rear turn signal lamps installed on 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses 2032 mm or more in 
overall width require measurement of the photometrics for the entire 
lamp and not for individual compartments.
    S7.1.2.12 Ratio to taillamps and clearance lamps.
    S7.1.2.12.1 When a taillamp, or a clearance lamp on a multipurpose 
passenger vehicle, truck, trailer, or bus of 2032 mm or more in overall 
width, is combined with a rear turn signal lamp, the luminous intensity 
of the rear turn signal lamp at each identified test point must not be 
less than the luminous intensity of the taillamp or clearance lamp at 
that same test point times the multiplier shown for that test point in 
Table VII.
    S7.1.2.12.2 If a multiple compartment or multiple lamp arrangement 
is used on a passenger car or on a multipurpose passenger vehicle, 
truck, bus, or trailer of less than 2032 mm in overall width, and the 
distance between the optical axes for both the taillamp and turn signal 
lamp is within 560 mm for two compartment or lamp arrangement or 410 mm 
for three compartments or lamp arrangements, then the ratio must be 
computed with all compartments or lamps lighted.
    S7.1.2.12.3 If a multiple compartment or multiple lamp arrangement 
is used and the distance between optical axes for one of the functions 
exceeds 560 mm for two compartment or lamp arrangements or 410 mm for 
three compartment or lamp arrangements, then the ratio must be computed 
for only those compartments or lamps where the taillamp and turn signal 
lamp are optically combined.
    S7.1.2.12.4 Where the taillamp or clearance lamp is combined with 
the turn signal lamp, and the maximum luminous intensity of the taillamp 
or clearance lamp is located below horizontal and within an area 
generated by a 0.5 [deg] radius around a test point for a taillamp on a 
passenger car or on a multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, bus, or 
trailer of less than 2032 mm in overall width, or by a 1.0 [deg] radius 
around a test point

[[Page 440]]

for a taillamp or clearance lamp on a vehicle 2032 mm or more in overall 
width, the ratio for the test point may be computed using the lowest 
value of the taillamp or clearance lamp luminous intensity within the 
generated area.
    S7.1.2.13 Photometry.
    S7.1.2.13.1 Each rear turn signal lamp must be designed to conform 
to the photometry requirements of Table VII, when tested according to 
the procedure of S14.2.1, for the number of lamp compartments or 
individual lamps, the type of vehicle it is installed on, and the lamp 
color as specified by this section.
    S7.1.2.13.2 As an alternative to S7.1.2.13.1, a rear turn signal 
lamp installed on a motorcycle may be designed to conform to the 
photometry requirements of Table XIII-a when tested according to the 
procedure of S14.2.1.
    S7.1.2.14 Physical tests. Each rear turn signal lamp must be 
designed to conform to the performance requirements of the vibration 
test, moisture test, dust test, and corrosion test of S14.5, and the 
color test and plastic optical material test of S14.4.
    S7.1.3 Combined lamp bulb indexing.
    S7.1.3.1 Each turn signal lamp optically combined with a taillamp or 
a parking lamp, or clearance lamp where installed on a vehicle 2032 mm 
or more in overall width, where a two-filament bulb is used must have a 
bulb with an indexing base and a socket designed so that bulbs with non-
indexing bases cannot be used.
    S7.1.3.2 Removable sockets must have an indexing feature so that 
they cannot be re-inserted into lamp housings in random positions, 
unless the lamp will perform its intended function with random light 
source orientation.
    S7.2 Taillamps.
    S7.2.1 Number. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S7.2.2 Color of light. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S7.2.3 Mounting location. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c and S6.1.3.2.
    S7.2.4 Mounting height. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S7.2.5 Activation. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S7.2.6 Effective projected luminous lens area. No requirement.
    S7.2.7 Visibility. See S6.4.
    S7.2.8 Indicator. No requirement.
    S7.2.9 Markings. See S6.5.1.2.
    S7.2.10 Spacing to other lamps. No requirement.
    S7.2.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps.
    S7.2.11.1 A multiple compartment lamp or multiple lamps may be used 
to meet the photometric requirements of a taillamp provided the 
requirements of S6.1.3.2 are met.
    S7.2.11.2 If a multiple compartment lamp or multiple lamps are used 
and the distance between the optical axes does not exceed 560 mm for two 
compartment or lamp arrangements and does not exceed 410 mm for three 
compartment or lamp arrangements, then the combination of the 
compartments or lamps must be used to meet the photometric requirements 
for the corresponding number of lighted sections specified in Table 
VIII.
    S7.2.11.3 If the distance between optical axes exceeds the 
previously stated dimensions, each compartment or lamp must comply with 
the photometric requirements for one lighted section specified in Table 
VIII.
    S7.2.11.4 Taillamps installed on vehicles 2032 mm or more in overall 
width. A maximum of two taillamps and/or two compartments per side may 
be mounted closer together than 560 mm providing that each compartment 
and/or lamp meets the single lighted section photometric requirements 
specified in Table VIII. Each lamp and/or compartment utilized in this 
manner must meet the single lighted section requirements for all 
functions for which it is designed.
    S7.2.12 Ratio. See S7.1.2.12 for rear turn signal lamps and S7.3.12 
for stop lamps.
    S7.2.13 Photometry. Each taillamp must be designed to conform to the 
photometry requirements of Table VIII, when tested according to the 
procedure of S14.2.1, for the number of lamp compartments or individual 
lamps and the type of vehicle it is installed on.
    S7.2.14 Physical tests. Each taillamp must be designed to conform to 
the performance requirements of the vibration test, moisture test, dust 
test, and corrosion test of S14.5, and the color test and plastic 
optical material test of S14.4.
    S7.3 Stop lamps.
    S7.3.1 Number. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S7.3.2 Color of light. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S7.3.3 Mounting location. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c and S6.1.3.2.
    S7.3.4 Mounting height. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S7.3.5 Activation. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S7.3.6 Effective projected luminous lens area. See Table IV-a.
    S7.3.7 Visibility. See S6.4.
    S7.3.8 Indicator. No requirement.
    S7.3.9 Markings. See S6.5.1.2.
    S7.3.10 Spacing to other lamps. No requirement.
    S7.3.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps.
    S7.3.11.1 A multiple compartment lamp or multiple lamps may be used 
to meet the photometric requirements of a stop lamp provided the 
requirements of S6.1.3.2 are met.
    S7.3.11.2 If a multiple compartment lamp or multiple lamps are used 
on a passenger car or on a multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, bus, 
or trailer of less than 2032 mm in overall width, and the distance 
between adjacent light sources does not exceed 560 mm for

[[Page 441]]

two compartment or lamp arrangements and does not exceed 410 mm for 
three compartment or lamp arrangements, then the combination of the 
compartments or lamps must be used to meet the photometric requirements 
for the corresponding number of lighted sections specified in Table IX.
    S7.3.11.3 If the distance between adjacent light sources exceeds the 
previously stated dimensions, each compartment or lamp must comply with 
the photometric requirements for one lighted section specified in Table 
IX.
    S7.3.11.4 Lamps installed on vehicles 2032 mm or more in overall 
width. Multiple compartment stop lamps installed on multipurpose 
passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses 2032 mm or more in overall width 
require measurement of the photometrics for the entire lamp and not for 
individual compartments.
    S7.3.12 Ratio to taillamps.
    S7.3.12.1 When a taillamp is combined with a stop lamp, the luminous 
intensity of the stop lamp at each identified test point must not be 
less than the luminous intensity of the taillamp at that same test point 
times the multiplier shown for that test point in Table IX.
    S7.3.12.2 If a multiple compartment or multiple lamp arrangement is 
used on a passenger car or on a multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, 
bus, or trailer of less than 2032 mm in overall width, and the distance 
between the optical axes for both the taillamp and stop lamp is within 
560 mm for two compartment or lamp arrangements or 410 mm for three 
compartment or lamp arrangements, then the ratio must be computed with 
all compartments or lamps lighted.
    S7.3.12.3 If a multiple compartment or multiple lamp arrangement is 
used and the distance between optical axes for one of the functions 
exceeds 560 mm for two compartment or lamp arrangements or 410 mm for 
three compartments or lamp arrangements, then the ratio must be computed 
for only those compartments or lamps where the taillamp and stop lamp 
are optically combined.
    S7.3.12.4 Where the taillamp is combined with the stop lamp, and the 
maximum luminous intensity of the taillamp is located below horizontal 
and within an area generated by a 0.5 [deg] radius around a test point 
for a taillamp on a passenger car or on a multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, truck, bus, or trailer of less than 2032 mm in overall width, 
or by a 1.0 [deg] radius around a test point for a taillamp on a vehicle 
2032 mm or more in overall width, the ratio for the test point may be 
computed using the lowest value of the taillamp luminous intensity 
within the generated area.
    S7.3.13 Photometry.
    S7.3.13.1 Each stop lamp must be designed to conform to the 
photometry requirements of Table IX, when tested according to the 
procedure of S14.2.1, for the number of lamp compartments or individual 
lamps and the type of vehicle it is installed on.
    S7.3.13.2 A stop lamp installed on a motor driven cycle may be 
designed to conform to the photometry requirements of Table XIII-b when 
tested according to the procedure of S14.2.1.
    S7.3.14 Physical tests. Each stop lamp must be designed to conform 
to the performance requirements of the vibration test, moisture test, 
dust test, and corrosion test of S14.5, and the color test and plastic 
optical material test of S14.4.
    S7.3.15 Combined lamp bulb indexing.
    S7.3.15.1 Each stop lamp optically combined with a taillamp where a 
two-filament bulb is used must have a bulb with an indexing base and a 
socket designed so that bulbs with non-indexing bases cannot be used.
    S7.3.15.2 Removable sockets must have an indexing feature so that 
they cannot be re-inserted into lamp housings in random positions, 
unless the lamp will perform its intended function with random light 
source orientation.
    S7.4 Side marker lamps.
    S7.4.1 Number. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S7.4.2 Color of light. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S7.4.3 Mounting location. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S7.4.4 Mounting height. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S7.4.5 Activation. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S7.4.6 Effective projected luminous lens area. No requirement.
    S7.4.7 Visibility. No requirement.
    S7.4.8 Indicator. No requirement.
    S7.4.9 Markings. See S6.5.1.2.
    S7.4.10 Spacing to other lamps. No requirement.
    S7.4.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps. No requirement.
    S7.4.12 Ratio. No requirement.
    S7.4.13 Photometry.
    S7.4.13.1 Each side marker lamp must be designed to conform to the 
photometry requirements of Table X, when tested according to the 
procedure of S14.2.1, for the lamp color as specified by this section.
    S7.4.13.2 Inboard photometry. For each motor vehicle less than 30 
feet in overall length and less than 2032 mm in overall width, the 
minimum photometric intensity requirements for a side marker lamp may be 
met for all inboard test points at a distance of 15 feet from the 
vehicle and on a vertical plane that is perpendicular to the 
longitudinal axis of the vehicle and located midway between the front 
and rear side marker lamps.
    S7.4.14 Physical tests. Each side marker lamp must be designed to 
conform to the performance requirements of the vibration

[[Page 442]]

test, moisture test, dust test, and corrosion test of S14.5, and the 
color test and plastic optical material test of S14.4.
    S7.5 Clearance and identification lamps.
    S7.5.1 Number. See Tables I-a and I-b.
    S7.5.2 Color of light. See Tables I-a and I-b.
    S7.5.3 Mounting location. See Tables I-a and I-b.
    S7.5.4 Mounting height. See Tables I-a and I-b.
    S7.5.5 Activation. See Tables I-a and I-b.
    S7.5.6 Effective projected luminous lens area. No requirement.
    S7.5.7 Visibility. No requirement.
    S7.5.8 Indicator. No requirement.
    S7.5.9 Markings. See S6.5.1.2.
    S7.5.10 Spacing to other lamps. No requirement.
    S7.5.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps. No requirement.
    S7.5.12 Ratio.
    S7.5.12.1 Clearance lamps. See S7.1.1.12 for front turn signal lamps 
and S7.1.2.12 for rear turn signal lamps.
    S7.5.12.2 Identification lamps. No requirement.
    S7.5.13 Photometry. Each clearance or identification lamp must be 
designed to conform to the photometry requirements of Table XI, for the 
applicable lamp color, when tested according to the procedure of 
S14.2.1.
    S7.5.14 Physical tests. Each clearance and identification must be 
designed to conform to the performance requirements of the vibration 
test, moisture test, dust test, and corrosion test of S14.5, and the 
color test and plastic optical material test of S14.4.
    S7.6 Backup lamps.
    S7.6.1 Number. See Table I-a and S6.1.1.
    S7.6.2 Color of light.
    S7.6.2.1 See Table I-a.
    S7.6.2.2 A backup lamp may project incidental red, yellow, or white 
light through reflectors or lenses that are adjacent, close to, or a 
part of the lamp assembly.
    S7.6.3 Mounting location. See Table I-a.
    S7.6.4 Mounting height. No requirement.
    S7.6.5 Activation. See Table I-a.
    S7.6.6 Effective projected luminous lens area. No requirement.
    S7.6.7 Visibility. See Table V-a.
    S7.6.8 Indicator. No requirement.
    S7.6.9 Markings. See. S6.5.1.2.
    S7.6.10 Spacing to other lamps. No requirement.
    S7.6.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps. No requirement.
    S7.6.12 Ratio. No requirement.
    S7.6.13 Photometry. Each backup lamp must be designed to conform to 
the photometry requirements of Table XII, when tested according to the 
procedure of S14.2.1, as specified by this section.
    S7.6.14 Physical tests. Each backup lamp must be designed to conform 
to the performance requirements of the vibration test, moisture test, 
dust test, and corrosion test of S14.5, and the color test and plastic 
optical material test of S14.4.
    S7.7 License plate lamps.
    S7.7.1 Number. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c and S6.1.1.
    S7.7.2 Color of light. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S7.7.3 Mounting location. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S7.7.4 Mounting height. No requirement.
    S7.7.5 Activation. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S7.7.6 Effective projected luminous lens area. No requirement.
    S7.7.7 Visibility. No requirement.
    S7.7.8 Indicator. No requirement.
    S7.7.9 Markings. See. S6.5.1.2.
    S7.7.10 Spacing to other lamps. No requirement.
    S7.7.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps. No requirement.
    S7.7.12 Ratio. No requirement.
    S7.7.13 Photometry.
    S7.7.13.1 Each license plate lamp must be designed to conform to the 
photometry requirements of this section when tested according to the 
procedure of S14.2.2.
    S7.7.13.2 An illumination value of no less than 8 lx [0.75 fc] must 
be met at each test station target location shown in Figure 19.
    S7.7.13.3 The ratio of the average of the two highest illumination 
values divided by the average of the two lowest illumination values must 
not exceed 20:1 for vehicles other than motorcycles and motor driven 
cycles.
    S7.7.13.4 The ratio of the highest illumination value divided by the 
average of the two lowest illumination values must not exceed 15:1 for 
motorcycles and motor driven cycles.
    S7.7.14 Physical tests. Each license plate lamp must be designed to 
conform to the performance requirements of the vibration test, moisture 
test, dust test, and corrosion test of S14.5, and the color test and 
plastic optical material test of S14.4.
    S7.7.15 Installation.
    S7.7.15.1 Each license plate lamp installed on a vehicle other than 
a motorcycle or motor driven cycle must be of such size and design as to 
provide illumination on all parts of a 150 mm by 300 mm test plate.
    S7.7.15.2 Each license plate lamp installed on a motorcycle or motor 
driven cycle must be of such size and design as to provide illumination 
on all parts of a 100 mm by 175 mm test plate.
    S7.7.15.3 The light rays must reach all portions of an imaginary 
plate of the same size at least 25 mm ahead of the actual plate measured 
perpendicular to the plane of the plate.
    S7.7.15.4 Incident light from single lamp. When a single lamp as 
shown in Figure 20 is used to illuminate the license plate, the

[[Page 443]]

lamp and license plate holder must bear such relation to each other that 
at no point on the plate must the incident light make an angle of less 
than 8[deg] to the plane of the plate, this angle being measured from 
the edge of the light emitting surface of the lamp farthest from the 
surface of the plate.
    S7.7.15.5 Incident light from multiple lamps. When two or more lamps 
as shown in Figure 20 are used to illuminate the license plate, the 
minimum 8[deg] incident light angle must apply only to that portion of 
the plate which the particular lamp is designed to illuminate. The angle 
must be measured in the same manner as S7.7.15.4.
    S7.8 Parking lamps.
    S7.8.1 Number. See Table I-a.
    S7.8.2 Color of light. See Table I-a.
    S7.8.3 Mounting location. See Table I-a.
    S7.8.4 Mounting height. See Table I-a.
    S7.8.5 Activation. See Table I-a.
    S7.8.6 Effective projected luminous lens area. No requirement.
    S7.8.7 Visibility. See S6.4.
    S7.8.8 Indicator. No requirement.
    S7.8.9 Markings. See. S6.5.1.2.
    S7.8.10 Spacing to other lamps. No requirement.
    S7.8.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps. No requirement.
    S7.8.12 Ratio. See S7.1.1.12 for front turn signal lamps.
    S7.8.13 Photometry. Each parking lamp must be designed to conform to 
the photometry requirements of Table XIV, when tested according to the 
procedure of S14.2.1, as specified by this section.
    S7.8.14 Physical tests. Each parking lamp must be designed to 
conform to the performance requirements of the vibration test, moisture 
test, dust test, and corrosion test of S14.5, and the color test and 
plastic optical material test of S14.4.
    S7.9 High-mounted stop lamps.
    S7.9.1 Number. See Table I-a and S6.1.1.2.
    S7.9.2 Color of light. See Table I-a.
    S7.9.3 Mounting location. See Table I-a.
    S7.9.4 Mounting height. See Table I-a and S6.1.4.1.
    S7.9.5 Activation. See Table I-a.
    S7.9.6 Effective projected luminous lens area. See Table IV-b.
    S7.9.7 Visibility. See Table V-a.
    S7.9.8 Indicator. No requirement.
    S7.9.9 Markings. See. S6.5.1.2.
    S7.9.10 Spacing to other lamps. No requirement.
    S7.9.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps. No requirement.
    S7.9.12 Ratio. No requirement.
    S7.9.13 Photometry. Each high-mounted stop lamp must be designed to 
conform to the photometry requirements of Table XV, when tested 
according to the procedure of S14.2.1, as specified by this section.
    S7.9.14 Physical tests.
    S7.9.14.1 Each high-mounted stop lamp must be designed to conform to 
the performance requirements of the vibration test of S14.5, and the 
color test and plastic optical material test of S14.4.
    S7.9.14.2 Each high-mounted stop lamp that is not mounted inside the 
vehicle must be designed to conform to the performance requirements of 
the moisture test, dust test, and corrosion test of S14.5.
    S7.10 Daytime running lamps (DRLs).
    S7.10.1 Number. See Table I-a.
    S7.10.2 Color of light. See Table I-a.
    S7.10.3 Mounting location. See Table I-a.
    S7.10.4 Mounting height. See Table I-a. and S7.10.13(b).
    S7.10.5 Activation. See Table I-a. and S7.10.10.1(c).
    S7.10.6 Effective projected luminous lens area. No requirement.
    S7.10.7 Visibility. No requirement.
    S7.10.8 Indicator. No requirement.
    S7.10.9 Markings. See S6.5.
    S7.10.10 Spacing to other lamps.
    S7.10.10.1 Spacing to turn signal lamps. Each DRL not optically 
combined with a turn signal lamp must be located on the vehicle so that 
the distance from its lighted edge to the optical center of the nearest 
turn signal lamp is not less than 100 mm unless,
    (a) The luminous intensity of the DRL is not more than 2,600 cd at 
any location in the beam and the turn signal lamp meets 2.5 times the 
base front turn signal photometric requirements, or
    (b) The DRL is optically combined with a lower beam headlamp and the 
turn signal lamp meets 2.5 times the base front turn signal photometric 
requirements, or
    (c) The DRL is deactivated when the turn signal or hazard warning 
signal lamp is activated.
    S7.10.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps. No requirement.
    S7.10.12 Ratio. No requirement.
    S7.10.13 Photometry. Each DRL must have a luminous intensity not 
less than 500 cd at test point H-V, nor more than 3,000 cd at any 
location in the beam when tested according to the procedure of S14.2.4 
as specified by this section, unless it is:
    (a) A lower beam headlamp intended to operate as a DRL at full 
voltage, or a voltage lower than used to operate it as a lower beam 
headlamp, or
    (b) An upper beam headlamp intended to operate as a DRL, whose 
luminous intensity at test point H-V is not more than 7,000 cd, and 
whose mounting height is not higher than 864 mm.
    S7.10.14 Physical tests. Each DRL that is not combined with another 
required lamp must be designed to conform to the performance 
requirements of the color test and plastic optical material test of 
S14.4.
    S7.11 School bus signal lamps.
    S7.11.1 Number. See Table I-a.

[[Page 444]]

    S7.11.2 Color of light. See Table I-a.
    S7.11.3 Mounting location. See Table I-a.
    S7.11.4 Mounting height. See Table I-a.
    S7.11.5 Activation. See Table I-a.
    S7.11.6 Effective projected luminous lens area. See Table IV-c.
    S7.11.7 Visibility. See Table V-a.
    S7.11.8 Indicator. No requirement.
    S7.11.9 Markings. See. S6.5.1.2.
    S7.11.10 Spacing to other lamps. No requirement.
    S7.11.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps. No requirement.
    S7.11.12 Ratio. No requirement.
    S7.11.13 Photometry. Each school bus signal lamp must be designed to 
conform to the photometry requirements of Table XVII, when tested 
according to the procedure of S14.2.1, for the lamp color as specified 
by this section.
    S7.11.14 Physical tests. Each school bus signal lamp must be 
designed to conform to the performance requirements of the vibration 
test, moisture test, dust test, and corrosion test of S14.5, and the 
color test and plastic optical material test of S14.4.
    S8 Reflective device requirements.
    S8.1 Reflex reflectors.
    S8.1.1 Number. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S8.1.2 Color. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S8.1.3 Mounting location. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S8.1.4 Mounting height. See Tables I-a, I-b, and I-c.
    S8.1.5 Activation. No requirement.
    S8.1.6 Effective projected luminous lens area. No requirement.
    S8.1.7 Visibility. No requirement.
    S8.1.8 Indicator. No requirement.
    S8.1.9 Markings. See. S6.5.1.2.
    S8.1.10 Spacing to other lamps or reflective devices. No 
requirement.
    S8.1.11 Photometry. Each reflex reflector must be designed to 
conform to the photometry requirements of Table XVI-a when tested 
according to the procedure of S14.2.3 for the reflex reflector color as 
specified by this section.
    S8.1.12 Physical tests. Each reflex reflector must be designed to 
conform to the performance requirements of the vibration test, moisture 
test, dust test, and corrosion test of S14.5, and the color test and 
plastic optical material test of S14.4.
    S8.1.13 Alternative side reflex reflector material. Reflective 
material conforming to Federal Specification L-S-300, Sheeting and Tape, 
Reflective; Non-exposed Lens, Adhesive Backing, (September 7, 1965) 
(incorporated by reference, see 571.108 S5.2 of this title), may be used 
for side reflex reflectors if this material as used on the vehicle, 
meets the performance requirements of Table XVI-a.
    S8.2 Conspicuity systems. The requirement for conspicuity systems 
may be met with retroreflective sheeting, conspicuity reflex reflectors, 
or a combination of retroreflective sheeting and conspicuity reflex 
reflectors.
    S8.2.1 Retroreflective sheeting.
    S8.2.1.1 Retroreflective sheeting must consist of a smooth, flat, 
transparent exterior film with retroreflective elements embedded or 
suspended beneath the film so as to form a non-exposed retroreflective 
optical system.
    S8.2.1.2 Retroreflective sheeting material. Retroreflective sheeting 
must meet the requirements, except photometry, of ASTM D 4956-90, 
Standard for Retroreflective Sheeting for Traffic Control, (incorporated 
by reference, see 571.108 S5.2 of this title) for Type V Sheeting. 
Sheeting of Grade DOT-C2 of no less than 50 mm wide, Grade DOT-C3 of no 
less than 75 mm wide, or Grade DOT-C4 of no less than 100 mm wide may be 
used.
    S8.2.1.3 Certification marking. The letters DOT-C2, DOT-C3, or DOT-
C4, as appropriate, constituting a certification that the 
retroreflective sheeting conforms to the requirements of this standard, 
must appear at least once on the exposed surface of each white or red 
segment of retroreflective sheeting, and at least once every 300 mm on 
retroreflective sheeting that is white only. The characters must be not 
less than 3 mm high, and must be permanently stamped, etched, molded, or 
printed in indelible ink.
    S8.2.1.4 Application pattern.
    S8.2.1.4.1 Alternating red and white materials.
    S8.2.1.4.1.1 As shown in Figures 12-1 and 12-2, where alternating 
material is installed, except for a segment that is trimmed to clear 
obstructions, or lengthened to provide red sheeting near red lamps, 
alternating material must be installed with each white and red segment 
having a length of 300 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 150 mm.
    S8.2.1.4.1.2 Neither white nor red sheeting must represent more than 
two thirds the aggregate of any continuous strip marking the width of a 
trailer, or any continuous or broken strip marking its length.
    S8.2.1.5 Application location. Conspicuity systems need not be 
installed, as illustrated in Figure 12-2, on discontinuous surfaces such 
as outside ribs, stake post pickets on platform trailers, and external 
protruding beams, or to items of equipment such as door hinges and lamp 
bodies on trailers and body joints, stiffening beads, drip rails, and 
rolled surfaces on truck tractors.
    S8.2.1.6 Application spacing. As illustrated in Figure 12-2, the 
edge of any white sheeting must not be located closer than 75 mm to the 
edge of the luminous lens area of any red or amber lamp that is required 
by this standard. The edge of any red sheeting must not be located 
closer than 75 mm to the edge of the luminous lens area of any amber 
lamp that is required by this standard.
    S8.2.1.7 Photometry. Each retroreflective sheeting must be designed 
to conform to the

[[Page 445]]

photometry requirements of Table XVI-c when tested according to the 
procedure of S14.2.3 for the color and grade as specified by this 
section.
    S8.2.2 Conspicuity reflex reflectors.
    S8.2.2.1 Certification marking. The exposed surface of each 
conspicuity reflex reflector must be marked with the letters DOT-C which 
constitutes a certification that the reflector conforms to the 
conspicuity reflex reflector requirements of this standard. The 
certification must be not less than 3 mm high, and must be permanently 
stamped, etched, molded, or printed in indelible ink.
    S8.2.2.2 Application pattern.
    S8.2.2.2.1 Alternating red and white materials. Conspicuity reflex 
reflectors must be installed in a repetitive pattern of two or three 
white reflectors alternating with two or three red reflectors, with the 
center of each reflector not more than 100 mm from the center of each 
adjacent reflector.
    S8.2.2.2.2 White material. White conspicuity reflex reflectors must 
be installed with the center of each reflector not more than 100 mm from 
the center of each adjacent reflector.
    S8.2.2.3 Photometry.
    S8.2.2.3.1 Each red conspicuity reflex reflector must be designed to 
conform to the photometry requirements of Table XVI-a for a red reflex 
reflector and Table XVI-b for a red conspicuity reflex reflector when 
tested according to the procedure of S14.2.3 as specified by this 
section.
    S8.2.2.3.2 Each white conspicuity reflex reflector installed in only 
a horizontal orientation must be designed to conform to the photometry 
requirements of Table XVI-a for a white reflex reflector and Table XVI-b 
for a white horizontal conspicuity reflex reflector when tested 
according to the procedure of S14.2.3 as specified by this section.
    S8.2.2.3.3 Each white conspicuity reflex reflector installed in a 
vertical orientation must be designed to conform to the photometry 
requirements of Table XVI-a for a white reflex reflector, and Table XVI-
b for a white horizontal conspicuity reflex reflector and a white 
vertical conspicuity reflex reflector when tested according to the 
procedure of S14.2.3 as specified by this section.
    S8.2.3 Conspicuity system installation on trailers.
    S8.2.3.1 Trailer rear.
    S8.2.3.1.1 Element 1--alternating red and white materials. As shown 
in Figure 11, a strip of sheeting or conspicuity reflex reflectors, as 
horizontal as practicable, must be applied across the full width of the 
trailer, as close to the extreme edges as practicable, and as close as 
practicable to not less than 375 mm and not more than 1525 mm above the 
road surface at the strip centerline with the trailer at curb weight.
    S8.2.3.1.2 Element 2--white. (not required for container chassis or 
for platform trailers without bulkheads).
    S8.2.3.1.2.1 As shown in Figure 11, two pairs of strips of sheeting 
or conspicuity reflex reflectors, each pair consisting of strips 300 mm 
long of Grade DOT-C2, DOT-C3, or DOT-C4, must be applied horizontally 
and vertically to the right and left upper contours of the body, as 
viewed from the rear, as close to the top of the trailer and as far 
apart as practicable.
    S8.2.3.1.2.2 If the perimeter of the body, as viewed from the rear, 
is other than rectangular, the strips may be applied along the 
perimeter, as close as practicable to the uppermost and outermost areas 
of the rear of the body on the left and right sides.
    S8.2.3.1.3 Element 3--alternating red and white materials. (not 
required for trailers without underride protection devices).
    S8.2.3.1.3.1 As shown in Figure 11, a strip of Grade DOT-C2 sheeting 
no less than 38 mm wide or reflectors must be applied across the full 
width of the horizontal member of the rear underride protection device.
    S8.2.3.2 Trailer side--alternating red and white materials.
    S8.2.3.2.1 As shown in Figure 11, a strip of sheeting or conspicuity 
reflex reflectors must be applied to each side, as horizontal as 
practicable, originating and terminating as close to the front and rear 
as practicable, as close as practicable to not less than 375 mm and not 
more than 1525 mm above the road surface at the strip centerline at curb 
weight, except that at the location chosen the strip must not be 
obscured in whole or in part by other motor vehicle equipment or trailer 
cargo.
    S8.2.3.2.2 The strip need not be continuous as long as not less than 
half the length of the trailer is covered and the spaces are distributed 
as evenly as practicable.
    S8.2.3.2.3 If necessary to clear rivet heads or other similar 
obstructions, Grade DOT-C2 sheeting may be separated into two 25 mm wide 
strips of the same length and color, separated by a space of not more 
than 25 mm and used in place of the retroreflective sheeting that would 
otherwise be applied.
    S8.2.4 Conspicuity system installation on truck tractors.
    S8.2.4.1 Element 1--alternating red and white materials. As shown in 
Figure 13, two strips of sheeting or conspicuity reflex reflectors, each 
not less than 600 mm long, located as close as practicable to the edges 
of the rear fenders, mudflaps, or the mudflap support brackets, must be 
applied to mark the width of the truck tractor.
    S8.2.4.1.1 The strips must be mounted as horizontal as practicable, 
in a vertical plane facing the rear, on the rear fenders, on the mudflap 
support brackets, on plates attached to the mudflap support brackets, or 
on the mudflaps.

[[Page 446]]

    S8.2.4.1.2 Strips on mudflaps must be mounted not lower than 300 mm 
below the upper horizontal edge of the mudflap. If the vehicle is 
certified with temporary mudflap support brackets, the strips must be 
mounted on the mudflaps or on plates transferable to permanent mudflap 
support brackets.
    S8.2.4.1.3 For a truck tractor without mudflaps, the strips may be 
mounted outboard of the frame on brackets behind the rear axle or on 
brackets ahead of the rear axle and above the top of the rear tires at 
unladen vehicle height, or they may be mounted directly or indirectly to 
the back of the cab as close to the outer edges as practicable, above 
the top of the tires, and not more than 1525 mm above the road surface 
at unladen vehicle height.
    S8.2.4.1.4 If the strips are mounted on the back of the cab, no more 
than 25% of their cumulative area may be obscured by vehicle equipment 
as determined in a rear orthogonal view.
    S8.2.4.2 Element 2--white. As shown in Figure 13, two pairs of 
strips of sheeting or conspicuity reflex reflectors, each pair 
consisting of strips 300 mm long, must be applied horizontally and 
vertically as practicable to the right and left upper contours of the 
cab, as close to the top of the cab and as far apart as practicable.
    S8.2.4.2.1 No more than 25% of their cumulative area may be obscured 
by vehicle equipment as determined in a rear orthogonal view.
    S8.2.4.2.2 If one pair must be relocated to avoid obscuration by 
vehicle equipment, the other pair may be relocated in order to be 
mounted symmetrically.
    S8.2.4.2.3 If the rear window is so large as to occupy all the 
practicable space, the material may be attached to the edge of the 
window itself.
    S9 Associated equipment requirements.
    S9.1 Turn signal operating unit.
    S9.1.1 The turn signal operating unit installed on passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses less than 2032 mm in 
overall width must be self-canceling by steering wheel rotation and 
capable of cancellation by a manually operated control.
    S9.1.2 Physical tests. Each turn signal operating unit must be 
designed to conform to all applicable performance requirements of S14.9.
    S9.2 Turn signal flasher.
    S9.2.1 The means of producing the turn signal pilot indicator signal 
may be incorporated in the flasher. A means of producing an audible 
signal may be incorporated in the flasher.
    S9.2.2 Physical tests. Each turn signal flasher must be designed to 
conform to all applicable performance requirements of S14.9.
    S9.3 Turn signal pilot indicator.
    S9.3.1 Each vehicle equipped with a turn signal operating unit where 
any turn signal lamp is not visible to the driver must also have an 
illuminated pilot indicator to provide a clear and unmistakable 
indication that the turn signal system is activated.
    S9.3.2 The indicator must consist of one or more lights flashing at 
the same frequency as the turn signal lamps.
    S9.3.3 The indicator must function satisfactorily under all test 
conditions imposed on the turn signal flasher in S14.9.
    S9.3.4 Indicator size and color.
    S9.3.4.1 If the indicator is located inside the vehicle it must emit 
a green colored light and have a minimum area equivalent to a \3/16\ in 
diameter circle.
    S9.3.4.2 If the indicator is located outside of the vehicle it must 
emit a yellow light and have a minimum projected illuminated area of 0.1 
sq in.
    S9.3.5 The minimum required illuminated area of the indicator must 
be visible to any tangent on the 95th eyellipse as defined in SAE J941b, 
Motor Vehicle Driver's Eye Range, February 1969, (incorporated by 
reference, see 571.108 S5.2 of this title) with the steering wheel 
turned to a straight ahead driving position and in the design location 
for an adjustable wheel or column.
    S9.3.6 Turn signal lamp failure. Failure of one or more turn signal 
lamps such that the minimum photometric performance specified in Tables 
VI or VII is not being met must be indicated by the turn signal pilot 
indicator by a ``steady on'', ``steady off'', or by a significant change 
in the flashing rate, except when a variable-load turn signal flasher is 
used on a multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, or bus 2032 mm or more 
in overall width, on a truck that is capable of accommodating a slide in 
camper, or on any vehicle equipped to tow trailers.
    S9.4 Headlamp beam switching device. Each vehicle must have a means 
of switching between lower and upper beams designed and located so that 
it may be operated conveniently by a simple movement of the driver's 
hand or foot. The switch must have no dead point and, except as provided 
by S6.1.5.2, the lower and upper beams must not be energized 
simultaneously except momentarily for temporary signaling purposes or 
during switching between beams.
    S9.4.1 Semi-automatic headlamp beam switching device. As an 
alternative to S9.4, a vehicle may be equipped with a semi-automatic 
means of switching between lower and upper beams.
    S9.4.1.1 Operating instructions. Each semi-automatic headlamp 
switching device must include operating instructions to permit a driver 
to operate the device correctly including; how to turn the automatic 
control on

[[Page 447]]

and off, how to adjust the provided sensitivity control, and any other 
specific instructions applicable to the particular device.
    S9.4.1.2 Manual override. The device must include a means convenient 
to the driver for switching to the opposite beam from the one provided.
    S9.4.1.3 Fail safe operation. A failure of the automatic control 
portion of the device must not result in the loss of manual operation of 
both upper and lower beams.
    S9.4.1.4 Automatic dimming indicator. There must be a convenient 
means of informing the driver when the device is controlling the 
headlamps automatically. The device shall not affect the function of the 
upper beam indicator light.
    S9.4.1.5 Lens accessibility. The device lens must be accessible for 
cleaning when the device is installed on a vehicle.
    S9.4.1.6 Mounting height. The center of the device lens must be 
mounted no less than 24 in. above the road surface.
    S9.4.1.7 Physical tests. Each semi-automatic headlamp beam switching 
device must be designed to conform to all applicable performance 
requirements of S14.9.
    S9.5 Upper beam headlamp indicator. Each vehicle must have a means 
for indicating to the driver when the upper beams of the headlighting 
system are activated.
    S9.5.1 Indicator size and location. The upper beam headlamp 
indicator must have a minimum area equivalent to that of a \3/16\ in 
diameter circle, and be plainly visible to drivers of all heights under 
normal driving conditions when headlamps are required.
    S9.6 Vehicular hazard warning signal operating unit.
    S9.6.1 The unit may be an independent device or it may be combined 
with the turn signal operating unit. If combined with the turn signal 
operating unit, the actuating motion of the hazard function must differ 
from the actuating motion of the turn signal function.
    S9.6.2 Operating unit switch. The unit must operate independently of 
the ignition or equivalent switch. If the actuation of the hazard 
function requires the operation of more than one switch, a means must be 
provided for actuating all switches simultaneously by a single driver 
action.
    S9.6.3 Physical tests. Each vehicular hazard warning signal 
operating unit must be designed to conform to all applicable performance 
requirements of S14.9.
    S9.7 Vehicular hazard warning signal flasher.
    S9.7.1 The means of producing the hazard warning signal pilot 
indicator signal may be incorporated in the flasher. A means of 
producing an audible signal may be incorporated in the flasher.
    S9.7.2 Physical tests. Each vehicular hazard warning signal flasher 
must be designed to conform to all applicable performance requirements 
of S14.9.
    S9.8 Vehicular hazard warning signal pilot indicator.
    S9.8.1 In vehicles equipped with right hand and left hand turn 
signal pilot indicators, both pilot indicators and /or a separate pilot 
indicator must flash simultaneously while the vehicle hazard warning 
signal operating unit is turned on.
    S9.8.2 In vehicles equipped with a single turn signal pilot 
indicator, a separate vehicular hazard warning signal pilot indicator 
must flash and the turn signal pilot indicator may flash while the 
vehicle hazard warning signal operating unit is turned on.
    S9.8.3 The indicator must function satisfactorily under all test 
conditions imposed on the vehicular hazard warning signal flasher in 
S14.9.
    S9.8.4 Indicator size and color. If the vehicular hazard warning 
signal pilot indicator is not combined with the turn signal pilot 
indicator, it must emit a red color and have a minimum area equivalent 
to a 0.5 in diameter circle.
    S10 Headlighting system requirements.
    S10.1 Vehicle headlighting systems.
    S10.1.1 Each passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck 
and bus must be equipped with a headlighting system conforming to the 
requirements of Table II and this standard.
    S10.1.2 Each motorcycle must be equipped with a headlighting system 
conforming to S10.17 of this standard.
    S10.2 [Reserved]
    S10.3 Number. See Tables I-a and I-c.
    S10.4 Color of light. See Tables I-a and I-c.
    S10.5 Mounting location. See Tables I-a and I-c and S6.1.3.5.
    S10.6 Mounting height. See Tables I-a and I-c.
    S10.7 Activation. See Tables I-a and I-c, Table II, and S6.1.5.
    S10.8 Effective projected luminous lens area. No requirement.
    S10.9 Visibility. No requirement.
    S10.10 Indicator. See S9.5.
    S10.11 Markings. See S6.5.
    S10.12 Spacing to other lamps. See S6.1.3.5.
    S10.13 Sealed beam headlighting systems. All sealed beam 
headlighting systems must be of a type designated in Table II-a. Each 
sealed beam headlamp must be designed to conform to the specifications 
furnished with respect to it pursuant to appendix C of part 564 of this 
chapter and Table II-a of this standard. The dimensions applicable to 
the design of a specific type are those identified with an ``I'' for 
interchangeability specified on the applicable drawing(s) filed in 
Docket No. NHTSA 98-3397.
    S10.13.1 Installation. A sealed beam headlighting system must 
consist of the correct number of designated headlamp units as specified 
for the applicable system in Table

[[Page 448]]

II-a. The units must have their beams activated as specified in Table 
II-a. A system must provide in total not more than two upper beams and 
two lower beams.
    S10.13.2 Simultaneous aim. Type F sealed beam headlamps may be 
mounted on common or parallel seating and aiming planes to permit 
simultaneous aiming of both headlamps provided that there is no 
provision for adjustment between the common or parallel aiming and 
seating planes of the two lamps. When tested with any conforming Type UF 
and LF headlamps in accordance with S14.2.5, the assembly (consisting of 
the Type UF and LF headlamps, mounting rings, the aiming/seating rings, 
and aim adjustment mechanism) must be designed to conform to the 
applicable photometric requirements.
    S10.13.3 Photometry. Each sealed beam headlamp must be designed to 
conform to the photometry requirements of Table XVIII for upper beam and 
Table XIX for lower beam as specified in Table II-a for the specific 
headlamp unit and aiming method, when tested according to the procedure 
of S14.2.5.
    S10.13.4 Physical tests.
    S10.13.4.1 Each sealed beam headlamp must be designed to conform to 
the performance requirements of the corrosion test, vibration test, 
inward force test (for lamps which are externally aimed only), torque 
deflection test (for lamps which are externally aimed only), headlamp 
connector test, headlamp wattage test, and aiming adjustment tests of 
S14.6.
    S10.13.4.2 Each sealed beam headlamp except a Type G or Type H must 
be designed to conform to the performance requirements of the retaining 
ring test of S14.6.
    S10.13.4.3 Each sealed beam headlamp must be designed to conform to 
the performance requirements of the color test of S14.4. Each sealed 
beam headlamp that does not incorporate a glass lens must be designed to 
conform to the plastic optical materials test of S14.4.
    S10.14 Integral beam headlighting systems. All integral beam 
headlighting systems must be of a type designated in Table II-c.
    S10.14.1 Installation. An integral beam headlighting system must 
consist of the correct number of designated headlamp units as specified 
for the applicable system in Table II-c. The units must have their beams 
activated as specified in Table II-c. A system must provide in total not 
more than two upper beams and two lower beams.
    S10.14.2 Aimability.
    S10.14.2.1 A system that incorporates any headlamp or beam 
contributor that does not have a VHAD as an integral and indivisible 
part of the headlamp or beam contributor must be designed so that the 
applicable photometric requirements are met when any correctly aimed and 
photometrically conforming headlamp or beam contributor is removed from 
its mounting and aiming mechanism, and is replaced without reaim by any 
conforming headlamp or beam contributor of the same type.
    S10.14.2.2 A system that incorporates more than one beam contributor 
providing a lower beam, and/or more than one beam contributor providing 
an upper beam, shall be designed to conform to the on-vehicle aiming 
requirements specified in S10.18.8.
    S10.14.3 Simultaneous aim. An integral beam headlighting system 
consisting of four individual headlamps or beam contributors may have 
the headlamp units mounted in an assembly to permit simultaneous aiming 
of the beam(s) contributors, providing that with any complying 
contributor the assembly complete with all lamps meets the applicable 
photometric requirements when tested in accordance with S14.2.5.
    S10.14.4 Markings. An integral beam headlamp with a single light 
source providing the lower beam must have its lens permanently marked 
with ``L''. An integral beam headlamp with a single light source 
providing the upper beam must have its lens permanently marked with 
``U''.
    S10.14.5 Additional light sources. An integral beam headlamp may 
incorporate light sources that are used for purposes other than 
headlighting and are capable of being replaced.
    S10.14.6 Photometry. Each integral beam headlamp must be designed to 
conform to the photometry requirements of Table XVIII for upper beam and 
Table XIX for lower beam as specified in Table II-c for the specific 
headlamp unit and aiming method, when tested according to the procedure 
of S14.2.5.
    S10.14.7 Physical tests.
    S10.14.7.1 Each integral beam headlamp must be designed to conform 
to the performance requirements of the corrosion test, temperature cycle 
test, vibration test, inward force test (for lamps which are externally 
aimed only), headlamp connector test, and aiming adjustment tests of 
S14.6.
    S10.14.7.2 Each integral beam headlamp that is not designed to 
conform to the performance requirements of the sealing test of S14.6 
must be designed to conform to the performance requirements of the 
connector-corrosion test, dust test, and humidity test of S14.6.
    S10.14.7.3 Each integral beam headlamp except those with a glass 
lens must be designed to conform to the performance requirements of the 
abrasion test of S14.6.
    S10.14.7.4 Each integral beam headlamp except those with a 
nonreplaceable glass lens must be designed to conform to the performance 
requirements of the chemical resistance test of S14.6.
    S10.14.7.5 Each integral beam headlamp except those with a glass 
lens and a non-

[[Page 449]]

plastic reflector must be designed to conform to the performance 
requirements of the internal heat test of S14.6.
    S10.14.7.6 Each integral beam headlamp incorporating a replaceable 
lens must be designed to conform to the performance requirements of the 
chemical resistance of reflectors of replaceable lens headlamps test and 
the corrosion resistance of reflectors of replaceable lens headlamps 
test of S14.6.
    S10.14.7.7 Each integral beam headlamp capable of being mechanically 
aimed by externally applied headlamp aiming devices specified in SAE 
J602 OCT80, Headlamp Aiming Device for Mechanically Aimable Sealed Beam 
Headlamp Units, (incorporated by reference, see 571.108 S5.2 of this 
title) must be designed to conform to the performance requirements of 
the torque deflection test of S14.6.
    S10.14.7.8 Each integral beam headlamp must be designed to conform 
to the performance requirements of the color test of S14.4. Each 
integral beam headlamp that does not incorporate a glass lens must be 
designed to conform to the performance requirements of the plastic 
optical materials test of S14.4.
    S10.15 Replaceable bulb headlighting systems. All replaceable bulb 
headlighting systems must be of a type designated in Table II-d.
    S10.15.1 Installation. A replaceable bulb headlighting system must 
consist of either two or four headlamps as specified for the applicable 
system in Table II-d. The headlamps must have their beams activated as 
specified in Table II-d. A system must provide in total not more than 
two upper beams and two lower beams and must incorporate not more than 
two replaceable light sources in each headlamp.
    S10.15.2 Aiming restrictions. Each replaceable bulb headlamp 
designed to conform to the external aiming requirements of S10.18.7 must 
have no mechanism that allows adjustment of an individual light source, 
or if there are two light sources, independent adjustments of each 
reflector.
    S10.15.3 Replacement lens reflector units. Each lens reflector unit 
manufactured as replacement equipment must be designed to conform to 
applicable photometry requirements when any replaceable light source 
designated for such a unit is inserted in it.
    S10.15.4 Markings.
    S10.15.4.1 A replaceable bulb headlamp in a four headlamp system 
providing lower beam must have its lens permanently marked with ``L''. A 
replaceable bulb headlamp in a four headlamp system providing upper beam 
must have its lens permanently marked with ``U''.
    S10.15.4.1.1 No such markings are required if the light sources in 
the headlamp are any combination of dual filament light sources other 
than HB2.
    S10.15.5 Additional light sources. A replaceable bulb headlamp may 
incorporate replaceable light sources that are used for purposes other 
than headlighting.
    S10.15.6 Photometry. Each replaceable bulb headlamp must be designed 
to conform to the photometry requirements of Table XVIII for upper beam 
and Table XIX for lower beam as specified in Table II-d for the specific 
headlamp unit and aiming method, when tested according to the procedure 
of S14.2.5 using any replaceable light source designated for use in the 
system under test.
    S10.15.7 Physical tests.
    S10.15.7.1 Each replaceable bulb headlamp must be designed to 
conform to the performance requirements of the corrosion test, 
corrosion-connector test, dust test, temperature cycle test, humidity 
test, vibration test, inward force test (for lamps which are externally 
aimed only), headlamp connector test, and aiming adjustment tests of 
S14.6.
    S10.15.7.2 Each replaceable bulb headlamp except those with a glass 
lens must be designed to conform to the performance requirements of the 
abrasion test of S14.6.
    S10.15.7.3 Each replaceable bulb headlamp except those with a 
nonreplaceable glass lens must be designed to conform to the performance 
requirements of the chemical resistance test of S14.6.
    S10.15.7.4 Each replaceable bulb headlamp except those with a glass 
lens and a non-plastic reflector must be designed to conform to the 
performance requirements of the internal heat test of S14.6.
    S10.15.7.5 Each replaceable bulb headlamp incorporating a 
replaceable lens must be designed to conform to the performance 
requirements of the chemical resistance of reflectors of replaceable 
lens headlamps test and the corrosion resistance of reflectors of 
replaceable lens headlamps test of S14.6.
    S10.15.7.6 Each replaceable bulb headlamp capable of being 
mechanically aimed by externally applied headlamp aiming devices 
specified in SAE J602 OCT80, Headlamp Aiming Device for Mechanically 
Aimable Sealed Beam Headlamp Units, (incorporated by reference, see 
571.108 S5.2 of this title) must be designed to conform to the 
performance requirements of the torque deflection test of S14.6.
    S10.15.7.7 Each replaceable bulb headlamp must be designed to 
conform to the performance requirements of the color test of S14.4. Each 
replaceable bulb headlamp that does not incorporate a glass lens must be 
designed to conform to the performance requirements of the plastic 
optical materials test of S14.4.
    S10.16 Combination headlighting systems. All combination 
headlighting systems must be of a type designated in Table II-b.
    S10.16.1 Installation. A combination headlighting system must 
consist of the correct number of designated headlamp units as specified 
for the applicable system in Table

[[Page 450]]

II-b. The units must have their beams activated as specified in Table 
II-b. A system must provide in total not more than two upper beams and 
two lower beams. When installed on a motor vehicle, the headlamps (or 
parts thereof) that provide the lower beam must be of the same type, and 
provide a symmetrical effective projected luminous lens area when 
illuminated.
    S10.16.2 Photometry. Each combination headlamp must be designed to 
conform to the photometry requirements of Table XVIII for upper beam and 
Table XIX for lower beam as specified in Table II-b for the specific 
headlamp unit and aiming method, when tested according to the procedure 
of S14.2.5.
    S10.16.3 Physical tests.
    S10.16.3.1 Any component headlamp of a combination headlighting 
system that is a Type F sealed beam headlamp must be designed to conform 
to the performance requirements of S10.13.4.
    S10.16.3.2 Any component headlamp of a combination headlighting 
system that is an integral beam headlamp must be designed to conform to 
the performance requirements of S10.14.7.
    S10.16.3.3 Any component headlamp of a combination headlighting 
system that is a replaceable bulb headlamp must be designed to conform 
to the performance requirements of S10.15.7.
    S10.17 Motorcycle headlighting systems. A motorcycle headlighting 
system may consist of:
    (a) One half of any headlighting system of Table II which provides 
both a full upper beam and full lower beam, and is designed to conform 
to the requirements for that headlamp type. Where more than one lamp 
must be used, the lamps shall be mounted vertically, with the lower beam 
as high as practicable, or
    (b) A headlighting system designed to conform to the requirements of 
paragraphs S10.17.1 through S10.17.5.
    S10.17.1 Installation. The headlighting system installed on a 
motorcycle must consist of one of the system types specified in this 
paragraph, and must be located on the front.
    S10.17.1.1 Single headlamp.
    S10.17.1.1.1 If the system consists of a single headlamp, it must be 
mounted on the vertical centerline of the motorcycle.
    S10.17.1.1.2 If the headlamp contains more than one light source, 
each light source must be mounted on the vertical centerline with the 
upper beam no higher than the lower beam, or horizontally disposed about 
the vertical centerline and mounted at the same height.
    S10.17.1.1.3 If the light sources are horizontally disposed about 
the vertical centerline, the distance between the closest edges of the 
effective projected luminous lens area in front of the light sources 
must not be greater than 200 mm.
    S10.17.1.2 Two headlamps with both beams.
    S10.17.1.2.1 If the system consists of two headlamps, each of which 
provides both an upper and lower beam, the headlamps must be mounted 
either at the same height and symmetrically disposed about the vertical 
centerline or mounted on the vertical centerline.
    S10.17.1.2.2 If the headlamps are horizontally disposed about the 
vertical centerline, the distance between the closest edges of their 
effective projected luminous lens areas must not be greater than 200 mm.
    S10.17.1.3 Two headlamps, upper beam and lower beam.
    S10.17.1.3.1 If the system consists of two headlamps, one of which 
provides an upper beam and one of which provides the lower beam, the 
headlamps must be located on the vertical centerline with the upper beam 
no higher than the lower beam, or horizontally disposed about the 
vertical centerline and mounted at the same height.
    S10.17.1.3.2 If the headlamps are horizontally disposed about the 
vertical centerline, the distance between the closest edges of their 
effective projected luminous lens areas must not be greater than 200 mm.
    S10.17.2 Motorcycle replaceable bulb headlamp marking. Each 
replaceable bulb headlamp that is designed to conform to S10.17(b) and 
that is equipped with a light source other than a replaceable light 
source meeting the requirements of S11, must have the word 
``motorcycle'' permanently marked on the lens in characters not less 
than 3 mm in height.
    S10.17.3 Photometry. Each motorcycle headlamp that is not designed 
to conform to S10.17(a), must be designed to conform to the photometry 
requirements of Table XX when tested according to the procedure of 
S14.2.5.
    S10.17.4 Physical tests. Each motorcycle headlamp that is not 
designed to conform to S10.17(a) must be designed to conform to the 
performance requirements of the vibration test, moisture test, dust 
test, and corrosion test of S14.5, the out of focus test of S14.3, the 
color test of S14.4, and each motorcycle headlamp that does not 
incorporate a glass lens must be designed to conform to the performance 
requirements of the plastic optical materials test of S14.4.
    S10.17.5 Motorcycle headlamp modulation system. A headlamp on a 
motorcycle may be activated to modulate either the upper beam or the 
lower beam from its maximum intensity to a lesser intensity, provided 
that:
    S10.17.5.1 Modulation.
    (a) The rate of modulation must be 240 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 40 
cycles per minute.
    (b) The headlamp must be operated at maximum power for 50 to 70 
percent of each cycle.

[[Page 451]]

    (c) The lowest intensity at any test point must be not less than 17 
percent of the maximum intensity measured at the same point.
    (d) The modulator switch must be wired in the power lead of the beam 
filament being modulated and not in the ground side of the circuit.
    (e) Means must be provided so that both the lower beam and upper 
beam remain operable in the event of a modulator failure.
    (f) The system must include a sensor mounted with the axis of its 
sensing element perpendicular to a horizontal plane. Headlamp modulation 
must cease whenever the level of light emitted by a tungsten filament 
light operating at 3000[deg] Kelvin is either less than 270 lux of 
direct light for upward pointing sensors or less than 60 lux of 
reflected light for downward pointing sensors. The light is measured by 
a silicon cell type light meter that is located at the sensor and 
pointing in the same direction as the sensor. A Kodak Gray Card (Kodak 
R-27) is placed at ground level to simulate the road surface in testing 
downward pointing sensors.
    (g) When tested in accordance with the test profile shown in Figure 
9, the voltage drop across the modulator when the lamp is on at all test 
conditions for 12 volt systems and 6 volt systems must not be greater 
than 0.45 volt. The modulator must meet all the provisions of the 
standard after completion of the test profile shown in Figure 9.
    (h) Means must be provided so that both the lower and upper beam 
function at design voltage when the headlamp control switch is in either 
the lower or upper beam position when the modulator is off.
    S10.17.5.2 Replacement modulators. Each modulator not intended as 
original equipment, or its container, must be labeled with the maximum 
wattage, and the minimum wattage appropriate for its use.
    S10.17.5.2.1 Replacement performance. Each modulator, not intended 
as original equipment, must comply with S10.17.5.1 (a) through (g) when 
connected to a headlamp of the maximum rated power and a headlamp of the 
minimum rated power, and must provide means so that the modulated beam 
functions at design voltage when the modulator is off.
    S10.17.5.2.2 Replacement instructions. Instructions, with a diagram, 
must be provided for mounting the light sensor including location on the 
motorcycle, distance above the road surface, and orientation with 
respect to the light.
    S10.18 Headlamp aimability performance requirements (except for 
motorcycles)
    S10.18.1 Headlamp mounting and aiming. Except as provided in this 
paragraph, each headlamp must be installed on a motor vehicle with a 
mounting and aiming mechanism that permits aim inspection and adjustment 
of both vertical and horizontal aim, and is accessible for those 
purposes without removal of any vehicle parts, except for protective 
covers removable without the use of tools.
    S10.18.1.1 The axis of the light beams must be adjustable to the 
left, right, up, or down from the designed setting, the amount of 
adjustability to be determined by practical operating conditions and the 
type of equipment.
    S10.18.1.2 The adjustments must be conveniently made by one person 
with tools ordinarily available. When the headlamps are secured, the aim 
will not be disturbed under ordinary conditions of service.
    S10.18.2 Headlamp aiming systems. When a headlamp system is 
installed on a motor vehicle, it must be aimable with at least one of 
the following: An externally applied aiming device, as specified in 
S10.18.7; an on-vehicle headlamp aiming device installed by the vehicle 
or lamp manufacturer, as specified in S10.18.8; or by visual/optical 
means, as specified in S10.18.9.
    S10.18.3 Aim adjustment interaction. When installed on the vehicle, 
adjustment of one aim axis through its full on-vehicle range must not 
cause the aim of the other axis to deviate more than <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.76[deg]. If the performance specified is not 
achievable, the requirements of S10.18.3.1 apply, except that if the 
aiming mechanism is not a VHAD, the requirements specific to VHADs are 
not applicable, and the instruction must be specific to the aiming 
mechanism installed.
    S10.18.3.1 Should the mechanism not meet the requirements of 
S10.18.3, a cautionary label must be placed adjacent to the mechanism 
stating the caution and including either the reason for the caution or 
the corrective action necessary. Each such label must also refer the 
reader to the vehicle operator's manual for complete instructions. Each 
such vehicle must be equipped with an operator's manual containing the 
complete instructions appropriate for the mechanism installed.
    S10.18.4 Horizontal adjustment-visually aimed headlamp. A visually/
optically aimable headlamp that has a lower beam must not have a 
horizontal adjustment mechanism unless such mechanism meets the 
requirements of this standard for on vehicle aiming as specified in 
S10.18.8.
    S10.18.5 Optical axis marking.
    S10.18.5.1 Optical axis marking-vehicle. Each motor vehicle must be 
equipped with headlamps or beam contributors which have a mark or 
markings that are visible from the front of the headlamp when installed 
on the vehicle to identify the optical axis of the headlamp to assure 
proper horizontal and vertical alignment of the aiming screen or optical 
aiming equipment. The manufacturer is free to choose the design of the 
mark or markings. The mark or markings may be on the interior or 
exterior of the lens or indicated by a mark or central structure on the 
interior or exterior of the headlamp.

[[Page 452]]

    S10.18.5.2 Optical axis marking-lamp. Each headlamp or beam 
contributor that is not visually/optically aimable in accordance with 
S10.18.9 of this standard must be equipped with fiducial marks, aiming 
pads, or similar references of sufficient detail and accuracy, for 
determination of an appropriate vehicle plane to be used with the 
photometric procedures of S14.2.5 for correct alignment with the 
photometer axis when being tested for photometric compliance, and to 
serve for the aiming reference when the headlamp or beam contributor is 
installed on a motor vehicle. The fiducial marks, aiming pads, or 
similar references are protrusions, bubble vials, holes, indentations, 
ridges, scribed lines, or other readily identifiable marks established 
and described by the vehicle or headlamp manufacturer.
    S10.18.5.3 Optical axis marking-visual/optical aim headlamp. There 
must be a mark or markings identifying the optical axis of the headlamp 
visible from the front of the headlamp when installed on the vehicle, to 
assure proper horizontal and vertical alignment of the aiming screen or 
optical aiming equipment with the headlamp being aimed. The manufacturer 
is free to choose the design of the mark or markings. The mark or 
markings may be on the interior or exterior of the lens or indicated by 
a mark or central structure on the interior or exterior of the headlamp.
    S10.18.6 Moveable reflectors. Each headlamp aimed by moving the 
reflector relative to the lens and headlamp housing, or vice versa, must 
conform with the photometric requirements applicable to it when tested 
according to the procedure of S14.2.5 with the lens at any position 
relative to the reflector within the full range of vertical pitch on the 
vehicle on which the headlamp system is installed and a horizontal range 
of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2.5[deg]. Additionally it must comply with the 
aiming adjustment requirements of S14.6.
    S10.18.7 External aiming. Each headlighting system that is capable 
of being mechanically aimed by externally applied headlamp aiming 
devices must be mechanically aimable using the equipment specified in 
SAE J602 Headlamp Aiming Device for Mechanically Aimable Sealed Beam 
Headlamp Units, October 1980, (incorporated by reference, see 571.108 
S5.2 of this title) without the removal of any ornamental trim rings, 
covers, wipers or other vehicle parts.
    S10.18.7.1 Headlamp aiming device locating plates. Each headlighting 
system which is designed to use the Headlamp Aiming Device Locating 
Plates with adjustable legs for the 100x165 mm unit and the 142x200 mm 
unit, and which has adjustable length legs, must meet the following 
requirements:
    S10.18.7.1.1 The lens must have three aiming pads which meet the 
requirements of Figure 4, Dimensional Specifications for Location of 
Aiming Pads on Replaceable Bulb Headlamp Units. The aiming pads need not 
be centered at the geometric center of the lens, or on the optical axis. 
Except as provided in S10.18.7.1.2, a whole number, which represents the 
distance in tenths of an inch (i.e. 0.3 inch = 3) from the aiming 
reference plane to the respective aiming pads which are not in contact 
with that plane, must be inscribed adjacent to each respective aiming 
pad on the lens. The height of these numbers must be not less than .157 
inch (4 mm). If there is interference between the plane and the area of 
the lens between the aiming pads, the whole number represents the 
distance to a secondary plane. The secondary plane must be located 
parallel to the aiming reference plane and as close to the lens as 
possible without causing interference.
    S10.18.7.1.2 If the most forward aiming pad is the lower inboard 
aiming pad, then the dimensions may be placed anywhere on the lens. The 
dimension for the outboard aiming pad (Dimension F in Figure 4) must be 
followed by the letter ``H'' and the dimension for the center aiming pad 
must be followed by the letter ``V.'' The dimensions must be expressed 
in tenths of an inch.
    S10.18.7.2 Nonadjustable headlamp aiming device locating plates. 
Each headlamp may be designed to use the nonadjustable Headlamp Aiming 
Device Locating Plate for the 100x165 mm unit, the 142x200 mm unit, the 
146 mm diameter unit, or the 178 mm diameter unit of SAE J602 OCT80, 
Headlamp Aiming Device for Mechanically Aimable Sealed Beam Headlamp 
Units, (incorporated by reference, see 571.108 S5.2 of this title), or 
the 92x150 mm Type F unit, and incorporate lens-mounted aiming pads as 
specified for those units pursuant to appendix C of part 564 of this 
chapter. If so designed, no additional lens marking is necessary to 
designate the type of plate or dimensions.
    S10.18.8 On-vehicle aiming. Each headlighting system that is capable 
of being aimed by equipment installed on the vehicle must include a 
Vehicle Headlamp Aiming Device (VHAD) that conforms to the following 
requirements:
    S10.18.8.1 Aim. The VHAD must provide for headlamp aim inspection 
and adjustment in both the vertical and horizontal axes.
    S10.18.8.1.1 Vertical aim. The VHAD must include the necessary 
references and scales relative to the horizontal plane to assure correct 
vertical aim for photometry and aiming purposes. An off vehicle 
measurement of the angle of the plane of the ground is permitted. In 
addition, an equal number of graduations from the ``0'' position 
representing angular changes in the axis in the upward and downward 
directions must be provided.
    S10.18.8.1.1.1 Each graduation must represent a change in the 
vertical position of the mechanical axis not larger than 0.19[deg] (1 in 
at 25 ft) to provide for variations in aim at

[[Page 453]]

least 1.2[deg] above and below the horizontal, and have an accuracy 
relative to the zero mark of less than 0.1[deg].
    S10.18.8.1.1.2 The VHAD must be marked to indicate headlamp aim 
movement in the upward and downward directions.
    S10.18.8.1.1.3 Each graduation must indicate a linear movement of 
the scale indicator of not less than 0.05 in (1.27 mm) if a direct 
reading analog indicator is used. If a remote reading indicator is 
provided, it must represent the actual aim movement in a clear, 
understandable format.
    S10.18.8.1.1.4 The vertical indicator must perform through a minimum 
range of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 1.2[deg].
    S10.18.8.1.1.5 Means must be provided in the VHAD for compensating 
for deviations in floor slope less than 1.2[deg] from the horizontal 
that would affect the correct positioning of the headlamp for vertical 
aim.
    S10.18.8.1.1.6 The graduations must be legible under an illumination 
level not greater than 30 foot candles, measured at the top of the 
graduation, by an observer having 20/20 vision (Snellen), and must 
permit aim adjustment to within 0.19[deg] (1 in at 25 ft).
    S10.18.8.1.2 Horizontal aim. The VHAD must include references and 
scales relative to the longitudinal axis of the vehicle necessary to 
assure correct horizontal aim for photometry and aiming purposes. An 
``0'' mark must be used to indicate alignment of the headlamps relative 
to the longitudinal axis of the vehicle. In addition, an equal number of 
graduations from the ``0'' position representing equal angular changes 
in the axis relative to the vehicle axis must be provided.
    S10.18.8.1.2.1 Each graduation must represent a change in the 
horizontal position of the mechanical axis not greater than 0.38[deg] (2 
in at 25 ft) to provide for variations in aim at least 0.76[deg] (4 in 
at 25 ft) to the left and right of the longitudinal axis of the vehicle, 
and must have an accuracy relative to the zero mark of less than 
0.1[deg].
    S10.18.8.1.2.2 The VHAD must be marked to indicate headlamp aim 
movement in the left and right directions.
    S10.18.8.1.2.3 The graduations must be legible under an illumination 
level not greater than 30 foot candles, measured at the top of the 
graduation, by an observer having 20/20 vision (Snellen), and must 
permit aim adjustment to within 0.38[deg] (2 in at 25 ft).
    S10.18.8.1.2.4 The horizontal indicator must perform through a 
minimum range of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.76[deg] (4 in at 25 ft); 
however, the indicator itself must be capable of recalibration over a 
movement of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2.5[deg] relative to the longitudinal 
axis of the vehicle to accommodate any adjustment necessary for 
recalibrating the indicator after vehicle repair from accident damage.
    S10.18.8.2 Aiming instructions.
    S10.18.8.2.1 The instructions for properly aiming the headlighting 
system using the VHAD must be provided on a label permanently affixed to 
the vehicle adjacent to the VHAD, or in the vehicle operator's manual. 
The instructions must advise that the headlighting system is properly 
aimed if the appropriate vertical plane (as defined by the vehicle 
manufacturer) is perpendicular to both the longitudinal axis of the 
vehicle, and a horizontal plane when the vehicle is on a horizontal 
surface, and the VHAD is set at ``0'' vertical and ``0'' horizontal.
    S10.18.8.2.2 Should a remote indicator or a remote indicator and 
adjuster be provided, the instructions must be placed in the operator's 
manual, and may also be placed on a label adjacent to the VHAD.
    S10.18.8.3 Permanent calibration. Each headlamp equipped with a VHAD 
must be manufactured with its calibration permanently fixed by its 
manufacturer. Calibration in this case means the process of accurately 
aligning the geometry of the VHAD devices with the beam pattern for the 
purposes of compliance with the standard.
    S10.18.8.4 Replacement units. When tested according to the procedure 
of S14.2.5 with any replacement headlamp unit(s) or light sources 
intended for use in the system under test, the VHAD and headlighting 
system must be designed to conform to the photometric performance 
requirements applicable for the system under test.
    S10.18.8.5 Physical tests. Each VHAD must be designed to conform 
with the performance requirements of S14.8.
    S10.18.9 Visual/optical aiming. Each visually/optically aimable 
headlamp must be designed to conform to the following requirements:
    S10.18.9.1 Vertical aim, lower beam. Each lower beam headlamp must 
have a cutoff in the beam pattern. It may be either on the left side or 
the right side of the optical axis, but once chosen for a particular 
headlamp system's design, the side chosen for the cutoff must not be 
changed for any headlamps intended to be used as replacements for those 
system's headlamps.
    S10.18.9.1.1 Vertical position of the cutoff. The headlamp must be 
aimed vertically so that the cutoff is on the left side, at 0.4[deg] 
down from the H-H line, or on the right side, at the H-H line.
    S10.18.9.1.2 Vertical gradient. The gradient of the cutoff measured 
at either 2.5[deg] L or 2.0[deg] R must be not less than 0.13 based on 
the procedure of S10.18.9.1.5.
    S10.18.9.1.3 Horizontal position of the cutoff. The width must be 
not less than 2[deg], with not less than 2[deg] of its actual width 
centered at either 2.5[deg] L, or 2.0[deg] R.
    S10.18.9.1.4 Maximum inclination of the cutoff. The vertical 
location of the highest gradient at the ends of the minimum width must 
be within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.2[deg] of the vertical location of 
the maximum gradient measured at the appropriate vertical line (at 
either 2.5[deg] L for

[[Page 454]]

a left side cutoff, or 2.0[deg] R for a right side cutoff).
    S10.18.9.1.5 Measuring the cutoff parameter.
    S10.18.9.1.5.1 The headlamp is mounted on a headlamp test fixture 
which simulates its actual design location on any vehicle for which the 
headlamp is intended. The fixture, with the headlamp installed, is 
attached to the goniometer table in such a way that the fixture 
alignment axes are coincident with the goniometer axes. The headlamp is 
energized at the specified test voltage. The cutoff parameter must be 
measured at a distance of 10 m from a photosensor with a 10 mm diameter.
    S10.18.9.1.5.2 The headlamp beam pattern is aimed with the cutoff at 
the H-H axis. There is no adjustment, shimming, or modification of the 
horizontal axis of the headlamp or test fixture, unless the headlamp is 
equipped with a VHAD. In this case the VHAD is adjusted to zero.
    S10.18.9.1.5.3 A vertical scan of the beam pattern is conducted for 
a headlamp with a left side gradient by aligning the goniometer on a 
vertical line at 2.5[deg] L and scanning from 1.5[deg] U to 1.5[deg] D. 
For a headlamp with a right side gradient, a vertical scan of the beam 
pattern is conducted by aligning the goniometer on a vertical line at 
2.0[deg] R and scanning from 1.5[deg] U to 1.5[deg] D.
    S10.18.9.1.5.4 Determine the maximum gradient within the range of 
the scan by using the formula: G = log E(a)-logE(a + 0.1), where ``G'' 
is the gradient, ``E'' is illumination and ``a'' is vertical angular 
position. The maximum value of the gradient ``G'' determines the 
vertical angular location of the cutoff. Perform vertical scans at 
1.0[deg] L and R of the measurement point of the maximum gradient to 
determine the inclination.
    S10.18.9.2 Horizontal aim, lower beam. There is no adjustment of 
horizontal aim unless the headlamp is equipped with a horizontal VHAD. 
If the headlamp has a VHAD, it is set to zero.
    S10.18.9.3 Vertical aim, upper beam.
    S10.18.9.3.1 If the upper beam is combined in a headlamp with a 
lower beam, the vertical aim of the upper beam must not be changed from 
the aim set using the procedures of S10.18.9.1 and S10.18.9.2 used for 
the lower beam.
    S10.18.9.3.2 If the upper beam is not combined in a headlamp with a 
lower beam, the vertical aim of the upper beam is adjusted so that the 
maximum beam intensity is located on the H-H axis.
    S10.18.9.4 Horizontal aim, upper beam.
    S10.18.9.4.1 If the upper beam is combined in a headlamp with a 
lower beam, the horizontal aim of the upper beam must not be changed 
from the aim set using the procedures of S10.18.9.1 and S10.18.9.2 used 
for the lower beam.
    S10.18.9.4.2 If the upper beam is not combined in a headlamp with 
the lower beam and has fixed horizontal aim or has a horizontal VHAD, 
then the headlamp is mounted on a headlamp test fixture which simulates 
its actual design location on any vehicle for which the headlamp is 
intended. The fixture, with the headlamp installed, is attached to the 
goniometer table in such a way that the fixture alignment axes are 
coincident with the goniometer axes. The headlamp must be energized at 
12.8 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.20 mV. There is no adjustment, shimming, 
or modification of the horizontal axis of the headlamp or test fixture, 
unless the headlamp is equipped with a VHAD. In this case the VHAD is 
adjusted to zero.
    S10.18.9.4.3 If the upper beam is not combined in a headlamp with a 
lower beam, and it does not have a VHAD, the horizontal aim of the upper 
beam is adjusted so that the maximum beam intensity is located on the V-
V axis.
    S10.18.9.5 Photometry. When tested according to the procedure of 
S14.2.5, a visually/optically aimable headlamp must be designed to 
conform to the lower beam requirements of columns; LB1V or LB2V of Table 
XIX-a, or LB3V of Table XIX-b, or LB4V of Table XIX-c.
    S10.18.9.6 Visual/optical aiming identification marking. Each letter 
used in marking according to this paragraph must be not less than 3 mm 
high.
    S10.18.9.6.1 The lens of a lower beam headlamp must be marked 
``VOL'' if the headlamp is intended to be visually/optically aimed using 
the left side of the lower beam pattern. The lens of a lower beam 
headlamp must be marked ``VOR'' if the headlamp is intended to be 
visually/optically aimed using the right side of the lower beam pattern. 
The lens of a headlamp that is solely an upper beam headlamp and 
intended to be visually/optically aimed using the upper beam must be 
marked ``VO''.
    S10.18.9.6.2 The lens of each sealed beam or integral beam headlamp 
must be marked ``VOR'' if the headlamp is of a type that was 
manufactured before May 1, 1997, and if such headlamp type has been 
redesigned since then to be visually/optically aimable.
    S11 Replaceable light source requirements. Each replaceable light 
source must be designed to conform to the dimensions and electrical 
specifications furnished with respect to it pursuant to part 564 of this 
chapter, on file in Docket No. NHTSA 98-3397, and must conform to the 
following requirements:
    S11.1 Markings. If other than an HB Type, the light source must be 
marked with the bulb marking designation specified for it in compliance 
with appendix A or appendix B of part 564 of this chapter. The base of 
each HB Type must be marked with its HB Type designation. Each 
replaceable light source must also be marked with the symbol DOT and 
with a name or trademark in accordance with S6.5.

[[Page 455]]

    S11.2 Ballast markings. If a ballast is required for operation, each 
ballast must bear the following permanent markings:
    (a) Name or logo of ballast manufacturer;
    (b) Ballast part number or unique identification;
    (c) Part number or other unique identification of the light source 
for which the ballast is designed;
    (d) Rated laboratory life of the light source/ballast combination, 
if the information for the light source has been filed in appendix B of 
part 564 of this chapter;
    (e) A warning that ballast output voltage presents the potential for 
severe electrical shock that could lead to permanent injury or death;
    (f) Ballast output power in watts and output voltage in rms volts AC 
or DC; and
    (g) The symbol `DOT''.
    S11.3 Gas discharge laboratory life. For light sources that use 
excited gas mixtures as a filament or discharge arc, the ``rated 
laboratory life'' is determined in accordance with sections 4.3 and 4.9 
of SAE Recommended Practice J2009 FEB93, Forward Discharge Lighting 
Systems (incorporated by reference, see 571.108 S5.2 of this title).
    S11.4 Physical tests.
    S11.4.1 Each replaceable light source must be designed to conform 
with the performance requirements of the deflection test and pressure 
test requirements of S14.7.
    S11.4.2 Replaceable light sources must be designed to conform with 
the requirements of section VII of appendix A of part 564 of this 
chapter, or section IV of appendix B of part 564 of this chapter, for 
maximum power and luminous flux when test by the procedure of S14.7.3.
    S12 Headlamp concealment device requirements.
    S12.1 While the headlamp is illuminated, its fully opened headlamp 
concealment device must remain fully opened should any loss of power to 
or within the headlamp concealment device occur.
    S12.2 Whenever any malfunction occurs in a component that controls 
or conducts power for the actuation of the concealment device, each 
closed headlamp concealment device must be capable of being fully opened 
by a means not requiring the use of any tools. Thereafter, the headlamp 
concealment device must remain fully opened until intentionally closed.
    S12.3 Except for malfunctions covered by S12.2, each headlamp 
concealment device must be capable of being fully opened and the 
headlamps illuminated by actuation of a single switch, lever, or similar 
mechanism, including a mechanism that is automatically actuated by a 
change in ambient light conditions.
    S12.4 Each headlamp concealment device must be installed so that the 
headlamp may be mounted, aimed, and adjusted without removing any 
component of the device, other than components of the headlamp assembly.
    S12.5 Except for cases of malfunction covered by S12.2, each 
headlamp concealment device must, within an ambient temperature range of 
-20 [deg]F to +120 [deg]F, be capable of being fully opened in not more 
than 3 seconds after the actuation of a driver-operated control.
    S12.6 As an alternative to complying with the requirements of S12.1 
through S12.5, a vehicle with headlamps incorporating VHAD or visual/
optical aiming in accordance with this standard may meet the 
requirements for Concealable lamps in paragraph 5.14 of the following 
version of the Economic Commission for Europe Regulation 48 ``Uniform 
Provisions Concerning the Approval of Vehicles With Regard to the 
Installation of Lighting and Light-Signaling Devices'': E/ECE/324-E/ECE/ 
TRANS/505, Rev.1/Add.47/Rev.1/Corr.2, 26 February 1996 (page 17) 
(incorporated by reference, see 571.108 S5.2 of this title), in the 
English language version.
    S12.7 Certification election. Manufacturers of vehicles with 
headlamps incorporating VHAD or visual/optical aiming must elect to 
certify to S12.1 through S12.5 or to S12.6 prior to, or at the time of 
certification of the vehicle, pursuant to 49 CFR part 567. The selection 
is irrevocable.
    S13 Replaceable headlamp lens requirements.
    S13.1 A replacement lens for a replaceable bulb headlamp or integral 
beam headlamp that is not required to have a bonded lens must be 
provided with a replacement seal in a package that includes instructions 
for the removal and replacement of the lens, the cleaning of the 
reflector, and the sealing of the replacement lens to the reflector 
assembly.
    S13.2 Each replacement headlamp lens with seal, when installed 
according to the lens manufacturer's instructions on an integral beam or 
replaceable bulb headlamp, must not cause the headlamp to fail to comply 
with any of the requirements of this standard.
    S14 Physical and photometry test procedures and performance 
requirements.
    S14.1 General test procedures and performance requirements.
    S14.1.1 Each lamp, reflective device, item of conspicuity treatment, 
and item of associated equipment required or permitted by this standard 
must be designed to conform to all applicable physical test performance 
requirements specified for it.
    S14.1.2 Plastic optical materials. All plastic materials used for 
optical parts such as lenses and reflectors on lamps or reflective 
devices required or allowed by this standard must conform to the 
material test requirements of S14.4.2.
    S14.1.3 All coatings used on optical materials must have added to 
their formulations

[[Page 456]]

an optical brightener, whose presence is detectable by ultraviolet 
light, to aid in testing for their presence. Other equivalent industry 
accepted methods may be used as an alternative.
    S14.1.4 Samples.
    S14.1.4.1 Samples submitted for laboratory test must be new, unused, 
manufactured from production tooling and assembled by production 
processes, and representative of the devices as regularly manufactured 
and marketed.
    S14.1.4.2 Each test sample must include not only the device but also 
accessory equipment necessary to operate in its intended manner. Where 
necessary a mounting bracket shall be provided so that the device may be 
rigidly bolted in its operating position on the various test equipment.
    S14.1.4.3 Dust and photometric tests may be made on a second set of 
mounted samples, if desired, to expedite completion of the tests.
    S14.1.5 Laboratory facilities. The laboratory must be equipped to 
test the sample in accordance with the requirements of the specific 
device.
    S14.2 Photometric test procedures. Each lamp and reflective device 
required or permitted by this standard must be designed to conform to 
the applicable photometric requirements.
    S14.2.1 Photometry measurements for all lamps except license plate 
lamps, headlamps, and DRLs.
    S14.2.1.1 Mounting. Photometry measurements are made with the sample 
lamp mounted in its normal operating position.
    S14.2.1.2 School bus signal lamp aiming. A school bus signal lamp 
must be aimed with its aiming plane normal to the photometer axis and 
may be reaimed for photometry by <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> \1/2\[deg] 
vertically and <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 1[deg] horizontally.
    S14.2.1.3 Measurement distance. Photometric measurements are made at 
a distance between the light source and the point of measurement of at 
least 1.2 m for side marker lamps, clearance lamps, identification 
lamps, and parking lamps, and at least 3 m for turn signal lamps, stop 
lamps, taillamps, backup lamps, and school bus signal lamps.
    S14.2.1.4 Location of test points. Test point location must comply 
with the following nomenclature:
    (a) The line formed by the intersection of a vertical plane through 
the light source of the lamp and normal to the test screen is designated 
``V''.
    (b) The line formed by the intersection of a horizontal plane 
through the light source and normal to the test screen is designated 
``H''.
    (c) The point of intersection of these two lines is designated ``H-
V''.
    (d) Other test points on the test screen are measured in terms of 
angles from the H and V lines.
    (e) Angles to the right (R) and to the left (L) are regarded as 
being to the right and left of the V line when the observer stands 
behind the lamp and looks in the direction of its light beam when it is 
properly aimed for photometry. Similarly, the upward angles designated 
as U and the downward angles designated as D, refer to light directed at 
angles above and below the H line, respectively.
    S14.2.1.5 Multiple compartment and multiple lamp photometry of turn 
signal lamps, stop lamps, and taillamps.
    S14.2.1.5.1 When compartments of lamps or arrangements of multiple 
lamps are photometered together, the H-V axis intersects the midpoint 
between the optical axes.
    S14.2.1.5.2 Luminous intensity measurements of multiple compartment 
lamps or multiple lamp arrangements are made either by:
    (a) Measuring all compartments together, provided that a line from 
the optical axis of each compartment or lamp to the center of the 
photometer sensing device does not make an angle more than 0.6[deg] with 
the H-V axis, or
    (b) Measuring each compartment or lamp separately by aligning its 
optical axis with the photometer and adding the value at each test 
point.
    S14.2.1.5.3 Multiple compartment turn signal lamps or stop lamps or 
multiple lamp arrangements of these lamps installed on multipurpose 
passenger vehicles, trucks, trailers, or buses 2032 mm or more in 
overall width must use the method of S14.2.1.5.2(b) only.
    S14.2.1.6 Bulbs. Except for a lamp having a sealed-in bulb, a lamp 
must meet the applicable requirements of this standard when tested with 
a bulb whose filament is positioned within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> .010 
in of the nominal design position specified in SAE J573d, Lamp Bulbs and 
Sealed Units, December 1968, (incorporated by reference, see 571.108 
S5.2 of this title) or specified by the bulb manufacturer and operated 
at the bulb's rated mean spherical candela.
    S14.2.1.6.1 Each lamp designed to use a type of bulb that has not 
been assigned a mean spherical candela rating by its manufacturer and is 
not listed in SAE J573d, Lamp Bulbs and Sealed Units, December 1968 
(incorporated by reference, see 571.108 S5.2 of this title), must meet 
the applicable requirements of this standard when used with any bulb of 
the type specified by the lamp manufacturer, operated at the bulb's 
design voltage. A lamp that contains a sealed-in bulb must meet these 
requirements with the bulb operated at the bulb's design voltage.
    S14.2.1.6.2 A bulb that is not listed in SAE J573d, Lamp Bulbs and 
Sealed Units, December 1968, (incorporated by reference, see 571.108 
S5.2 of this title) is not required to use a socket that conforms to the 
requirements of

[[Page 457]]

SAE J567b, Bulb Sockets, April 1964 (incorporated by reference, see 
571.108 S5.2 of this title).
    S14.2.2 License plate lamp photometry. Photometry compliance of 
license plate lamps is determined by measurement of the illumination 
falling upon test stations located on a test plate.
    S14.2.2.1 Illumination surface. All illumination measurements are 
made on a rectangular test plate of clean, white blotting paper mounted 
on the license plate holder in the position normally taken by the 
license plate. The face of the test plate must be 1.5 mm from the face 
of the license plate holder.
    S14.2.2.2 Test stations. Test stations must be located on the face 
of the test plate as shown in Figure 19 according to the type of vehicle 
on which the license plate lamps are installed.
    S14.2.2.3 Bulb requirements of S14.2.1.6 apply to license plate lamp 
photometry.
    S14.2.3 Reflex reflector and retroreflective sheeting photometry.
    S14.2.3.1 Mounting. Each reflex reflector is mounted for photometry 
with the center of the reflex area at the center of goniometer rotation 
and at the same horizontal level as the source of illumination.
    S14.2.3.2 Illumination source. The source of illumination is a lamp 
with a 50 mm effective diameter and with a filament operating at 2856 
[deg]K.
    S14.2.3.3 Measurement distance. The test distance is 30.5 m [100ft].
    S14.2.3.4 Test setup The observation point is located directly above 
the source of illumination. The H-V axis of reflex reflectors is taken 
as parallel to the longitudinal axis of the vehicle for rear reflectors 
and perpendicular to a vertical plane passing through the longitudinal 
axis of the vehicle for side reflectors.
    S14.2.3.5 Photodetector. The photodetector has an opening of not 
more than 13 mm vertically and 25 mm horizontally.
    S14.2.3.6 Photometry surface. Reflex reflectors may have any linear 
or area dimensions but must have no more than 7740 sq mm projected area 
contained within a 254 mm diameter circle exposed for photometry.
    S14.2.3.7 Procedure. Photometric measurements of reflex reflectors 
and retroreflective sheeting must be made at various observation and 
entrance angles as shown in Table XVI.
    S14.2.3.7.1 The observation angle is the angle formed by a line from 
the observation point to the center of the reflector and a second line 
from the center of the reflector to the source of illumination.
    S14.2.3.7.2 The entrance angle is the angle between the axis of the 
reflex reflector and a line from the center of the reflector to the 
source of illumination.
    S14.2.3.7.3 The entrance angle is designated left, right, up, and 
down in accordance with the position of the source of illumination with 
respect to the axis of the reflex reflector as viewed from behind the 
reflector.
    S14.2.3.7.4 Measurements are made of the luminous intensity which 
the reflex reflector is projecting toward the observation point and the 
illumination on the reflex reflector from the source of illumination.
    S14.2.3.8 Measurements.
    S14.2.3.8.1 Reflex reflectors. The required measurement for reflex 
reflectors at each test point as shown in Table XVI is the quotient of 
the projected luminous intensity divided by the illumination expressed 
as millicandela per lux or candela per footcandle.
    S14.2.3.8.2 Retroreflective sheeting. The required measurement for 
retroreflective sheeting reflectors at each test point as shown in Table 
XVI is candela per lux per square meter of area.
    S14.2.3.8.3 Reflex reflector photometry measurement adjustments.
    S14.2.3.8.3.1 Reflex reflectors, which do not have a fixed 
rotational position on the vehicle, are rotated about their axis through 
360[deg] to find the minimum photometric value which must be reported 
for each test point. If the output falls below the minimum requirement 
at any test point, the reflector is rotated <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5[deg] 
about its axis from the angle where the minimum output occurred, and the 
maximum value within this angle is reported as a tolerance value.
    S14.2.3.8.3.2 Reflex reflectors, which by their design or 
construction, permit mounting on a vehicle in a fixed rotational 
position, are tested in this position. A visual locator, such as the 
word TOP is not considered adequate to establish a fixed rotational 
position on the vehicle.
    S14.2.3.8.3.3 If uncolored reflections from the front surface 
interfere with photometric readings at any test point, additional 
readings are taken 1[deg] above, below, right, and left of the test 
point, and the lowest of these readings and its location is reported 
provided the minimum test point requirement for the test point is met.
    S14.2.4 Daytime running lamp (DRL) photometry measurements.
    S14.2.4.1 Each DRL is tested to the procedure of S14.2.5 when a test 
voltage of 12.8 v <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 20 mv is applied to the input 
terminals of the lamp switch module or voltage-reducing equipment, 
whichever is closer to the electrical source on the vehicle.
    S14.2.4.2 The test distance from the lamp to the photometer is not 
less than 18.3 m if the lamp is optically combined with a headlamp, or 
is a separate lamp, and not less than 3 m if the lamp is optically 
combined with a lamp, other than a headlamp, that is required by this 
standard.

[[Page 458]]

    S14.2.4.3 Except for a lamp having a sealed-in bulb, a lamp must 
meet the applicable requirements of this standard when tested with a 
bulb whose filament is positioned within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> .010 in. 
of the nominal design position specified in SAE J573d, Lamp bulbs and 
Sealed Units, December 1968, (incorporated by reference, paragraph S5.2 
of this section) or specified by the bulb manufacturer.
    S14.2.5 Headlamp photometry measurements.
    S14.2.5.1 Mounting. Photometry measurements at the applicable test 
points are made with the sample headlamp mounted in its normal operating 
position.
    S14.2.5.2 Test points in the area from 10[deg] U to 90[deg] U must 
be measured from the normally exposed surface of the lens face.
    S14.2.5.3 Measurement distance. Photometric measurements are made at 
a distance between the light source and the photometer sensor of at 
least 18.3 m.
    S14.2.5.4 Seasoning and test voltage. All sealed beam headlamps, 
integral beam headlamps, beam contributors, and replaceable light 
sources are seasoned at design voltage for 1% of its average design life 
or 10 hours, whichever is less prior to a photometry test. A headlamp is 
tested at 12.8 v. <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 20 mv, D.C. as measured at the 
terminals of the lamp.
    S14.2.5.5 Aiming. Each headlamp is aimed prior to a photometry test 
in accordance with the procedure appropriate to its aiming system. A \1/
4\[deg] reaim is permitted in any direction at any test point to allow 
for variations in readings between laboratories for all headlamps except 
a Type F upper beam unit not equipped with a VHAD.
    S14.2.5.5.1 Mechanically aimable headlamps using an external aimer. 
The headlamp is aimed mechanically with the aiming plane at the design 
angle(s) to the photometer axis and the mechanical axis of the headlamp 
on the photometer axis.
    S14.2.5.5.2 Mechanically aimable headlamps equipped with a VHAD. The 
headlamp is aimed mechanically using the VHAD in accordance with the 
manufacturer's instructions as provided with the vehicle on which the 
headlamp is intended to be used.
    S14.2.5.5.3 Visually aimable lower beam headlamps-vertical aim.
    S14.2.5.5.3.1 A VOL cutoff headlamp must have the location of the 
cutoff maximum gradient, as determined by the method of this standard, 
positioned at 0.4[deg] down from the H-H line.
    S14.2.5.5.3.2 A VOR cutoff headlamp must have the location of the 
cutoff maximum gradient, as determined by the method of this standard, 
positioned at the H-H line.
    S14.2.5.5.4 Visually aimable lower beam headlamps-horizontal aim. 
There must be no adjustment of horizontal aim unless the headlamp is 
equipped with a horizontal VHAD. If the headlamp has a VHAD, it must be 
set to zero.
    S14.2.5.5.5 Visually aimable upper beam headlamps-vertical aim.
    S14.2.5.5.5.1 A headlamp whose upper beam is combined with a lower 
beam must not have its vertical aim changed from that set for the lower 
beam.
    S14.2.5.5.5.2 A headlamp whose upper beam is not combined with a 
lower beam must have its maximum beam intensity positioned on the H-H 
axis.
    S14.2.5.5.6 Visually aimable upper beam headlamps-horizontal aim.
    S14.2.5.5.6.1 A headlamp whose upper beam is combined with a lower 
beam must not have its horizontal aim changed from that set for the 
lower beam.
    S14.2.5.5.6.2 A headlamp whose upper beam is not combined with a 
lower beam and has a fixed horizontal aim or has a horizontal VHAD must 
be mounted in its normal operating position on a goniometer such that 
the mounting fixture alignment axes are coincident with the goniometer 
axes and must be energized at 12.8 v <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 20 mv. There 
must be no adjustment, shimming, or modification of the horizontal axis 
of the headlamp or test fixture, unless the headlamp is equipped with a 
VHAD, in which case the VHAD must be adjusted to zero.
    S14.2.5.5.6.3 A headlamp whose upper beam is not combined with a 
lower beam and is not equipped with a horizontal VHAD, the horizontal 
aim must be adjusted so that the maximum beam intensity is positioned on 
the V-V axis.
    S14.2.5.5.7 Simultaneous aim Type F sealed beam headlamps and beam 
contributor integral beam headlamps.
    S14.2.5.5.7.1 A headlamp system permitted to use simultaneous aim of 
lower beams and upper beams must be aimed mechanically for lower beam 
photometry by centering the lower beam unit or the geometric center of 
all lower beam contributors on the photometer axis and aligning the 
aiming plane, aiming reference plane, or other appropriate vertical 
plane defined by the manufacturer perpendicular to the photometer axis.
    S14.2.5.5.7.2 The headlamp must be aimed for upper beam photometry 
by moving the assembly in a plane parallel to the established lower beam 
aiming plane until the upper beam unit or the geometric center of all 
upper beam contributors is centered in the photometric axis.
    S14.2.5.5.8 Motorcycle headlamp-upper beam headlamps designed to 
comply with Table XX. The upper beam of a multiple beam headlamp 
designed to comply with the requirements of Table XX must be aimed 
photoelectrically so that the center of the zone of highest intensity 
falls 0.4[deg] vertically

[[Page 459]]

below the lamp axis and is centered laterally. The center of the zone of 
highest intensity must be established by the intersection of a 
horizontal plane passing through the point of maximum intensity, and the 
vertical plane established by balancing the photometric values at 
3[deg]L and 3[deg]R.
    S14.2.5.5.9 Motorcycle headlamp-lower beam headlamps designed to 
comply with Table XX. The beam from a single beam headlamp designed to 
comply with the requirements of Table XX must be aimed straight ahead 
with the top of the beam aimed vertically to obtain 2000 cd at H-V.
    S14.2.5.6 Positioner. The goniometer configuration, used to position 
the sample headlamp when making photometric measurements at specific 
angular test points, is horizontal rotation over elevation. The vertical 
axis of the goniometer must correspond to the design position vertical 
axis of the sample headlamp which is vertical and perpendicular to the 
longitudinal axis of the vehicle.
    S14.2.5.7 Photometer.
    S14.2.5.7.1 The photometer must be capable of measuring the luminous 
intensity of the sample headlamp throughout its illumination range.
    S14.2.5.7.2 Sensor.
    S14.2.5.7.2.1 The maximum effective area of the photometric sensor 
must fit within a circle whose diameter is equal to 0.009 times the 
actual test distance from the light source of the sample headlamp to the 
sensor.
    S14.2.5.7.2.2 The sensor effective area is defined as the actual 
area of intercepted light striking the detector surface of the 
photometer. Sensor systems incorporating lens(es) that change the 
diameter of the intercepted light beam before it reaches the actual 
detector surface, the maximum size requirements must apply to the total 
area of the light actually intercepted by the lens surface.
    S14.2.5.7.2.3 The sensor must be capable of intercepting all direct 
illumination from the largest illuminated dimension of the sample lamp 
at the test distance.
    S14.2.5.7.3 The color response of the photometer must be corrected 
to that of the 1931 International Commission on Illumination (C.I.E.) 
Standard Observer (2-degree) Photopic Response Curve, as shown in the 
C.I.E. 1931 Chromaticity Diagram (incorporated by reference, see 571.108 
S5.2 of this title).
    S14.2.5.8 Location of test points.
    S14.2.5.8.1 Test point positions are defined by the positioner. The 
following nomenclature applies:
    S14.2.5.8.1.1 The letters ``V'' and ``H'' designate the vertical and 
horizontal planes intersecting both the headlamp light source and the 
photometer axis. ``H-V'' designates the zero test point angle at the 
intersection of the H and V planes. This intersection is parallel to the 
longitudinal axis of the vehicle.
    S14.2.5.8.1.2 The letters ``U'', ``D'', ``L'', and ``R'', indicating 
up, down, left and right, respectively, designate the angular position 
from the H and V planes to the photometer as viewed from the headlamp.
    S14.2.5.8.1.3 Horizontal angles designated L and R are defined as 
the plan view angle between the vertical plane and the projection of the 
light ray from the headlamp onto the horizontal plane.
    S14.2.5.8.1.4 Vertical angles designated U and D are defined as the 
true angle between the horizontal plane and the light ray from the 
headlamp.
    S14.2.5.9 Beam contributor photometry measurements. In a 
headlighting system where there is more than one beam contributor 
providing a lower beam, and/or more than one beam contributor providing 
an upper beam, each beam contributor must be designed to meet only the 
applicable photometric performance requirements based upon the following 
mathematical expression: conforming test point value = 2(test point 
value)/total number of lower or upper beam contributors for the vehicle, 
as appropriate.
    S14.2.5.10 Moveable reflector aimed headlamp photometry 
measurements.
    S14.2.5.10.1 A headlamp aimed by moving the reflector relative to 
the lens and headlamp housing, or vice versa, must conform to the 
photometry requirements applicable to it with the lens at any position 
relative to the reflector.
    S14.2.5.10.2 These positions include not less than the full range of 
vertical pitch of the vehicle on which the headlamp is installed and not 
less than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2.5[deg] from the nominal horizontal 
aim position for the vehicle on which the headlamp is installed unless 
the headlamp is visually/optically aimed with a fixed horizontal aim.
    S14.3 Motorcycle headlamp out of focus test procedure and 
performance requirements.
    S14.3.1 Procedure. The sample device must be tested for photometry 
using bulbs having each of four out-of-focus filament positions. Where 
conventional bulbs with two pin bayonet bases are used, tests must be 
made with the light source 0.060 in. above, below, ahead, and behind the 
designated position. If prefocused bulbs are used, the limiting 
positions at which tests are made must be 0.020 in. above, below, ahead, 
and behind the designated position. The sample device may be reaimed for 
each of the out-of-focus positions of the light source.
    S14.3.2 Performance requirements. The minimum photometric values for 
the out-of-design position must be 80% of the in-design position.
    S14.4 General test procedures and performance requirements.
    S14.4.1 Color test. The requirement applies to the overall effective 
color of light emitted

[[Page 460]]

by the device and not to the color of the light from a small area of the 
lens. It does not apply to any pilot, indicator, or tell-tale lights. 
The color of the sample device must comply when tested by either the 
Visual Method or the Tristimulus Method.
    S14.4.1.1 Samples. A test sample for a reflex reflector may be 
either the reflex reflector or a disc of the same material, technique of 
fabrication, and dye formulation as the reflex reflector. If a disc is 
used, the thickness must be twice the thickness of the reflector as 
measured from the face of the lens to the apexes of the reflecting 
elements.
    S14.4.1.2 General procedure.
    S14.4.1.2.1 The device must be operated at design voltage.
    S14.4.1.2.2 Components (bulbs, caps, lenses, and the like) must be 
tested in a fixture or manner simulating the intended application.
    S14.4.1.2.3 The lamp shall be allowed to reach operating temperature 
before measurements are made.
    S14.4.1.2.4 The entire light emitting surface of the sample must be 
visible from any point on the entrance window of the test instrument.
    S14.4.1.2.5 The distance between the test instrument and the sample 
must be large enough so that further increases in distance will not 
affect the results.
    S14.4.1.3 Visual method.
    S14.4.1.3.1 Visual method procedure. The color of light from the 
sample device must be compared visually with the color of the light from 
a standard. The standard may consist of a filter or limit glass. In the 
case of white, CIE Source A is used only as a color reference. The 
chromaticity coordinates of the color standards must be as close as 
possible to the limits listed. The color of the standard filters is 
determined spectro-photometrically.
    S14.4.1.3.2 Visual method performance requirements. The color must 
comply with the applicable requirement.
    S14.4.1.3.2.1 Red. Red is not acceptable if it is less saturated 
(paler), yellower, or bluer than the limit standards.
    S14.4.1.3.2.2 Yellow (Amber). Yellow is not acceptable if it is less 
saturated (paler), greener, or redder than the limit standards.
    S14.4.1.3.2.3 White. White is not acceptable if its color differs 
materially from that of CIE Source A.
    S14.4.1.4 Tristimulus method.
    S14.4.1.4.1 Tristimulus method procedure.
    S14.4.1.4.1.1 The color of light from the H-V point of a sample 
device must be measured by photoelectric receivers with spectral 
responses that approximate CIE standard spectral tristimulus valves.
    S14.4.1.4.1.2 A sphere may be used to integrate light from a colored 
source provided that the color shift that results from the spectral 
selectivity of the sphere paint be corrected by the use of a filter, 
correction factor, or an appropriate calibration.
    S14.4.1.4.1.3 Where the sample device does not have uniform spectral 
characteristics in all useful directions, color measurements must be 
made at as many directions of view as are required to evaluate the color 
for those directions that apply to the end use of the device.
    S14.4.1.4.2 Tristimulus method performance requirements. The color 
must comply with the applicable requirement.
    S14.4.1.4.2.1 Red. The color of light emitted must fall within the 
following boundaries:

y = 0.33 (yellow boundary)
y = 0.98 - x (purple boundary)

    S14.4.1.4.2.2 Yellow (Amber). The color of light emitted must fall 
within the following boundaries:

y = 0.39 (red boundary)
y = 0.79 - 0.67x (white boundary)
y = x - 0.12 (green boundary)

    S14.4.1.4.2.3 White (achromatic). The color of light emitted must 
fall within the following boundaries:

x = 0.31 (blue boundary)
y = 0.44 (green boundary)
x = 0.50 (yellow boundary)
y = 0.15 + 0.64x (green boundary)
y = 0.38 (red boundary)
y = 0.05 + 0.75x (purple boundary)

    S14.4.2 Plastic optical materials tests. Accelerated weathering 
procedures are not permitted.
    S14.4.2.1 Samples.
    S14.4.2.1.1 Samples of materials shall be injection molded into 
polished metal molds to produce test specimens with two flat and 
parallel faces. Alternative techniques may be used to produce equivalent 
specimens.
    S14.4.2.1.2 Test specimens shape may vary, but each exposed surface 
must contain a minimum uninterrupted area of 32 sq cm.
    S14.4.2.1.3 Samples must be furnished in thicknesses of 1.6 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.25 mm, 2.3 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.25 mm, 3.2 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.25 mm, and 6.4 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.25 mm.
    S14.4.2.1.4 All samples must conform to the applicable color test 
requirement of this standard prior to testing.
    S14.4.2.1.5 A control sample, kept properly protected from 
influences which may change its appearance and properties of each 
thickness, must be retained.
    S14.4.2.2 Outdoor exposure test.
    S14.4.2.2.1 Outdoor exposure tests of 3 years in duration must be 
made on samples of all materials, including coated and uncoated 
versions, used for optical parts of devices covered by this standard. 
Tests are to be conducted in Florida and Arizona.
    S14.4.2.2.2 Concentrations of polymer components and additives used 
in plastic materials may be changed without outdoor exposure testing 
provided the changes are

[[Page 461]]

within the limits of composition represented by higher and lower 
concentrations of these polymer components and additives previously 
tested to this section and found to meet its requirements.
    S14.4.2.2.3 Procedure.
    S14.4.2.2.3.1 One sample of each thickness of each material must be 
mounted at each exposure site so that at least a minimum uninterrupted 
area of 32 sq cm of the exposed upper surface of the sample is at an 
angle of 45[deg] to the horizontal facing south. The sample must be 
mounted in the open no closer than 30 cm (11.8 in) to its background.
    S14.4.2.2.3.2 During the exposure time the samples must be cleaned 
once every three months by washing with mild soap or detergent and 
water, and then rinsing with distilled water. Rubbing must be avoided.
    S14.4.2.2.4 Performance requirements. Plastic lenses, other than 
those incorporating reflex reflectors, used for inner lenses or those 
covered by another material and not exposed directly to sunlight must 
meet the optical material test requirements when covered by the outer 
lens or other material.
    S14.4.2.2.4.1 After completion of the outdoor exposure test the haze 
and loss of surface luster as measured by ASTM 1003-92, Haze and 
Luminous Transmittance of Transparent Plastic, (incorporated by 
reference, see 571.108 S5.2 of this title) must not be greater than:
    (a) 30% for materials used for outer lenses, other than those 
incorporating reflex reflectors;
    (b) 7% for materials used for reflex reflectors and lenses used in 
front of reflex reflectors.
    S14.4.2.2.4.2 After completion of the outdoor exposure test 
materials used for headlamp lenses must show no deterioration.
    S14.4.2.2.4.3 After completion of the outdoor exposure test all 
materials, when compared with the unexposed control samples, must not 
show physical changes affecting performance such as color bleeding, 
delamination, crazing, or cracking. Additionally materials used for 
reflex reflectors and lenses used in front of reflex reflectors must not 
show surface deterioration or dimensional changes.
    S14.4.2.2.4.4 After completion of the outdoor exposure test all 
materials, when compared with the unexposed control samples, must not 
have their luminous transmittance changed by more than 25% when tested 
in accordance with ASTM E 308-66 (1973), Spectrophotmetry and 
Description of Color in CIE 1931 System (incorporated by reference, see 
571.108 S5.2 of this title) using CIE Illuminant A (2856K).
    S14.4.2.2.4.5 After completion of the outdoor exposure test all 
materials must conform to the color test of this standard in the range 
of thickness stated by the material manufacturer.
    S14.4.2.3 Heat test.
    S14.4.2.3.1 Procedure. Two samples of each thickness of each 
material must be supported at the bottom, with at least 51 mm of the 
sample above the support, in the vertical position in such a manner 
that, on each side, the minimum uninterrupted area of exposed surface is 
not less than 3225 sq mm. The samples are placed in a circulating air 
oven at 79 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 3 [deg]C for two hours.
    S14.4.2.3.2 Performance requirements. After completion of the heat 
exposure and cooling to room ambient temperature, a test specimen must 
show no change in shape and general appearance discernable to the naked 
eye when compared with an unexposed specimen and continue to conform to 
the applicable color test requirement of this standard.
    S14.5 Signal lamp and reflective device physical test procedures and 
performance requirements.
    S14.5.1 Vibration test.
    S14.5.1.1 Procedure. The sample device, as mounted on the support 
supplied, must be bolted to the anvil end of the table of the vibration 
test machine of Figure 21 and vibrated approximately 750 cpm through a 
distance of \1/8\ in. The table must be spring mounted at one end and 
fitted with steel calks on the underside of the other end. The calks are 
to make contact with the steel anvil once during each cycle at the 
completion of the fall. The rack must be operated under a spring tension 
of 60 to 70 lb. The test must be continued for 1 hour.
    S14.5.1.2 Performance requirements. After completion of the 
vibration test a device showing evidence of material physical weakness, 
lens or reflector rotation, displacement or rupture of parts except bulb 
failures, must be considered to have failed, providing that the rotation 
of lens or reflector must not be considered as a failure when tests show 
compliance with specifications despite such rotation.
    S14.5.2 Moisture test.
    S14.5.2.1 Procedure. The sample device must be mounted in its normal 
operating position with all drain holes open and subjected to a 
precipitation of 0.1 in of water per minute, delivered at an angle of 
45[deg] from a nozzle with a solid cone spray. During the test the 
device must revolve about its vertical axis at a rate of 4 rpm for a 
period of 12 hours followed by a one hour drain period where the device 
does not rotate and the spray stops. After completion of the moisture 
test the device must be examined for moisture accumulation.
    S14.5.2.2 Performance requirements. Accumulation of moisture in 
excess of 2 cc or any visible moisture in a sealed reflex unit must 
constitute a failure.
    S14.5.3 Dust test.
    S14.5.3.1 Samples. A sealed unit is not required to meet the 
requirements of this test.

[[Page 462]]

    S14.5.3.2 Procedure. The sample device with any drain hole closed 
must be mounted in its normal operating position, at least 6 in from the 
wall in a cubical box with inside measurements of 3 ft on each side 
containing 10 lb of fine powered cement in accordance with ASTM C 150-
56, Standard Specification for Portland Cement (incorporated by 
reference, see 571.108 S5.2 of this title). At intervals of 15 minutes 
during a test period of 5 hours, the dust must be agitated by compressed 
air or fan blower by projecting blasts of air for a 2 second period in a 
downward direction into the dust in such a way that the dust is 
completely and uniformly diffused throughout the entire cube and allowed 
to settle. After the completion of the dust test the exterior surface of 
the device must be cleaned.
    S14.5.3.3 Performance requirements. If after a photometry test the 
maximum photometric intensity of the device is not more than 10% less 
than the maximum photometric intensity of the same device after being 
cleaned both inside and outside, the device is considered to have met 
the requirements of the dust test.
    S14.5.4 Corrosion test.
    S14.5.4.1 Procedure. The sample device must be subjected to a salt 
spray (fog) test in accordance with the latest version of ASTM B117-73, 
Method of Salt Spray (Fog) Testing (incorporated by reference, see 
571.108 S5.2 of this title), for a period of 50 hours, consisting of two 
periods of 24 hour exposure followed by a 1 hr drying time.
    S14.5.4.2 Performance requirements. After the completion of the 
corrosion test there must be no evidence of excessive corrosion which 
would affect the proper function of the device.
    S14.6 Headlamp physical test procedures and performance 
requirements.
    S14.6.1 Abrasion test.
    S14.6.1.1 Procedure.
    S14.6.1.1.1 Abrading pad. A new, unused abrading pad constructed of 
0000 steel wool not less than 2.5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> .1 cm wide, 
rubber cemented to a rigid base shaped to the same vertical contour of 
the lens, is used for each test. The abrading pad support is equal in 
size to the pad and the center of the support surface is within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 2 mm of parallel to the lens surface. The ``grain'' of 
the pad is oriented perpendicular to the direction of motion. The 
density of the pad is such that when the pad is resting unweighted on 
the lens, the base of the pad is no closer than 3.2 mm to the lens at 
its closest point.
    S14.6.1.1.2 Abrading pad alignment. A sample headlamp is mounted in 
the abrasion test fixture of Figure 5 with the lens facing upward. When 
mounted on its support and resting on the lens of the test headlamp, the 
abrading pad is then weighted such that a pad pressure of 14 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 1 KPa. exists at the center and perpendicular to the 
face of the lens.
    S14.6.1.1.3 Abrasion test procedure. The pad is cycled back and 
forth (1 cycle) for 11 cycles at 4 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.8 in (10 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2 cm) per second over at least 80% of the lens 
surface, including all the area between the upper and lower aiming pads, 
but not including lens trim rings and edges. A pivot must be used if it 
is required to follow the contour of the lens.
    S14.6.1.2 Performance requirements. After completion of the abrasion 
test the sample headlamp must meet the requirements of the applicable 
photometry tests of Table XIX and Table XVIII. A \1/4\[deg] reaim is 
permitted in any direction at any test point.
    S14.6.2 Chemical resistance test.
    S14.6.2.1 Procedure.
    S14.6.2.1.1 Test fluids. The five test fluids used in the chemical 
resistance test include:
    (a) ASTM Reference Fuel C, which is composed of Isooctane 50% volume 
and Toluene 50% volume. Isooctane must conform to A2.7 in Annex 2 of the 
Motor Fuels Section of the 1985 Annual Book of ASTM Standards, Vol. 
05.04 (incorporated by reference, see 571.108 S5.2 of this title), and 
Toluene must conform to ASTM specification D362-84, Standard 
Specification for Industrial Grade Toluene (incorporated by reference, 
see 571.108 S5.2 of this title). ASTM Reference Fuel C must be used as 
specified in: Paragraph A2.3.2 and A2.3.3 of Annex 2 to Motor Fuels; 
Section 1 in the 1985 Annual Book of ASTM Standards, Vol. 05.04 
(incorporated by reference, see 571.108 S5.2 of this title); and OSHA 
Standard 29 CFR 1910.106--Handling Storage and Use of Flammable 
Combustible Liquids;
    (b) Tar remover (consisting by volume of 45% xylene and 55% 
petroleum base mineral spirits);
    (c) Power steering fluid (as specified by the vehicle manufacturer 
for use in the motor vehicle on which the headlamp is intended to be 
installed);
    (d) Windshield washer fluid consisting of 0.5% monoethanolamine with 
the remainder 50% concentration of methanol/distilled water by volume; 
and
    (e) Antifreeze (50% concentration of ethylene glycol/distilled water 
by volume).
    S14.6.2.1.2 Fluid application. The entire exterior lens surface of 
the sample headlamp mounted in the headlamp test fixture and top surface 
of the lens-reflector joint is wiped once to the left and once to the 
right with a 6 inch square soft cotton cloth (with pressure equally 
applied) which has been saturated once in a container with 2 ounces of 
five different test fluids listed above. The lamp is wiped within 5 
seconds after removal of the cloth from the test fluid. A new lamp 
sample may be used with each fluid.
    S14.6.2.1.3 Test duration. After the headlamp sample has been wiped 
with the test fluid, it must be stored in its designed operating 
attitude for 48 hours at a temperature of 23 [deg]C <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 4 [deg]C and a relative humidity

[[Page 463]]

of 30% <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 10%. At the end of the 48-hour period, the 
headlamp is wiped clean with a soft dry cotton cloth and visually 
inspected.
    S14.6.2.2 Performance requirements. After completion of the chemical 
resistance test, the sample headlamp must have no surface deterioration, 
coating delamination, fractures, deterioration of bonding or sealing 
materials, color bleeding, or color pickup visible without magnification 
and the headlamp must meet the requirements of the applicable photometry 
tests of Table XIX and Table XVIII. A \1/4\[deg] reaim is permitted in 
any direction at any test point.
    S14.6.3 Corrosion test.
    S14.6.3.1 Procedure. A sample headlamp, mounted on a headlamp test 
fixture in designed operating position and including all accessory 
equipment necessary to operate in its normal manner, is subjected to a 
salt spray (fog) test in accordance with ASTM B117-73, Method of Salt 
Spray (Fog) Testing (incorporated by reference, see 571.108 S5.2 of this 
title), for 50 total hours, consisting of two periods of 24 hours 
exposure followed by a 1 hour drying period. If a portion of the device 
is completely protected in service, that portion is covered to prevent 
salt fog entry during exposure. After removal from the salt spray and 
the final 1 hour drying period the sample headlamp is examined for 
corrosion that affect any other applicable tests contained in S14.6. If 
such corrosion is found, the affected test(s) must be performed on the 
corrosion sample and the results recorded.
    S14.6.3.2 Performance requirements. After completion of the 
corrosion test, the sample headlamp must not have any observed corrosion 
which would result in the failure of any other applicable tests 
contained in S14.6 and no corrosion of the headlamp mounting and aiming 
mechanism that would result in the failure of the aiming adjustment 
tests, inward force test, or torque deflection test of S14.6.
    S14.6.4 Corrosion-connector test.
    S14.6.4.1 Procedure.
    S14.6.4.1.1 A headlamp connector test must be performed on each 
filament circuit of the sample headlamp prior to the test in S14.6.4.1.2 
according to Figure 4 and S14.6.15. The power source is set to provide 
12.8 volts and the resistance must be set to produce 10 amperes.
    S14.6.4.1.2 The headlamp, with connector attached to the terminals, 
unfixtured and in its designed operating attitude with all drain holes, 
breathing devices or other designed openings in their normal operating 
positions, is subjected to a salt spray (fog) test in accordance with 
ASTM B117-73, Method of Salt Spray (Fog) Testing (incorporated by 
reference, see 571.108 S5.2 of this title), for 240 hours, consisting of 
ten successive 24-hour periods.
    S14.6.4.1.3 During each period, the headlamp is mounted in the 
middle of the chamber and exposed for 23 hours to the salt spray. The 
spray is not activated during the 24th hour. The bulb is removed from 
the headlamp and from the test chamber during the one hour of salt spray 
deactivation and reinserted for the start of the next test period, at 
the end of the first and last three 23-hour periods of salt spray 
exposure, and at the end of any two of the fourth through seventh 23-
hour periods of salt-spray exposure.
    S14.6.4.1.4 The test chamber is closed at all times except for a 
maximum of 2 minutes which is allowed for removal or replacement of a 
bulb during each period.
    S14.6.4.1.5 After the ten periods, the lens-reflector unit without 
the bulb must be immersed in deionized water for 5 minutes, then secured 
and allowed to dry by natural convection only.
    S14.6.4.1.6 Using the voltage, resistance and pre-test set up of 
S14.6.4.1.1 the current in each filament circuit must be measured after 
the test conducted in S14.6.4.1.2.
    S14.6.4.2 Performance requirements.
    S14.6.4.2.1 After the completion of the corrosion-connector test, 
the sample headlamp must show no evidence of external or internal 
corrosion or rust visible without magnification.
    S14.6.4.2.2 Loss of adhesion of any applied coating must not occur 
more than 3.2 mm from any sharp edge on the inside or out.
    S14.6.4.2.3 Corrosion may occur on terminals only if the test 
current produced during the test of S14.6.4.1.6 is not less than 9.7 
amperes.
    S14.6.5 Dust test.
    S14.6.5.1 Procedure.
    S14.6.5.1.1 A sample headlamp, mounted on a headlamp test fixture, 
with all drain holes, breathing devices or other designed openings in 
their normal operating positions, is positioned within a cubical box, 
with inside measurements of 900 mm on each side or larger if required 
for adequate wall clearance (i.e., a distance of at least 150 mm between 
the headlamp and any wall of the box).
    S14.6.5.1.2 The box contains 4.5 kg of fine powdered cement which 
conforms to the ASTM C150-77, Standard Specification for Portland Cement 
(incorporated by reference, see 571.108 S5.2 of this title). Every 15 
minutes, the cement is agitated by compressed air or fan blower(s) by 
projecting blasts of air for a two-second period in a downward direction 
so that the cement is diffused as uniformly as possible throughout the 
entire box.
    S14.6.5.1.3 This test is continued for five hours after which the 
exterior surfaces of the headlamp are wiped clean.
    S14.6.5.2 Performance requirements. After completion of the dust 
test, the sample headlamp must meet the requirements of the applicable 
photometry tests of Table XIX and Table XVIII. A \1/4\[deg] reaim is 
permitted in any direction at any test point.

[[Page 464]]

    S14.6.6 Temperature cycle test and internal heat test.
    S14.6.6.1 Samples. A sample headlamp with one or more replaceable 
light sources is tested according to the procedures of this section for 
a temperature cycle test and an internal heat test. The same sample 
headlamp is used in the temperature cycle test and then in the internal 
heat test.
    S14.6.6.2 General procedure.
    S14.6.6.2.1 Tests are made with all filaments lighted at design 
voltage that are intended to be used simultaneously in the headlamp and 
which in combination draw the highest total wattage. These include but 
are not limited to filaments used for turn signal lamps, fog lamps, 
parking lamps, and headlamp lower beams lighted with upper beams when 
the wiring harness is so connected on the vehicle.
    S14.6.6.2.2 If a turn signal is included in the headlamp assembly, 
it is operated at 90 flashes a minute with a 75% <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 
2% current ``on time.''
    S14.6.6.2.3 If the lamp produces both the upper and lower beam, it 
is tested in both the upper beam mode and the lower beam mode under the 
conditions above described, except for a headlamp with a single type HB1 
or type HB2 light source.
    S14.6.6.3 Temperature cycle test.
    S14.6.6.3.1 Procedure.
    S14.6.6.3.1.1 A sample headlamp, mounted on a headlamp test fixture, 
is subjected to 10 complete consecutive cycles having the thermal cycle 
profile shown in Figure 6.
    S14.6.6.3.1.2 During the hot cycle, the lamp, is energized 
commencing at point ``A'' of Figure 6 and de-energized at point ``B.''
    S14.6.6.3.1.3 Separate or single test chambers may be used to 
generate the environment of Figure 6.
    S14.6.6.3.1.4 All drain holes, breathing devices or other openings 
or vents of the headlamps are set in their normal operating positions.
    S14.6.6.3.2 Performance requirements. After completion of the 
temperature cycle test, the sample headlamp must:
    (a) show no evidence of delamination, fractures, entry of moisture, 
or deterioration of bonding material, color bleeding, warp or 
deformation visible without magnification;
    (b) show no lens warpage greater than 3 mm when measured parallel to 
the optical axis at the point of intersection of the axis of each light 
source with the exterior surface of the lens; and
    (c) meet the requirements of the applicable photometry tests of 
Table XIX and Table XVIII. A \1/4\[deg] reaim is permitted in any 
direction at any test point.
    S14.6.6.4 Internal heat test.
    S14.6.6.4.1 Procedure.
    S14.6.6.4.1.1 A sample headlamp lens surface that would normally be 
exposed to road dirt is uniformly sprayed with any appropriate mixture 
of dust and water or other materials to reduce the photometric output at 
the H-V test point of the upper beam (or the \1/2\[deg]D-1\1/2\[deg]R 
test point of the lower beam as applicable) to 25% <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 2% of the output originally measured in the applicable 
photometric compliance test.
    S14.6.6.4.1.2 A headlamp with a single type HB1 or type HB2 light 
source is tested on the upper beam only.
    S14.6.6.4.1.3 Such reduction is determined under the same conditions 
as that of the original photometric measurement.
    S14.6.6.4.1.4 After the photometric output of the lamp has been 
reduced as specified above, the sample lamp and its mounting hardware 
must be mounted in an environmental chamber in a manner similar to that 
indicated in Figure 7 ``Dirt/Ambient Test Setup.''
    S14.6.6.4.1.5 The headlamp is soaked for one hour at a temperature 
of 35[deg] + 4[deg] - 0 [deg]C) and then the lamp is energized according 
to the procedure of this section for one hour in a still air condition, 
allowing the temperature to rise from the soak temperature.
    S14.6.6.4.1.6 At the end of one hour the sample lamp is returned to 
a room ambient temperature of 23[deg] + 4[deg] - 0 [deg]C and a relative 
humidity of 30% <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 10% and allowed to stabilize to 
the room ambient temperature. The lens is then cleaned.
    S14.6.6.4.2 Performance requirements. After completion of the 
temperature cycle test and meeting its requirements, and completion of 
the internal heat test, the sample headlamp must:
    (a) have no lens warpage greater than 3 mm when measured parallel to 
the optical axis at the point of intersection of the axis of each light 
source with the exterior surface of the lens, and
    (b) meet the requirements of the applicable photometry tests of 
Table XIX and Table XVIII. A \1/4\[deg] reaim is permitted in any 
direction at any test point.
    S14.6.7 Humidity test.
    S14.6.7.1 Procedure.
    S14.6.7.1.1 The test fixture consists of a horizontal steel plate to 
which three threaded steel or aluminum rods of \1/2\ inch diameter are 
screwed vertically behind the headlamp.
    S14.6.7.1.2 The sample headlamp assembly is clamped to the vertical 
rods, which are behind the headlamp. All attachments to the headlamp 
assembly are made behind the lens and vents or openings, and are not 
within 2 inches laterally of a vent inlet or outlet.
    S14.6.7.1.3 The mounted headlamp assembly is oriented in its design 
operating position, and is placed in a controlled environment at a 
temperature of 100[deg] + 7[deg]-0 [deg]F (38[deg] + 4[deg]-0 [deg]C) 
with a relative humidity of not less than 90%. All drain holes, 
breathing devices, and other openings are set in their

[[Page 465]]

normal operation positions for all phases of the humidity test.
    S14.6.7.1.4 The headlamp is subjected to 24 consecutive 3-hour test 
cycles. In each cycle, the headlamp is energized for 1 hour at design 
voltage with the highest combination of filament wattages that are 
intended to be used, and then de-energized for 2 hours. If the headlamp 
incorporates a turn signal then the turn signal flashes at 90 flashes 
per minute with a 75% <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2% current ``on-time.''
    S14.6.7.1.5 Within 3 minutes after the completion of the 24th cycle, 
the air flow test will begin. The following procedure shall occur: the 
mounted assembly is removed, placed in an insulating box and covered 
with foam material so that there is no visible air space around the 
assembly; the box is closed, taken to the air flow test chamber, and 
placed within it. Inside the chamber, the assembly with respect to the 
air flow, is oriented in its design operating position. The assembly is 
positioned in the chamber so that the center of the lens is in the 
center of the opening of the air flow entry duct during the test. The 
headlamp has at least 3 inches clearance on all sides, and at least 4 
inches to the entry and exit ducts at the closest points. If vent tubes 
are used which extend below the lamp body, the 3 inches are measured 
from the bottom of the vent tube or its protection. The temperature of 
the chamber is 73[deg] + 7[deg] - 0 [deg]F (23[deg] + 4[deg] - 0 [deg]C) 
with a relative humidity of 30% + 10% - 0%. The headlamp is not 
energized.
    S14.6.7.1.6 Before the test specified in paragraph S14.6.7.1.7 of 
this section, the uniformity of the air flow in the empty test chamber 
at a plane 4 inches downstream of the air entry duct is measured over a 
4 inch square grid. The uniformity of air flow at each grid point is 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 10% of the average air flow specified in 
paragraph S14.6.7.1.7 of this section.
    S14.6.7.1.7 The mounted assembly in the chamber is exposed, for one 
hour, to an average air flow of 330 +0 -30 ft/min as measured with an 
air velocity measuring probe having an accuracy of <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 3% in the 330 ft/min range. The average air flow is the 
average of the velocity recorded at six points around the perimeter of 
the lens. The six points are determined as follows: At the center of the 
lens, construct a horizontal plane. The first two points are located in 
the plane, 1 inch outward from the intersection of the plane and each 
edge of the lens. Then, trisect the distance between these two points 
and construct longitudinal vertical planes at the two intermediate 
locations formed by the trisection. The four remaining points are 
located in the vertical planes, one inch above the top edge of the lens, 
and one inch below the bottom edge of the lens.
    S14.6.7.1.8 After one hour, the headlamp is removed and inspected 
for moisture.
    S14.6.7.2 Performance requirements. After completion of the humidity 
test, the sample headlamp must show no evidence of interior delamination 
or moisture, fogging or condensation visible without magnification.
    S14.6.8 Vibration test.
    S14.6.8.1 Samples. The mounting bracket with a sample headlamp 
installed must not have a resonant frequency in the 10-55 Hz. range.
    S14.6.8.2 Procedure. The mounted sample headlamp is bolted to the 
anvil end of the table of the vibration test machine of Figure 21 and 
vibrated 750 cpm through a distance of 1/8 in. The table is spring 
mounted at one end and fitted with steel calks on the underside of the 
other end. The table is of sufficient size to completely contain the 
test fixture base with no overhang. The calks are to make contact with 
the steel anvil once during each cycle at the completion of the fall. 
The rack is operated under a spring tension of 60 to 70 lb. The 
vibration is applied in the vertical axis of the headlamp as mounted on 
the vehicle. Bulb filaments are not energized during the test. The test 
is continued for 1 hour.
    S14.6.8.3 Performance requirements. After completion of the 
vibration test, there must be no evidence of loose or broken parts, 
other than filaments, visible without magnification.
    S14.6.9 Sealing test.
    S14.6.9.1 Procedure.
    S14.6.9.1.1 An unfixtured sample headlamp in its design mounting 
position is placed in water at a temperature of 176[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 [deg]F (80[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 3 [deg]C) for 
one hour. The headlamp is energized in its highest wattage mode, with 
the test voltage at 12.8 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.1 V during immersion.
    S14.6.9.1.2 The lamp is then de-energized and immediately submerged 
in its design mounting position into water at 32[deg] +5[deg] -0 [deg]F 
(0[deg] +3[deg] -0 [deg]C). The water is in a pressurized vessel, and 
the pressure is increased to 10 psi (70 kPa), upon placing the lamp in 
the water. The lamp must remain in the pressurized vessel for a period 
of thirty minutes.
    S14.6.9.1.3 This entire procedure is repeated for four cycles.
    S14.6.9.1.4 Then the lamp is inspected for any signs of water on its 
interior. During the high temperature portion of the cycles, the lamp is 
observed for signs of air escaping from its interior.
    S14.6.9.2 Performance requirements. After completion of the sealing 
test, a sample headlamp confirmed to be sealed need not meet the 
corrosion test, dust test, or humidity test of this Section. If any 
water is on the interior or air escapes, the lamp is not a sealed lamp.
    S14.6.10 Chemical resistance test of reflectors of replaceable lens 
headlamps test.
    S14.6.10.1 Procedure.

[[Page 466]]

    S14.6.10.1.1 Test fluids. The three test fluids used in the chemical 
resistance test include;
    (a) Tar remover (consisting by volume of 45% xylene and 55% 
petroleum base mineral spirits);
    (b) Mineral spirits; and
    (c) Fluids other than water contained in the manufacturer's 
instructions for cleaning the reflector.
    S14.6.10.1.2 Fluid application. With a sample headlamp in the 
headlamp test fixture and the lens removed, the entire surface of the 
reflector that receives light from a headlamp light source is wiped once 
to the left and once to the right with a 6-inch square soft cotton cloth 
(with pressure equally applied) which has been saturated once in a 
container with 2 ounces of one of the test fluids listed in 
S14.6.10.1.1. The lamp is wiped within 5 seconds after removal of the 
cloth from the test fluid.
    S14.6.10.1.3 Test duration. After the headlamp has been wiped with 
the test fluid, it is stored in its designed operating attitude for 48 
hours at a temperature of 73[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 7 [deg]F 
(23[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 4 [deg]C) and a relative humidity of 30% 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 10%. At the end of the 48-hour period, the 
headlamp is wiped clean with a soft dry cotton cloth and visually 
inspected.
    S14.6.10.2 Performance requirements. After completion of the 
chemical resistance test, the sample headlamp must have no surface 
deterioration, coating delamination, fractures, deterioration of bonding 
or sealing materials, color bleeding or color pickup visible without 
magnification and the headlamp must meet the requirements of the 
applicable photometry tests of Table XIX and Table XVIII. A \1/4\[deg] 
re-aim is permitted in any direction at any test point.
    S14.6.11 Corrosion resistance test of reflectors of replaceable lens 
headlamps test.
    S14.6.11.1 Procedure.
    S14.6.11.1.1 A sample headlamp with the lens removed, unfixtured and 
in its designed operating attitude with all drain holes, breathing 
devices or other designed openings in their normal operating positions, 
must be subjected to a salt spray (fog) test in accordance with ASTM 
B117-73, Method of Salt Spray (Fog) Testing (incorporated by reference, 
see 571.108 S5.2 of this title), for 24 hours, while mounted in the 
middle of the chamber.
    S14.6.11.1.2 Afterwards, the headlamp must be stored in its designed 
operating attitude for 48 hours at a temperature of 73[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 7 [deg]F (23[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 4 [deg]C) and 
a relative humidity of 30% <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 10% and allowed to dry 
by natural convection only. At the end of the 48-hour period, the 
reflector must be cleaned according to the instructions supplied with 
the headlamp manufacturer's replacement lens, and inspected. The lens 
and seal must then be attached according to these instructions and the 
headlamp tested for photometric performance.
    S14.6.11.2 Performance requirements. After the completion of the 
corrosion test, the sample headlamp must show no evidence of corrosion 
or rust visible without magnification on any part of the headlamp 
reflector that receives light from a headlamp light source, on any metal 
light or heat shield assembly, or on a metal reflector of any other 
lamp. The sample headlamp with the replacement lens installed must meet 
the requirements of the applicable photometry tests of Table XIX and 
Table XVIII. A \1/4\[deg] re-aim is permitted in any direction at any 
test point.
    S14.6.12 Inward force test.
    S14.6.12.1 Procedure. A sample headlamp mechanism, including the 
aiming adjusters, must be subjected to an inward force of 222 N directed 
normal to the headlamp aiming plane and symmetrically about the center 
of the headlamp lens face.
    S14.6.12.2 Performance requirements. After the completion of the 
inward force test, a sample headlamp must not permanently recede by more 
than 2.5 mm. The aim of the headlamp must not permanently deviate by 
more than 3.2 mm at a distance of 7.6 m. The aim of any headlamp that is 
capable of being mechanically aimed by externally applied aiming devices 
must not change by more than 0.30[deg].
    S14.6.13 Torque deflection test.
    S14.6.13.1 Procedure.
    S14.6.13.1.1 The sample headlamp assembly is mounted in designed 
vehicle position and set at nominal aim (H=0, V=0).
    S14.6.13.1.2 A sealed beam headlamp, except Type G and Type H, is 
removed from its mounting and replaced by the applicable deflectometer. 
(Type C and Type D-Figure 18, Type A and Type E-Figure 16, Type B-Figure 
17, and Type F-Figure 14).
    S14.6.13.1.3 Sealed beam headlamps Type G and Type H have the 
adapter of Figure 15 and the deflectometer of Figure 14 attached to the 
headlamp.
    S14.6.13.1.4 A torque of 2.25 Nm must be applied to the headlamp 
assembly through the deflectometer and a reading on the thumbwheel is 
taken. The torque must be removed and a second reading on the thumbwheel 
is taken.
    S14.6.13.1.5 Headlamps other than sealed beam headlamps must have 
the downward force used to create the torque applied parallel to the 
aiming reference plane, through the aiming pads, and displaced forward 
using a lever arm such that the force is applied on an axis that is 
perpendicular to the aiming reference plane and originates at the center 
of the aiming pad pattern (see Figure 3).
    S14.6.13.1.6 For headlamps using the aiming pad locations of Group 
I, the distance between the point of application of force and the aiming 
reference plane is not less than

[[Page 467]]

168.3 mm plus the distance from the aiming reference plane to the 
secondary plane, if used.
    S14.6.13.1.7 For headlamps using the aiming pad locations of Group 
II, the distance between the point of application of force and the 
aiming reference plane is not less than 167.9 mm plus the distance to 
the secondary plane, if used.
    S14.6.13.1.8 For headlamps using the nonadjustable Headlamp Aiming 
Device Locating Plates for the 146 mm diameter, the 176 mm diameter, and 
the 92x150 mm sealed beam, the distance between the point of application 
of force and the aiming plane is not, respectively, less than 177.4 mm, 
176.2 mm, and 193.7 mm.
    S14.6.13.2 Performance requirements. The aim of each sample headlamp 
must not deviate more than 0.30[deg] when the downward torque is 
removed.
    S14.6.14 Retaining ring test.
    S14.6.14.1 Procedure. A sample headlamp with the minimum flange 
thickness of: Type A-31.5 mm, Type B-10.1 mm, Type C-11.8 mm, Type D-
11.8 mm, Type E-31.5 mm, and Type F-8.6 mm, is secured between the 
appropriate mounting ring and retaining ring (mounting ring and aiming 
ring for Type F).
    S14.6.14.2 Performance requirements. The sample headlamp when 
secured per the procedure must be held tight enough that it will not 
rattle.
    S14.6.15 Headlamp connector test.
    S14.6.15.1 Procedure. A sample headlamp connected into the test 
circuit of Figure 4 has the power supply adjusted until 10 amperes DC 
are flowing through the circuit. The test is repeated for each filament 
circuit of the headlamp.
    S14.6.15.2 Performance requirements. The voltage drop, as measured 
in the test circuit of Figure 4, must not exceed 40 mv DC in any 
applicable filament circuit of the sample headlamp.
    S14.6.16 Headlamp wattage test.
    S14.6.16.1 Procedure. A sample headlamp that has been seasoned is 
energized so as to have 12.8v <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 20 mv DC applied 
across each filament circuit and the current flowing in each circuit is 
measured.
    S14.6.16.2 Performance requirements. The wattage of each filament 
circuit of the sample headlamp must not exceed the applicable value for 
that type of headlamp as shown in Table II.
    S14.6.17 Aiming adjustment test-laboratory.
    S14.6.17.1 Procedure. A sample headlamp is mounted in design 
position at nominal (H = 0, V = 0) aim with an accurate measuring device 
such as a spot projector or other equally accurate means attached. The 
headlamp is adjusted to the extremes of travel in each horizontal and 
vertical direction.
    S14.6.17.2 Performance requirements. Visually aimed lower beam 
headlamps without a VHAD are required not to have a horizontal 
adjustment mechanism and horizontal aim range requirements do not apply.
    S14.6.17.2.1 A sample sealed beam headlamp, other than a Type F, 
tested per the procedure must provide a minimum of <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 4.0[deg] adjustment range in both the vertical and 
horizontal planes and if equipped with independent vertical and 
horizontal aiming screws, the adjustment must be such that neither the 
vertical nor horizontal aim must deviate more than 100 mm from 
horizontal or vertical planes, respectively, at a distance of 7.6 m 
through an angle of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 4.0[deg].
    S14.6.17.2.2 A sample Type F sealed beam, integral beam, replaceable 
bulb, or combination headlamp tested per the procedure must provide a 
minimum of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 4.0[deg] adjustment range in the 
vertical plane and <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2.5[deg] in the horizontal 
plane and if equipped with independent vertical and horizontal aiming 
screws, the adjustment must be such that neither the vertical nor 
horizontal aim must deviate more than 100 mm from horizontal or vertical 
planes, respectively, at a distance of 7.6 m through an angle of <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 2.5[deg] and <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 4.0[deg], 
respectively.
    S14.6.17.2.3 A sample headlamp that is aimed by moving the reflector 
relative to the lens and headlamp housing, and vice versa must provide a 
minimum adjustment range in the vertical plane not less than the full 
range of the pitch on the vehicle on which it is installed and <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 2.5[deg] in the horizontal plane.
    S14.6.18 Aiming adjustment test-on vehicle.
    S14.6.18.1 Procedure.
    S14.6.18.1.1 A sample headlamp is mounted on the vehicle at nominal 
(H = 0, V = 0) aim with an accurate measuring device such as a spot 
projector or other equally accurate means attached.
    S14.6.18.1.2 The installed range of static pitch angle is, at a 
minimum, determined from unloaded vehicle weight to gross vehicle weight 
rating, and incorporates pitch angle effects from maximum trailer or 
trunk loadings, the full range of tire intermix sizes and suspensions 
recommended and/or installed by the vehicle manufacturer, and the 
anticipated effects of variable passenger loading.
    S14.6.18.1.3 The headlamp is adjusted to the extremes of travel in 
each horizontal and vertical direction.
    S14.6.18.2 Performance requirements.
    S14.6.18.2.1 A sample headlamp tested per the procedure must provide 
a minimum vertical adjustment range not less than the full range of 
pitch of the vehicle on which it is installed.
    S14.6.18.2.2 The vertical aim mechanism must be continuously 
variable over the full range.
    S14.6.18.2.3 The adjustment of one aim axis through its full on-
vehicle range must not cause the aim of the other axis to deviate more 
than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.76[deg]. If this performance is

[[Page 468]]

not achievable, the requirements of S10.18.3.1 apply, except that if the 
aiming mechanism is not a VHAD, the requirements specific to VHADs are 
not applicable, and the instruction must be specific to the aiming 
mechanism installed.
    S14.7 Replaceable light source physical test procedures and 
performance requirements.
    S14.7.1 Deflection test for replaceable light sources.
    S14.7.1.1 Procedure.
    S14.7.1.1.1 With the sample light source rigidly mounted in a 
fixture in a manner indicated in Figure 8, a force 4.0 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.1 pounds (17.8 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.4N) is 
applied at a distance ``A'' from the reference plane perpendicular to 
the longitudinal axis of the glass capsule and parallel to the smallest 
dimension of the pressed glass capsule seal.
    S14.7.1.1.2 The force is applied (using a rod with a hard rubber tip 
with a minimum spherical radius of .039 in [1 mm]) radially to the 
surface of the glass capsule in four locations in a plane parallel to 
the reference plane and spaced at a distance ``A'' from that plane. 
These force applications are spaced 90[deg] apart starting at the point 
perpendicular to the smallest dimension of the pressed seal of the glass 
capsule.
    S14.7.1.1.3. The bulb deflection is measured at the glass capsule 
surface at 180[deg] opposite to the force application. Distance ``A'' 
for a replaceable light source other than an HB Type is the dimension 
provided in accordance with appendix A of part 564 of this chapter, 
section I.A.1 if the light source has a lower beam filament, or as 
specified in section I.B.1 if the light source has only an upper beam 
filament.
    S14.7.1.2 Performance requirements. After completion of the 
deflection test, a sample light source must have no permanent deflection 
of the glass envelope exceeding 0.13 mm in the direction of applied 
force.
    S14.7.2 Pressure test for replaceable light sources.
    S14.7.2.1 Procedure.
    S14.7.2.1.1 The capsule, lead wires and/or terminals, and seal on 
each sample Type HB1, Type HB3, Type HB4, and Type HB5 light source, and 
on any other replaceable light source which uses a seal, is installed in 
a pressure chamber as shown in Figure 10 so as to provide an airtight 
seal. The diameter of the aperture in Figure 10 on a replaceable light 
source (other than an HB Type) must be that dimension furnished for such 
light source in compliance with appendix A or appendix B of part 564 of 
this chapter.
    S14.7.2.1.2 The light source is immersed in water for one minute 
while inserted in a cylindrical aperture specified for the light source, 
and subjected to an air pressure of 70 KPa (10 psig) on the glass 
capsule side.
    S14.7.2.2 Performance requirements. After completion of the pressure 
test, the sample light source with an airtight seal on the low pressure 
(connector side) must show no evidence of air bubbles on that side.
    S14.7.3 Replaceable light source power and flux measurement 
procedure. The measurement of maximum power and luminous flux that is 
submitted in compliance with section VII of appendix A of part 564 of 
this chapter, or section IV of appendix B of part 564 of this chapter, 
is made in accordance with this paragraph.
    S14.7.3.1 Seasoning. The filament or discharge arc is seasoned 
before measurement of either maximum power and luminous flux.
    S14.7.3.1.1 Resistive filament source. Seasoning of a light source 
with a resistive element type filament is made in accordance with this 
S14.2.5.4 of this standard.
    S14.7.3.1.2 Discharge source. For a light source using excited gas 
mixtures as a filament or discharge arc, seasoning of the light source 
system, including any ballast required for its operation, is made in 
accordance with section 4.0 of SAE Recommended Practice J2009 FEB93, 
Discharge Forward Lighting Systems.
    S14.7.3.2 Test voltage. Measurements are made with a direct current 
test voltage of 12.8 v regulated within one quarter of one percent.
    S14.7.3.3 Luminous flux measurement. The measurement of luminous 
flux is made in accordance with the Illuminating Engineering Society of 
North America, LM 45; IES Approved Method for Electrical and Photometric 
Measurements of General Service Incandescent Filament Lamps (April 1980) 
(incorporated by reference, see 571.108 S5.2 of this title).
    S14.7.3.3.1 Resistive filament light source setup. Luminous flux 
measurements are made with the black cap installed on Type HB1, Type 
HB2, Type HB4, and Type HB5, and on any other replaceable light source 
so designed; and is with the electrical conductor and light source base 
shrouded with an opaque white cover, except for the portion normally 
located within the interior of the lamp housing. The measurement of 
luminous flux for the Types HB3 and HB4 is made with the base covered 
with a white cover as shown in the drawings for Types HB3 and HB4 filed 
in Docket No. NHTSA 98-3397. The white covers are used to eliminate the 
likelihood of incorrect lumen measurement that will occur should the 
reflectance of the light source base and electrical connector be low.
    S14.7.3.3.2 Discharge light source setup. With the test voltage 
applied to the ballast input terminals, the measurement of luminous flux 
is made with the black cap installed, if so designed, and is made with 
an opaque white colored cover, except for the portion normally located 
within the interior of the lamp housing.
    S14.8 Vehicle headlamp aiming devices (VHAD) physical test 
procedures and performance requirements.

[[Page 469]]

    S14.8.1 Samples. The same VHAD and associated headlamp(s) or 
headlamp assembly must be rigidly mounted in a headlamp test fixture 
with the aiming plane horizontal and vertical and with the scale on the 
device set at 0.
    S14.8.2 Scale graduation test.
    S14.8.2.1 Procedure. Check each graduation on the horizontal and 
vertical aim scales.
    S14.8.2.2 Performance requirements. Scale graduation from correct 
aim must not exceed <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.2[deg] horizontally and 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.1[deg] vertically.
    S14.8.3 Cold scale graduation test.
    S14.8.3.1 Procedure. The VHAD and an unlighted headlamp assembly 
must then be stabilized at -7[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 3 [deg]C in a 
circulating air environmental test chamber for a 30 minute temperature 
soak.
    S14.8.3.2 Performance requirements. After completion of a 30 minute 
temperature soak the variation from correct aim shown by the sample VHAD 
must not exceed <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.2[deg] horizontally and <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.1[deg] vertically.
    S14.8.4 Hot scale graduation test.
    S14.8.4.1 Procedure. The VHAD and the headlamp assembly with its 
highest wattage filament, or combination of filaments intended to be 
used simultaneously, energized at its design voltage, is then stabilized 
at 38[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 3 [deg]C in a circulating air 
environmental test chamber for a 30 minute temperature soak.
    S14.8.4.2 Performance requirements. After completion of a 30 minute 
temperature soak the variation from correct aim shown by the sample VHAD 
must not exceed <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.2[deg] horizontally and <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.1[deg] vertically.
    S14.8.5 Thermal cycle test.
    S14.8.5.1 Procedure. The VHAD and an unlighted headlamp assembly are 
then placed in a circulating air environmental test chamber and exposed 
to a temperature of 60[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 3 [deg]C for 24 
hours, followed by a temperature of -40[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 3 
[deg]C for 24 hours, and are then permitted to return to room 
temperature.
    S14.8.5.2 Performance requirements. After completion of the thermal 
cycle test the variation from correct aim shown by the sample VHAD must 
not exceed <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.2[deg] horizontally and <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.1[deg] vertically and the VHAD and headlamp assembly 
must show no damage which would impair its ability to perform as 
specified in this standard.
    S14.8.6 Corrosion test.
    S14.8.6.1 Procedure. The VHAD and headlamp assembly are then tested 
according to the headlamp corrosion test of S14.6.3.
    S14.8.6.2 Performance requirements. After completion of the 
corrosion test the sample VHAD and headlamp must not have any observed 
corrosion that would result in the failure of any other applicable tests 
contained in this section.
    S14.8.7 Photometry test.
    S14.8.7.1 Procedure. The VHAD and headlamp assembly are then tested 
for photometric compliance according to the procedure of S14.2.5 and for 
replacement units per S10.18.8.4.
    S14.8.7.2 Performance requirements. The sample headlamp must comply 
with the applicable photometric requirements of Table XIX and Table 
XVIII and with replacement units installed per S10.18.8.4.
    S14.9 Associated equipment physical test procedures and performance 
requirements.
    S14.9.1 Turn signal operating unit durability test.
    S14.9.1.1 Power supply specifications. During the test, the unit is 
operated at 6.4 volts for 6 volt systems or 12.8 volts for 12 volt 
systems from a power supply meeting the following requirements:
    (a) An output current that is at least 10 times the load current;
    (b) Voltage regulation that allows a voltage change of less than 5%;
    (c) Ripple voltage of not more than 5%;
    (d) A response time of not more than 25 milliseconds rise time from 
0 to rated current at rated voltage in a pure resistance circuit; and
    (e) An output impedance of not more than 0.005 ohms dc.
    S14.9.1.2 Procedure.
    S14.9.1.2.1 The sample unit is operated with the maximum bulb load 
it will experience on the vehicle on which it will be installed. Bulbs 
that fail during the test are replaced. The turn signal flasher is not 
to be included in the test circuit. When the unit includes a self-
canceling means, the test equipment is arranged so that the unit will be 
turned ``off'' in its normal operating manner.
    S14.9.1.2.2 The test is conducted at a rate not to exceed 15 
complete cycles per minute. One complete cycle consists of the following 
sequence: Off, left turn, off, right turn, and return to off.
    S14.9.1.2.3 The voltage drop from the input terminal of the device 
to each lamp output terminal, including 3 in of 16 or 18 gage wire, is 
measured at the start of the test, at intervals of not more than 25,000 
cycles during the test, and at the completion of the test.
    S14.9.1.3 Performance requirements.
    S14.9.1.3.1 A turn signal operating unit is considered to have met 
the requirements of the durability test if it remains operational after 
completing at least 100,000 cycles, and the voltage drop between the 
input contact and any output contact, including required length of wire, 
does not exceed 0.25 volts.
    S14.9.1.3.2 A turn signal operating unit is considered to have met 
the requirements of the durability test if it remains operational after 
completing at least 175,000 cycles for a unit installed on a 
multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, or bus 2032 mm or more in overall 
width, and the voltage drop between the input contact and any output 
contact,

[[Page 470]]

including required length of wire, does not exceed 0.25 volts.
    S14.9.1.3.3 If stop signals also operate through the turn signal 
operating unit, the voltage drop of any additional switch contacts must 
meet the same requirements as the turn signal contacts.
    S14.9.2 Vehicular hazard warning signal operating unit durability 
test.
    S14.9.2.1 Procedure.
    S14.9.2.1.1 The sample unit is operated at its rated voltage with 
the maximum bulb load it will experience on the vehicle on which it will 
be installed. Bulbs that fail during the test are replaced. The hazard 
warning signal flasher is not to be included in the test circuit.
    S14.9.2.1.2 The unit is turned ``on'' and ``off'' in its normal 
operating manner at a rate not to exceed 15 complete cycles per minute. 
One complete cycle consists of the sequence: Off, on, and return to off. 
The test consists of 10,000 cycles at an ambient temperature of 75[deg] 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 [deg]F followed by 1 hour constant ``on'' at 
the same temperature.
    S14.9.2.1.3 The voltage drop from the input terminal of the device 
to each lamp output terminal, including 3 in of 16 or 18 gage wire, is 
measured at the start of the test and at the completion of the test.
    S14.9.2.2 Performance requirements. A hazard warning signal 
operating unit is considered to have met the requirements of the 
durability test if it remains operational after completing 10,000 cycles 
and the 1 hour constant ``on'' and the voltage drop between the input 
contact and any output contact, including required length of wire, does 
not exceed 0.3 volts for either 6.4 or 12.8 line voltage both at the 
start and completion of the test.
    S14.9.3 Turn signal flasher and vehicular hazard warning signal 
flasher tests.
    S14.9.3.1 Standard test circuit. All turn signal flasher and 
vehicular hazard warning signal flasher tests use the standard test 
circuit of Figure 22.
    S14.9.3.1.1 Test circuit setup.
    S14.9.3.1.1.1 The effective series resistance in the total circuit 
between the power supply and the bulb sockets (excluding the flasher and 
bulb load(s) using shorting bars) is 0.10 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.01 
ohm.
    S14.9.3.1.1.2 The circuit resistance at A-B of Figure 22 is measured 
with flasher and bulb load(s) each shorted out with an effective shunt 
resistance not to exceed 0.005 ohms.
    S14.9.3.1.1.3 The voltage to the bulbs at C-D of Figure 22 is 
adjusted to 12.8 volts (or 6.4 volts) with the flasher shorted out by an 
effective shunt resistance not to exceed 0.005 ohms. The load current is 
adjusted by simultaneously adjusting trimmer resistors, R.
    S14.9.3.1.1.4 For testing fixed-load flashers at other required 
voltages, adjust the power supply to provide required voltages, at the 
required temperatures, at C-D of Figure 22, without readjustment of 
trimming resistors, R.
    S14.9.3.1.1.5 For variable-load flashers, the circuit is first 
adjusted for 12.8 volts (or 6.4 volts) at C-D of Figure 22, with the 
minimum required load, and the power supply is adjusted to provide other 
required test voltages, at required temperatures, at C-D of Figure 22, 
without readjustment of trimming resistors, R (each such required 
voltage being set with the minimum required load in place). The required 
voltage tests with the maximum load are conducted without readjusting 
each corresponding power supply voltage, previously set with minimum 
bulb load.
    S14.9.3.1.1.6 A suitable high impedance measuring device connected 
to points X-Y in Figure 22 is used for measuring flash rate, percent 
current ``on'' time, and voltage drop across the flasher. The 
measurement of these quantities does not affect the circuit.
    S14.9.3.2 Power supply specifications.
    S14.9.3.2.1 Starting time, voltage drop, and flash rate and percent 
current ``on'' time tests. The power supply used in the standard test 
circuit for conducting the starting time, the voltage drop, and the 
flash rate and percent current ``on'' time tests must comply with the 
following specifications:
    (a) Must not generate any adverse transients not present in motor 
vehicles;
    (b) Be capable of supplying 11-16 vdc for 12 volt flashers and 5-9 
vdc for 6 volt flashers to the input terminals of the standard test 
circuit;
    (c) Be capable of supplying required design current(s) continuously 
and inrush currents as required by the design bulb load complement;
    (d) Be capable of supplying an output voltage that does not deviate 
more than 2% with changes in the static load from 0 to maximum (not 
including inrush current) nor for static input line voltage variations;
    (e) Be capable of supplying an output voltage that does not deviate 
more than 1.0 vdc from 0 to maximum load (including inrush current) and 
must recover 63% of its maximum excursion within 100 [micro]sec; and
    (f) Have a ripple voltage of 75mv, peak to peak.
    S14.9.3.2.2 Durability tests. The power supply used in the standard 
test circuit for conducting durability tests must comply with the 
following specifications:
    (a) Must not generate any adverse transients not present in motor 
vehicles;
    (b) Be capable of supplying 13 vdc and 14 vdc for 12 volt flashers 
and 6.5 vdc and 7 vdc for 6 volt flashers to the input terminals of the 
standard test circuit;
    (c) Be capable of supplying a continuous output current of the 
design load for one flasher times the number of flashers and

[[Page 471]]

inrush currents as required by the design bulb load complement;
    (d) Be capable of supplying an output voltage that does not deviate 
more than 2% with changes in the static load from 0 to maximum (not 
including inrush current) and means must be provided to compensate for 
static input line voltage variations;
    (e) Be capable of supplying an output voltage that does not deviate 
more than 1.0 vdc from 0 to maximum load (including inrush current) and 
must recover 63% of its maximum excursion within 5 [micro]sec; and
    (f) Have a ripple voltage of 300 mv, peak to peak.
    S14.9.3.3 Turn signal flasher starting time test.
    S14.9.3.3.1 Samples. Twenty sample flashers chosen from random from 
fifty representative samples are subjected to a starting time test using 
the standard test circuit.
    S14.9.3.3.2 Procedure.
    S14.9.3.3.2.1 The test is conducted in an ambient temperature of 75 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 [deg]F with the design load (variable load 
flashers are tested with their minimum and their maximum design load) 
connected and the power source for the test circuit adjusted to apply 
design voltage at the bulbs.
    S14.9.3.3.2.2 The time measurement starts when the voltage is 
initially applied. Compliance is based on an average of three starts for 
each sample separated by a cooling interval of 5 minutes.
    S14.9.3.3.3 Performance requirements. The requirements of the 
starting time test are considered to have been met if 17 of 20 samples 
comply with the following:
    (a) A flasher having normally closed contacts must open (turn off) 
within 1.0 second for a device designed to operate two signal lamps, or 
within 1.25 seconds for a device designed to operate more than two 
lamps, or
    (b) A flasher having normally open contacts must complete the first 
cycle (close the contacts and then open the contacts) within 1.5 
seconds.
    S14.9.3.4 Turn signal flasher voltage drop test.
    S14.9.3.4.1 Samples. The same twenty sample flashers used in the 
starting time test are subjected to a voltage drop test using the 
standard test circuit.
    S14.9.3.4.2 Procedure.
    S14.9.3.4.2.1 The test is conducted in an ambient temperature of 75 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 [deg]F with the design load (variable load 
flashers are tested with their maximum design load) connected and the 
power source for the standard test circuit adjusted to apply 12.8 volts 
or 6.4 volts at the bulbs according to the flasher rating.
    S14.9.3.4.2.2 The voltage drop is measured between the input and 
load terminals of the flasher during the ``on'' period after the 
flashers have completed at least five consecutive cycles.
    S14.9.3.4.3 Performance requirements. The requirements of the 
voltage drop test are considered to have been met if 17 of 20 samples 
comply with the lowest voltage drop across any flasher not exceeding 
0.80 volt.
    S14.9.3.5 Turn signal flasher flash rate and percent current ``on'' 
time test.
    S14.9.3.5.1 Samples. The same twenty sample flashers used in the 
voltage drop test are subjected to a flash rate and percent of current 
``on'' time test.
    S14.9.3.5.2 Procedure.
    S14.9.3.5.2.1 The test is conducted using the standard test circuit 
with the design load (variable load flashers are tested with their 
minimum and their maximum design load) connected and design voltage 
applied to the bulbs.
    S14.9.3.5.2.2 Compliance is determined using the following 
combinations of ambient temperature and bulb voltage:
    (a) 12.8 volts (or 6.4 volts) and 75[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 
[deg]F,
    (b) 12.0 volts (or 6.0 volts) and 0[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 
[deg]F,
    (c) 15.0 volts (or 7.5 volts) and 0[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 
[deg]F,
    (d) 11.0 volts (or 5.5 volts) and 125[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 
[deg]F, and
    (e) 14.0 volts (or 7.0 volts) and 125[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 
[deg]F.
    S14.9.3.5.2.3 Flash rate and percent current ``on'' time are 
measured after the flashers have completed five consecutive cycles and 
are determined by an average of at least three consecutive cycles.
    S14.9.3.5.3 Performance requirements. The requirements of the flash 
rate and percent current ``on'' time test are considered to have been 
met if 17 of 20 samples comply with the following:
    (a) The performance of a normally closed type flasher must be within 
the unshaded portion of the polygon shown in Figure 2, or
    (b) The performance of a normally open type flasher must be within 
the entire rectangle including the shaded areas shown in Figure 2.
    S14.9.3.6 Turn signal flasher durability test.
    S14.9.3.6.1 Samples. Twenty sample flashers chosen from random from 
the thirty samples not used in the previous tests are subjected to a 
durability test.
    S14.9.3.6.2 Procedure.
    S14.9.3.6.2.1 Conformance of the samples to the starting time, 
voltage drop, and flash rate and percent of current ``on'' time tests 
(limited to the 12.8 volts or 6.4 volts and 75[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 [deg]F test condition only) is established.
    S14.9.3.6.2.2 The test is conducted on each sample with the design 
load (variable load flashers are tested with their maximum design load) 
connected and 14 volts or 7.0 volts, according to the flasher rating, 
applied to the input terminals of the standard test circuit.
    S14.9.3.6.2.3 The test cycle consists of 15 seconds on followed by 
15 seconds off for a total time of 200 hours in an ambient temperature 
of 75[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 [deg]F.

[[Page 472]]

    S14.9.3.6.3 Performance requirements. The requirements of the 
durability test are considered to have been met if, after completion, 17 
of 20 samples comply with the performance requirements of the starting 
time, voltage drop, and flash rate and percent of current ``on'' time 
tests (limited to the 12.8 volts or 6.4 volts and 75[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 [deg]F test condition only) when tested in the 
standard test circuit with design load and 12.8 volts (or 6.4 volts) 
applied to the bulbs.
    S14.9.3.7 Vehicular hazard warning signal flasher starting time 
test.
    S14.9.3.7.1 Samples. Twenty sample flashers chosen from random from 
fifty representative samples are subjected to a starting time test using 
the standard test circuit.
    S14.9.3.7.2 Procedure.
    S14.9.3.7.2.1 The test is conducted test in an ambient temperature 
of 75[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 [deg]F with the minimum and maximum 
load connected and the power source for the test circuit adjusted to 
apply design voltage at the bulbs.
    S14.9.3.7.2.2 The time measurement starts when the voltage is 
initially applied.
    S14.9.3.7.3 Performance requirements. The requirements of the 
starting time test are considered to have been met if 17 of 20 samples 
comply with the following:
    (a) A flasher having normally closed contacts must open (turn off) 
within 1.5 seconds after the voltage is applied, or
    (b) A flasher having normally open contacts must complete the first 
cycle (close the contacts and then open the contacts) within 1.5 seconds 
after the voltage is applied.
    S14.9.3.8 Vehicular hazard warning signal flasher voltage drop test.
    S14.9.3.8.1 Samples. The same twenty sample flashers used in the 
starting time test are subjected to a voltage drop test using the 
standard test circuit.
    S14.9.3.8.2 Procedure.
    S14.9.3.8.2.1 The test is conducted in an ambient temperature of 
75[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 [deg]F with the maximum design load 
connected and the power source for the test circuit adjusted to apply 
design voltage at the bulbs.
    S14.9.3.8.2.2 The voltage drop is measured between the input and 
load terminals of the flasher during the ``on'' period after the 
flashers have completed at least five consecutive cycles.
    S14.9.3.8.3 Performance requirements. The requirements of the 
voltage drop test are considered to have been met if 17 of 20 samples 
comply with the lowest voltage drop across any flasher must not exceed 
0.8 volt.
    S14.9.3.9 Vehicular hazard warning signal flasher flash rate and 
percent ``on'' time test.
    S14.9.3.9.1 Samples. The same twenty sample flashers used in the 
voltage drop test are subjected to a flash rate and percent of current 
``on'' time test.
    S14.9.3.9.2 Procedure.
    S14.9.3.9.2.1 The test is conducted using the standard test circuit 
by and applying loads of from two signal lamps to the maximum design 
loading including pilot indicator.
    S14.9.3.9.2.2 Compliance is determined using the following 
combinations of ambient temperature and bulb voltage:
    (a) 12.8 volts (or 6.4 volts) and 75[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 
[deg]F,
    (b) 11.0 volts (or 5.5 volts) and 125[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 
[deg]F,
    (c) 11.0 volts (or 5.5 volts) and 0[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 
[deg]F,
    (d) 13.0 volts (or 6.5 volts) and 125[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 
[deg]F, and
    (e) 13.0 volts (or 6.5 volts) and 0[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 
[deg]F.
    S14.9.3.9.2.3 Flash rate and percent current ``on'' time are 
measured after the flashers have completed five consecutive cycles and 
are determined by an average of at least three consecutive cycles.
    S14.9.3.9.3 Performance requirements. The requirements of the flash 
rate and percent current ``on'' time test are considered to have been 
met if 17 of 20 samples comply with the following:
    (a) The performance of a normally closed type flasher must be within 
the unshaded portion of the polygon shown in Figure 2, or
    (b) The performance of a normally open type flasher must be within 
the entire rectangle including the shaded areas shown in Figure 2.
    S14.9.3.10 Vehicular hazard warning signal flasher durability test.
    S14.9.3.10.1 Samples. Twenty sample flashers chosen from random from 
the thirty samples not used in the previous tests are subjected to a 
durability test.
    S14.9.3.10.2 Procedure.
    S14.9.3.10.2.1 Conformance of the samples to the starting time, 
voltage drop, and flash rate and percent of current ``on'' time tests 
(limited to the 12.8 volts or 6.4 volts and 75[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 [deg]F test condition only) is established.
    S14.9.3.10.2.2 The test is conducted on each sample with the maximum 
design load connected and 13.0 volts (or 6.5 volts) applied to the input 
terminals of the standard test circuit.
    S14.9.3.10.2.3 The flasher is subjected to continuous flashing for a 
total time of 36 hours in an ambient temperature of 75[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 [deg]F.
    S14.9.3.10.3 Performance requirements. The requirements of the 
durability test are considered to have been met if, after completion, 17 
of 20 samples comply with the performance requirements of the starting 
time, voltage drop, and flash rate and percent of current ``on'' time 
tests (limited to the 12.8 volts or 6.4 volts and 75[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 [deg]F test condition only) when tested in the 
standard test circuit with the power source adjusted to provide design 
voltage to the bulbs and with a minimum load of two signal lamp bulbs 
and the maximum design load, including pilot lamps, as specified by the 
manufacturer at an ambient temperature of 75[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 
10 [deg]F.

[[Page 473]]

    S14.9.3.11 Semiautomatic headlamp beam switching device tests.
    S14.9.3.11.1 Test conditions. All tests are conducted with 13 volts 
input to the device unless otherwise specified.
    S14.9.3.11.2 Sensitivity test.
    S14.9.3.11.2.1 Samples. The sample device is mounted in and operated 
in the laboratory in the same environment as that encountered on the 
vehicle, that is tinted glass, grille work, etc.
    S14.9.3.11.2.2 Procedure.
    S14.9.3.11.2.2.1 The sample device is adjusted for sensitivity in 
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. It is exposed to a 
light source capable of providing a variable intensity of at least 1.5 
cd to 150 cd at 100 feet from the sample device.
    S14.9.3.11.2.2.2 The device is switched to the lower beam mode in 
accordance with the ``dim'' limits specified and switched back to the 
upper beam mode in accordance with the ``hold'' limits specified for the 
specified test positions.
    S14.9.3.11.2.2.3 To provide more complete information on sensitivity 
throughout the required vertical and horizontal angles, a set of 
constant footcandle curves are made at ``dim'' sensitivities of 17, 25, 
and 100 cd at 100 ft.
    S14.9.3.11.2.3 Performance requirements.
    S14.9.3.11.2.3.1 Operating limits.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Test position  (degrees)              Dim  (cd at 100 ft)                Hold  (cd at 100 ft)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
H V......................................  Adjust to 15...............  1.5 min to 3.75 max.
H 2L.....................................  25 max.....................  1.5 min.
H 4L.....................................  40 max.....................  1.5 min.
H 6L.....................................  75 max.....................  1.5 min.
H 2R.....................................  25 max.....................  1.5 min.
H 5R.....................................  150 max to 40 min..........  1.5 min.
1D V.....................................  30 max.....................  1.5 min.
1U V.....................................  30 max.....................  1.5 min.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S14.9.3.11.2.3.2 There must be no sensitivity voids shown in the 
constant footcandle curves within the area limited by the test 
positions.
    S14.9.3.11.3 Voltage regulation test.
    S14.9.3.11.3.1 Procedure.
    S14.9.3.11.3.1.1 The sensitivity of the sample device is adjusted so 
that it complies with the sensitivity test.
    S14.9.3.11.3.1.2 The ``dim'' sensitivity is measured at the H-V test 
position at 11 volts input to the device and at 15 volts input to the 
device.
    S14.9.3.11.3.2 Performance requirements. The device must switch to 
the lower beam mode at between 8 (cd at 100 ft) and 25 (cd at 100 ft) 
with the input voltage at 11 volts and at 15 volts.
    S14.9.3.11.4 Manual override test.
    S14.9.3.11.4.1 Procedure.
    S14.9.3.11.4.1.1 The sensitivity of the sample device is adjusted so 
that it complies with the sensitivity test.
    S14.9.3.11.4.1.2 The device is exposed to a test light that causes 
it to switch to the lower beam mode.
    S14.9.3.11.4.1.3 The manufacturer's instructions are followed to 
cause the device to override the test light and switch to upper beam.
    S14.9.3.11.4.1.4 In a similar manner, the test light is extinguished 
to cause the device to switch to the upper beam mode.
    S14.9.3.11.4.1.5 Again the manufacturer's instructions are followed 
to cause the device to switch to lower beam.
    S14.9.3.11.4.2 Performance requirements. The device, when operated 
in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, must switch to the 
opposite beam with the test light energized and with the test light 
extinguished.
    S14.9.3.11.5 Warmup test.
    S14.9.3.11.5.1 Procedure.
    S14.9.3.11.5.1.1 The sensitivity of the sample device is adjusted so 
that it complies with the sensitivity test and the test lamp 
extinguished.
    S14.9.3.11.5.1.2 The test lamp will then be energized at a level of 
25 (cd at 100 ft) at the H-V position of the device and the time for the 
device to switch to lower beam is measured.
    S14.9.3.11.5.2 Performance requirements. If the warmup time of the 
device exceeds 10 seconds it shall maintain the headlamps on lower beam 
during warmup.
    S14.9.3.11.6 Temperature test.
    S14.9.3.11.6.1 Procedure.
    S14.9.3.11.6.1.1 The sample device is exposed for 1 hour in a 
temperature corresponding to that at the device mounting location.
    S14.9.3.11.6.1.2 For a device mounted in the passenger compartment 
or the engine compartment, the temperature is 210 [deg]F, mounted 
elsewhere, the temperature is 150 [deg]F.
    S14.9.3.11.6.1.3 After this exposure the H-V ``dim'' sensitivity of 
the sample device is measured over the temperature range of -30 [deg]F 
to +100 [deg]F.
    S14.9.3.11.6.2 Performance requirements. The device must switch to 
the lower beam mode between 8 (cd at 100 ft) and 25 (cd at 100 ft)

[[Page 474]]

over the temperature range of -30 [deg]F to +100 [deg]F.
    S14.9.3.11.7 Dust test.
    S14.9.3.11.7.1 Procedure.
    S14.9.3.11.7.1.1 The sensitivity of the sample device is adjusted so 
that it complies with the sensitivity test.
    S14.9.3.11.7.1.2 The device is then subjected to the dust test of 
S14.5.3.
    S14.9.3.11.7.1.3 At the conclusion of the dust exposure the lens of 
the device must be wiped clean and the H-V ``dim'' sensitivity of the 
sample device is measured.
    S14.9.3.11.7.2 Performance requirements. The device must switch to 
the lower beam mode between 8 (cd at 100 ft) and 25 (cd at 100 ft).
    S14.9.3.11.8 Corrosion test.
    S14.9.3.11.8.1 Procedure.
    S14.9.3.11.8.1.1 The sensitivity of the sample device is adjusted so 
that it complies with the sensitivity test.
    S14.9.3.11.8.1.2 All system components located outside the passenger 
compartment must be subjected to the corrosion test of S14.5.4 with the 
device not operating.
    S14.9.3.11.8.1.3 Water is not permitted to accumulate on any 
connector socket.
    S14.9.3.11.8.1.4 At the conclusion of the test the H-V ``dim'' 
sensitivity of the sample device must be measured.
    S14.9.3.11.8.2 Performance requirements. The sample device must 
switch to the lower beam mode between 8 (cd at 100 ft) and 25 (cd at 100 
ft).
    S14.9.3.11.9 Vibration test.
    S14.9.3.11.9.1 Procedure.
    S14.9.3.11.9.1.1 The sensitivity of the sample device is adjusted so 
that it complies with the sensitivity test and the mechanical aim of the 
photounit determined.
    S14.9.3.11.9.1.2 The sample device must be mounted in proper vehicle 
position and subjected to vibration of 5g constant acceleration for \1/
2\ hour in each of three directions: vertical; horizontal and parallel 
to the vehicle longitudinal axis; and horizontal and normal to the 
vehicle longitudinal axis.
    S14.9.3.11.9.1.3 The vibration frequency must be varied from 30 to 
200 and back to 30 cycles per second over a period of approximately 1 
minute.
    S14.9.3.11.9.1.4 The device must be operating during the test.
    S14.9.3.11.9.1.5 At the conclusion of the test the H-V ``dim'' 
sensitivity of the sample device and the mechanical aim of the photounit 
must be measured.
    S14.9.3.11.9.2 Performance requirements.
    S14.9.3.11.9.2.1 The sample device must switch to the lower beam 
mode between 8 (cd at 100 ft) and 25 (cd at 100 ft).
    S14.9.3.11.9.2.2 The mechanical aim of the device photounit must not 
have changed by more than 0.25[deg] from the initial value.
    S14.9.3.11.10 Sunlight test.
    S14.9.3.11.10.1 Procedure.
    S14.9.3.11.10.1.1 The sample device must be exposed for 1 hour in 
bright noonday sunlight (5000 fc minimum illumination with a clear sky) 
with the photounit aimed as it would be in service and facing an 
unobstructed portion of the horizon in the direction of the sun.
    S14.9.3.11.10.1.2 The device must then be rested for 1 hour in 
normal room light at room temperature and the H-V ``dim'' sensitivity of 
the sample device is measured.
    S14.9.3.11.10.2 Performance requirements. The sample device must 
switch to the lower beam mode between 8 (cd at 100 ft) and 25 (cd at 100 
ft).
    S14.9.3.11.11 Durability test.
    S14.9.3.11.11.1 Procedure.
    S14.9.3.11.11.1.1 The sensitivity of the sample device is adjusted 
so that it complies with the sensitivity test.
    S14.9.3.11.11.1.2 The device photounit operated at a 13.0 input 
voltage on a cycle of 90 minutes on and 30 minutes off must be activated 
by a 60 cd light source at 100 ft, or equivalent, which is cycled on and 
off 4 times per minute for a period of 200 hours.
    S14.9.3.11.11.1.3 The device must then rest for 2 hours in a lighted 
area of 50 to 150 fc after which the H-V ``dim'' sensitivity must be 
measured.
    S14.9.3.11.11.2 Performance requirements. The sample device must 
switch to the lower beam mode between 8 (cd at 100 ft) and 25 (cd at 100 
ft).
    S14.9.3.11.12 Return to upper beam test.
    S14.9.3.11.12.1 Procedure.
    S14.9.3.11.12.1.1 The sensitivity of the sample device is adjusted 
so that it complies with the sensitivity test.
    S14.9.3.11.12.1.2 The lens of the photounit must be exposed to light 
of 100 fc for 10 seconds.
    S14.9.3.11.12.2 Performance requirements. The sample device must 
switch to upper beam mode within 2 seconds after the 100 fc light is 
extinguished.

[[Page 475]]



                                Table I-a--Required Lamps and Reflective Devices
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         Mounting
        Lighting  device          Number and color       location       Mounting height      Device activation
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  All Passenger Cars, Multipurpose Passenger Vehicles (MPV), Trucks, and Buses
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lower Beam Headlamps...........  White, of a        On the front, at   Not less than 22   The wiring harness or
                                  headlighting       the same height,   inches (55.9 cm)   connector assembly of
                                  system listed in   symmetrically      nor more than 54   each headlighting
                                  Table II.          about the          inches (137.2      system must be
                                                     vertical           cm).               designed so that only
                                                     centerline, as                        those light sources
                                                     far apart as                          intended for meeting
                                                     practicable.                          lower beam
                                                                                           photometrics are
                                                                                           energized when the
                                                                                           beam selector switch
                                                                                           is in the lower beam
                                                                                           position, and that
                                                                                           only those light
                                                                                           sources intended for
                                                                                           meeting upper beam
                                                                                           photometrics are
                                                                                           energized when the
                                                                                           beam selector switch
                                                                                           is in the upper beam
                                                                                           position, except for
                                                                                           certain systems
                                                                                           listed in Table II.
                                                                                          Steady burning, except
                                                                                           that may be flashed
                                                                                           for signaling
                                                                                           purposes.
Upper Beam Headlamps...........  White, of a        On the front, at   Not less than 22
                                  headlighting       the same height,   inches (55.9 cm)
                                  system listed in   symmetrically      nor more than 54
                                  Table II.          about the          inches (137.2
                                                     vertical           cm).
                                                     centerline, as
                                                     far apart as
                                                     practicable.
Turn Signal Lamps..............  2 Amber..........  At or near the     Not less than 15   Flash when the turn
                                                     front, at the      inches, nor more   signal flasher is
                                                     same height,       than 83 inches.    actuated by the turn
                                                     symmetrically                         signal operating
                                                     about the                             unit.
                                                     vertical
                                                     centerline, as
                                                     far apart as
                                                     practicable.
                                 2 Amber or red     On the rear, at
                                  Truck tractor      the same height,
                                  exception, see     symmetrically
                                  S6.1.1.3.          about the
                                                     vertical
                                                     centerline, as
                                                     far apart as
                                                     practicable.
Taillamps......................  2 Red............  On the rear, at    Not less than 15   Steady burning. Must
                                                     the same height,   inches, nor more   be activated when the
                                                     symmetrically      than 72 inches.    headlamps are
                                                     about the                             activated in a steady
                                                     vertical                              burning state or the
                                                     centerline, as                        parking lamps on
                                                     far apart as                          passenger cars and
                                                     practicable.                          MPVs, trucks, and
                                                                                           buses less than 80
                                                                                           inches in overall
                                                                                           width are activated.
                                                                                          May be activated when
                                                                                           the headlamps are
                                                                                           activated at less
                                                                                           than full intensity
                                                                                           as Daytime Running
                                                                                           Lamps (DRL).
Stop Lamps.....................  2 Red............  On the rear, at    Not less than 15   Steady burning.
                                                     the same height,   inches, nor more  Must be activated upon
                                                     symmetrically      than 72 inches.    application of the
                                                     about the                             service brakes. When
                                                     vertical                              optically combined
                                                     centerline, as                        with a turn signal
                                                     far apart as                          lamp, the circuit
                                                     practicable.                          must be such that the
                                                                                           stop signal cannot be
                                                                                           activated if the turn
                                                                                           signal lamp is
                                                                                           flashing.
                                                                                          May also be activated
                                                                                           by a device designed
                                                                                           to retard the motion
                                                                                           of the vehicle.
Side Marker Lamps..............  2 Amber..........  On each side as    Not less than 15   Steady burning except
                                                     far to the front   inches.            may be flashed for
                                                     as practicable.                       signaling purposes.
                                                                                           Must be activated
                                                                                           when the headlamps
                                                                                           are activated in a
                                                                                           steady burning state
                                                                                           or the parking lamps
                                                                                           on passenger cars and
                                                                                           MPVs, trucks, and
                                                                                           buses less than 80
                                                                                           inches in overall
                                                                                           width are activated.
                                 2 Red (not         On each side as
                                  required on        far to the rear
                                  truck tractor).    as practicable.

[[Page 476]]

 
Reflex Reflectors..............  2 Amber..........  On each side as    Not less than 15   Not applicable.
                                                     far to the front   inches, nor more
                                                     as practicable.    than 60 inches.
                                 2 Red (not         On each side as
                                  required on        far to the rear
                                  truck tractor)..   as practicable.
                                 2 Red............  On the rear, at
                                                     the same height,
                                                     symmetrically
                                                     about the
                                                     vertical
                                                     centerline, as
                                                     far apart as
                                                     practicable.
                                                    On a truck
                                                     tractor may be
                                                     mounted on the
                                                     back of the cab
                                                     not less than 4
                                                     inches above the
                                                     height of the
                                                     rear tires..
Backup Lamp....................  1 White            On the rear......  No requirement...  Steady burning.
                                  Additional lamps                                        Must be activated when
                                  permitted to                                             the ignition switch
                                  meet                                                     is energized and
                                  requirements.                                            reverse gear is
                                                                                           engaged.
                                                                                          Must not be energized
                                                                                           when the vehicle is
                                                                                           in forward motion.
License Plate Lamp.............  1 White            On the rear to     No requirement...  Steady burning.
                                  Additional lamps   illuminate                           Must be activated when
                                  permitted to       license plate                         the headlamps are
                                  meet               from top or                           activated in a steady
                                  requirements.      sides.                                burning state or when
                                                                                           the parking lamps on
                                                                                           passenger cars and
                                                                                           MPVs, trucks, and
                                                                                           buses less than 80
                                                                                           inches in overall
                                                                                           width are activated.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Additional Lamps Required on All Passenger Cars, and on Multipurpose Passenger Vehicles (MPV), Trucks, and
                                    Buses, Less Than 2032 MM in Overall Width
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Parking lamps..................  2 Amber or white.  On the front, at   Not less than 15   Steady burning.
                                                     the same height,   inches, nor more  Must be activated when
                                                     symmetrically      than 72 inches.    the headlamps are
                                                     about the                             activated in a steady
                                                     vertical                              burning state.
                                                     centerline, as
                                                     far apart as
                                                     practicable.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Additional Lamp(s) Required on All Passenger Cars, and on Multipurpose Passenger Vehicles (MPV), Trucks, and
                 Buses, Less Than 2032 MM in Overall Width and With a GVWR of 10,000 Lbs or Less
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
High mounted stop lamp.........  1 Red, or 2 red    On the rear        Not less than 34   Steady burning.
                                  where exceptions   including          inches except     Must only be activated
                                  apply. See         glazing, with      for passenger      upon application of
                                  Section 6.1.1.2.   the lamp center    cars. See          the service brakes or
                                                     on the vertical    Section 6.1.4.1.   may be activated by a
                                                     centerline as                         device designed to
                                                     viewed from the                       retard the motion of
                                                     rear.                                 the vehicle.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Additional Lamps and Reflective Devices Required on All Passenger Cars, Multipurpose Passenger Vehicles (MPV),
                                      Trucks, and Buses, 30 Feet or Longer
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Intermediate side marker lamps.  2 Amber..........  On each side       Not less than 15   Steady burning except
                                                     located at or      inches.            may be flashed for
                                                     near the                              signaling purposes.
                                                     midpoint between                     Must be activated when
                                                     the front and                         the headlamps are
                                                     rear side marker                      activated in a steady
                                                     lamps.                                burning state or when
                                                                                           the parking lamps on
                                                                                           passenger cars and
                                                                                           MPVs, trucks, and
                                                                                           buses less than 80
                                                                                           inches in overall
                                                                                           width are activated.

[[Page 477]]

 
Intermediate side reflex         2 Amber..........  On each side       Not less than 15   Not applicable.
 reflectors.                                         located at or      inches, nor more
                                                     near the           than 60 inches.
                                                     midpoint between
                                                     the front and
                                                     rear side reflex
                                                     reflectors.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Additional Lamps Required on All Multipurpose Passenger Vehicles (MPV), Trucks, and Buses, 2032 MM or More in
                                                  Overall Width
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Clearance lamps................  2 Amber..........  On the front to    As near the top    Steady burning.
                                                     indicate the       as practicable.
                                                     overall width of
                                                     the vehicle, or
                                                     width of cab on
                                                     truck tractor,
                                                     at the same
                                                     height,
                                                     symmetrically
                                                     about the
                                                     vertical
                                                     centerline.
                                                    May be located at
                                                     a location other
                                                     than the front
                                                     if necessary to
                                                     indicate the
                                                     overall width of
                                                     the vehicle, or
                                                     for protection
                                                     from damage
                                                     during normal
                                                     operation of the
                                                     vehicle..
                                 2 Red............  On the rear to     As near the top    Steady burning.
                                 (not required on    indicate the       as practicable,
                                  truck tractor).    overall width of   except where the
                                                     the vehicle, at    rear
                                                     the same height,   identification
                                                     symmetrically      lamps are
                                                     about the          mounted at the
                                                     vertical           extreme height
                                                     centerline.        of the vehicle..
                                                    May be located at  Practicability of
                                                     a location other   locating lamps
                                                     than the rear if   on the vehicle
                                                     necessary to       header is
                                                     indicate the       presumed when
                                                     overall width of   the header
                                                     the vehicle, or    extends at least
                                                     for protection     25 mm (1 inch)
                                                     from damage        above the rear
                                                     during normal      doors..
                                                     operation of the
                                                     vehicle..
Identification lamps...........  3 Amber..........  On the front, at   As near the top    Steady burning.
                                                     the same height,   of the vehicle
                                                     as close as        or top of the
                                                     practicable to     cab as
                                                     the vertical       practicable.
                                                     centerline, with
                                                     lamp centers
                                                     spaced not less
                                                     than 6 inches or
                                                     more than 12
                                                     inches apart.
                                 3 Red (not         On the rear, at    As near the top    Steady burning.
                                  required on        the same height,   as practicable.
                                  truck tractor).    as close as       Practicability of
                                                     practicable to     locating lamps
                                                     the vertical       on the vehicle
                                                     centerline, with   header is
                                                     lamp centers       presumed when
                                                     spaced not less    the header
                                                     than 6 inches or   extends at least
                                                     more than 12       25 mm (1 inch)
                                                     inches apart.      above the rear
                                                                        doors..
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 478]]

 
            Additional Lamps Required on All School Buses Except Multifunction School Activity Buses
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Signal warning lamps...........  2 Red plus 2       On the front of    As high as         Flashing alternately
                                  amber optional.    the cab as far     practicable but    between 60 to 120
                                                     apart as           at least above     cycles per minute,
                                                     practicable, but   the windshield.    with an activation
                                                     in no case shall                      period sufficient to
                                                     the spacing                           allow the lamp to
                                                     between lamps be                      reach full
                                                     less than 40                          brightness, when
                                                     inches.                               actuated by a manual
                                                    Amber lamps, when                      switch.
                                                     installed, at                        Amber lamps, when
                                                     the same height                       installed, may only
                                                     as and just                           be activated by
                                                     inboard of the                        manual or foot
                                                     red lamp..                            operation, and must
                                                                                           be automatically
                                                                                           deactivated and the
                                                                                           red lamps must be
                                                                                           automatically
                                                                                           activated when the
                                                                                           bus entrance door is
                                                                                           opened.
                                 2 Red plus 2       On the rear cab    As high as         Flashing alternately
                                  amber optional.    as far apart as    practicable but    between 60 to 120
                                                     practicable, but   at least above     cycles per minute,
                                                     in no case shall   the top of any     with an activation
                                                     the spacing        side window        period sufficient to
                                                     between lamps be   opening.           allow the lamp to
                                                     less than 40                          reach full
                                                     inches.                               brightness, when
                                                    Amber lamps, when                      actuated by a manual
                                                     installed, at                         switch.
                                                     the same height                      Amber lamps, when
                                                     as and just                           installed, may only
                                                     inboard of the                        be activated by
                                                     red lamp..                            manual or foot
                                                                                           operation, and must
                                                                                           be automatically
                                                                                           deactivated and the
                                                                                           red lamps must be
                                                                                           automatically
                                                                                           activated when the
                                                                                           bus entrance door is
                                                                                           opened.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Daytime Running Lamps Permitted But Not Required on Passenger Cars, Multipurpose Passenger Vehicles (MPV),
                                                Trucks, and Buses
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Daytime running lamp (DRL).....  2 identically      On the front,      Not more than      Steady burning.
                                  colored either     symmetrically      1.067 meters      Automatically
                                  white, white to    disposed about     above the road     activated as
                                  yellow, white to   the vertical       surface if not a   determined by the
                                  selective          centerline if      pair of lamps      vehicle manufacturer
                                  yellow,            not a pair of      required by this   and automatically
                                  selective          lamps required     standard or if     deactivated when the
                                  yellow, or         by this standard   not optically      headlamp control is
                                  yellow.            or if not          combined with a    in any ``on''
                                                     optically          pair of lamps      position.
                                                     combined with a    required by this  Each DRL optically
                                                     pair of lamps      standard.          combined with a turn
                                                     required by this  See S7.10.13(b)     signal lamp must be
                                                     standard.          for additional     automatically
                                                                        height             deactivated as a DRL
                                                                        limitation..       when the turn signal
                                                                                           lamp or hazard
                                                                                           warning lamp is
                                                                                           activated, and
                                                                                           automatically
                                                                                           reactivated as a DRL
                                                                                           when the turn signal
                                                                                           lamp or hazard
                                                                                           warning lamp is
                                                                                           deactivated.
                                                                                          See S7.10.10.1(c) for
                                                                                           additional activation
                                                                                           requirements when
                                                                                           mounted close to, or
                                                                                           combined with, a turn
                                                                                           signal lamp.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                Table I-b--Required Lamps and Reflective Devices
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Lighting device           Number and color     Mounting location     Mounting height   Device activation
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  ALL TRAILERS
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Turn Signal Lamps..............  2 Red or amber...  On the rear, at the     Not less than 15   Flash when the
                                                     same height,            inches, nor more   turn signal
                                                     symmetrically about     than 83 inches.    flasher is
                                                     the vertical                               actuated by the
                                                     centerline, as far                         turn signal
                                                     apart as practicable.                      operating unit.
Taillamps......................  2 Red or 1 red on  On the rear, at the     Not less than 15   Steady burning.
                                  trailers less      same height,            inches, nor more
                                  than 30 inches     symmetrically about     than 72 inches.
                                  wide.              the vertical
                                                     centerline, as far
                                                     apart as practicable.
                                                     When a single lamp is
                                                     installed it must be
                                                     mounted at or near
                                                     the vertical
                                                     centerline.

[[Page 479]]

 
Stop Lamps.....................  2 Red, or 1 red    On the rear, at the     Not less than 15   Steady burning.
                                  on trailers less   same height,            inches, nor more  Must be activated
                                  than 30 inches     symmetrically about     than 72 inches.    upon application
                                  wide.              the vertical                               of the service
                                                     centerline, as far                         brakes.
                                                     apart as practicable.                     When optically
                                                     When a single lamp is                      combined with a
                                                     installed it must be                       turn signal
                                                     mounted at or near                         lamp, the
                                                     the vertical                               circuit must be
                                                     centerline.                                such that the
                                                                                                stop signal
                                                                                                cannot be
                                                                                                activated if the
                                                                                                turn signal lamp
                                                                                                is flashing. May
                                                                                                also be
                                                                                                activated by a
                                                                                                device designed
                                                                                                to retard the
                                                                                                motion of the
                                                                                                vehicle.
Side Marker Lamps..............  2 Amber..........  On each side as far to  Not less than 15   Steady burning
                                 None required on    the front as            inches.            except may be
                                  trailers less      practicable exclusive                      flashed for
                                  than 1829 mm [6    of the trailer tongue.                     signaling
                                  ft] in overall                                                purposes.
                                  length including
                                  the trailer
                                  tongue.
                                 2 Red............  On each side as far to  Not less than 15
                                                     the rear as             inches. Not more
                                                     practicable.            than 60 inches
                                                                             on trailers 2032
                                                                             mm or more in
                                                                             overall width.
Reflex Reflectors. A trailer     2 Amber..........  On each side as far to  Not less than 15   Not applicable.
 equipped with a conspicuity     None required on    the front as            inches, nor more
 treatment in conformance with    trailers less      practicable exclusive   than 60 inches.
 S8.2 of this standard need not   than 1829 mm [6    of the trailer tongue.
 be equipped with reflex          ft] in overall
 reflectors if the conspicuity    length including
 material is placed at the        the trailer
 locations of the required        tongue.
 reflex reflectors.
                                 2 Red............  On each side as far to
                                                     the rear as
                                                     practicable.
                                 2 Red or 1 red on  On the rear, at the
                                  trailers less      same height,
                                  than 30 inches     symmetrically about
                                  wide.              the vertical
                                                     centerline, as far
                                                     apart as practicable.
                                                    When a single
                                                     reflector is
                                                     installed it must be
                                                     mounted at or near
                                                     the vertical
                                                     centerline..
License Plate Lamp.............  1 White..........  On the rear to          No requirement...  Steady burning.
                                 Additional lamps    illuminate license
                                  permitted to       plate from top or
                                  meet               sides.
                                  requirements.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Additional Lamps and Reflective Devices Required on all Trailers 30 Feet or Longer
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Intermediate side marker lamps.  2 Amber..........  On each side located    Not less than 15   Steady burning
                                                     at or near the          inches.            except may be
                                                     midpoint between the                       flashed for
                                                     front and rear side                        signaling
                                                     marker lamps.                              purposes.

[[Page 480]]

 
Intermediate side reflex         2 Amber..........  On each side located    Not less than 15   Not applicable.
 reflectors.                                         at or near the          inches, nor more
A trailer equipped with a                            midpoint between the    than 60 inches.
 conspicuity treatment in                            front and rear side
 conformance with S8.2 of this                       reflex reflectors.
 standard need not be equipped
 with reflex reflectors if the
 conspicuity material is placed
 at the locations of the
 required reflex reflectors.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                   Additional Lamps Required on all Trailers 2032 MM or More in Overall Width
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Clearance lamps................  2 Amber..........  On the front to         As near the top    Steady burning.
                                                     indicate the overall    as practicable.
                                                     width of the vehicle,
                                                     at the same height,
                                                     symmetrically about
                                                     the vertical
                                                     centerline.
                                                    May be located at a
                                                     location other than
                                                     the front if
                                                     necessary to indicate
                                                     the overall width of
                                                     the vehicle, or for
                                                     protection from
                                                     damage during normal
                                                     operation of the
                                                     vehicle.
                                 2 Red............  On the rear to          As near the top    Steady burning.
                                                     indicate the overall    as practicable,
                                                     width of the vehicle,   except where the
                                                     at the same height,     rear
                                                     symmetrically about     identification
                                                     the vertical            lamps are
                                                     centerline.             mounted at the
                                                    May be located at a      extreme height
                                                     location other than     of the vehicle.
                                                     the rear if necessary   Practicability
                                                     to indicate the         of locating
                                                     overall width of the    lamps on the
                                                     vehicle, or for         vehicle header
                                                     protection from         is presumed when
                                                     damage during normal    the header
                                                     operation of the        extends at least
                                                     vehicle.                25 mm (1 inch)
                                                                             above the rear
                                                                             doors.
                                 2 Amber to front   On a boat trailer the   As near the top    Steady burning.
                                  and red to rear.   requirement for front   as practicable.
                                                     and rear clearance
                                                     lamps may be met by
                                                     installation at or
                                                     near the midpoint on
                                                     each side of a dual
                                                     facing lamp so as to
                                                     indicate the extreme
                                                     width. May be located
                                                     at a location other
                                                     than the front and
                                                     the rear if necessary
                                                     to indicate the
                                                     overall width of the
                                                     vehicle, or for
                                                     protection from
                                                     damage during normal
                                                     operation of the
                                                     vehicle.
Identification lamps...........  3 Red............  On the rear, at the     As near the top    Steady burning.
                                                     same height, as close   as practicable.
                                                     as practicable to the  Practicability of
                                                     vertical centerline,    locating lamps
                                                     with lamp centers       on the vehicle
                                                     spaced not less than    header is
                                                     6 inches or more than   presumed when
                                                     12 inches apart.        the header
                                                                             extends at least
                                                                             25 mm (1 inch)
                                                                             above the rear
                                                                             doors.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 481]]


                                Table I-c--Required Lamps and Reflective Devices
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Lighting device           Number and color  Mounting location   Mounting height      Device activation
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                 All Motorcycles
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lower Beam Headlamps...........  White, of a        On the front, at   Not less than 22   The wiring harness or
                                  headlighting       the same height,   inches (55.9 cm)   connector assembly of
                                  system listed in   symmetrically      nor more than 54   each headlighting
                                  S10.17.            about the          inches (137.2      system must be
                                                     vertical           cm).               designed so that only
                                                     centerline, as                        those light sources
                                                     far apart as                          intended for meeting
                                                     practicable. See                      lower beam
                                                     additional                            photometrics are
                                                     requirements in                       energized when the
                                                     S10.17.1.1,                           beam selector switch
                                                     S10.17.1.2, and                       is in the lower beam
                                                     S10.17.1.3.                           position, and that
                                                                                           only those light
                                                                                           sources intended for
                                                                                           meeting upper beam
                                                                                           photometrics are
                                                                                           energized when the
                                                                                           beam selector switch
                                                                                           is in the upper beam
                                                                                           position, except for
                                                                                           certain systems
                                                                                           listed in Table II.
Upper Beam Headlamps...........  White, of a        On the front, at   Not less than 22   Steady burning, except
                                  headlighting       the same height,   inches (55.9 cm)   that may be flashed
                                  system listed in   symmetrically      nor more than 54   for signaling
                                  S10.17.            about the          inches (137.2      purposes.
                                                     vertical           cm).
                                                     centerline, as
                                                     far apart as
                                                     practicable. See
                                                     additional
                                                     requirements in
                                                     S10.17.1.1,
                                                     S10.17.1.2, and
                                                     S10.17.1.3.
                                                                                          The upper beam or the
                                                                                           lower beam, but not
                                                                                           both, may be wired to
                                                                                           modulate from a
                                                                                           higher intensity to a
                                                                                           lower intensity in
                                                                                           accordance with
                                                                                           S10.17.5
Turn Signal Lamps..............  2 Amber. None      At or near the     Not less than 15   Flash when the turn
                                  required on a      front, at the      inches, nor more   signal flasher is
                                  motor driven       same height,       than 83 inches.    actuated by the turn
                                  cycle whose        symmetrically                         signal operating
                                  speed attainable   about the                             unit.
                                  in 1 mile is 30    vertical
                                  mph or less.       centerline, and
                                                     having a minimum
                                                     horizontal
                                                     separation
                                                     distance
                                                     (centerline of
                                                     lamps) of 16
                                                     inches. Minimum
                                                     edge to edge
                                                     separation
                                                     distance between
                                                     a turn signal
                                                     lamp and
                                                     headlamp is 4
                                                     inches.
                                 2 Amber or red.    At or near the
                                  None required on   rear, at the
                                  a motor driven     same height,
                                  cycle whose        symmetrically
                                  speed attainable   about the
                                  in 1 mile is 30    vertical
                                  mph or less.       centerline, and
                                                     having a minimum
                                                     horizontal
                                                     separation
                                                     distance
                                                     (centerline to
                                                     centerline of
                                                     lamps) of 9
                                                     inches.

[[Page 482]]

 
                                                    Minimum edge to
                                                     edge separation
                                                     distance between
                                                     the turn signal
                                                     lamp and the
                                                     taillamp or stop
                                                     lamp is 4
                                                     inches, when a
                                                     single stop and
                                                     taillamp is
                                                     installed on the
                                                     vertical
                                                     centerline and
                                                     the turn signal
                                                     lamps are red.
Taillamps......................  1 Red............  On the rear, on    Not less than 15   Steady burning.
                                                     the vertical       inches, nor more
                                                     centerline         than 72 inches.
                                                     except that if
                                                     two are used,
                                                     they must be
                                                     symmetrically
                                                     disposed about
                                                     the vertical
                                                     centerline.
                                                                                          Must be activated when
                                                                                           the headlamps are
                                                                                           activated in a steady
                                                                                           burning state.
Stop Lamps.....................  1 Red............  On the rear, on    Not less than 15   Steady burning.
                                                     the vertical       inches, nor more
                                                     centerline         than 72 inches.
                                                     except that if
                                                     two are used,
                                                     they must be
                                                     symmetrically
                                                     disposed about
                                                     the vertical
                                                     centerline.
                                                                                          Must be activated upon
                                                                                           application of the
                                                                                           service brakes.
                                                                                          When optically
                                                                                           combined with a turn
                                                                                           signal lamp, the
                                                                                           circuit must be such
                                                                                           that the stop signal
                                                                                           cannot be activated
                                                                                           if the turn signal
                                                                                           lamp is flashing. May
                                                                                           also be activated by
                                                                                           a device designed to
                                                                                           retard the motion of
                                                                                           the vehicle.
Reflex Reflectors..............  2 Amber..........  On each side as    Not less than 15   Not applicable.
                                                     far to the front   inches, nor more
                                                     as practicable.    than 60 inches.
                                 2 Red............  On each side as
                                                     far to the rear
                                                     as practicable.
                                 1 Red............  On the rear, on
                                                     the vertical
                                                     centerline
                                                     except that, if
                                                     two are used on
                                                     the rear, they
                                                     must be
                                                     symmetrically
                                                     disposed about
                                                     the vertical
                                                     centerline.
License Plate Lamp.............  1 White..........  On the rear to     No requirement...  Steady burning.
                                                     illuminate
                                                     license plate.
                                 Additional lamps   .................  .................  Must be activated when
                                  permitted to                                             the headlamps are
                                  meet                                                     activated in a steady
                                  requirements.                                            burning state.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 483]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.000


[[Page 484]]


                                  Table II-b--Headlighting Systems--Combination
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Photometry requirements reference
                                              ------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   System              Table XVIII               Tables XIX-a, XIX-b, XIX-c
     System designation         composition   ------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                Upper beam mechanical and  Lower beam mech    Lower beam visual
                                                       visual aim                aim                 aim
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2 LAMP SYSTEM...............  A COMBINATION    UB2 \(1)\.................  LB2M \(1)\.....  LB2V \(1)\
                               OF TWO
                               DIFFERENT
                               HEADLAMPS
                               CHOSEN FROM;
                               TYPE F, AN
                               INTEGRAL BEAM
                               HEADLAMP, OR A
                               REPLACEABLE
                               BULB HEADLAMP.
4 LAMP SYSTEM...............  ANY COMBINATION  UB1.......................  LB1M \(2)\.....  LB1V \(2)\
                               OF FOUR
                               DIFFERENT
                               HEADLAMPS
                               CHOSEN FROM;
                               TYPE F, AN
                               INTEGRAL BEAM
                               HEADLAMP
                               \(3)\, OR A
                               REPLACEABLE
                               BULB HEADLAMP.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\(1)\ Headlamps designed to conform to the photometry requirements of UB2 and LB2M or LB2V may allow the lower
  beam light source(s) to remain activated when an upper beam light source is activated if the lower beam light
  source(s) contribute to upper beam photometric compliance.
\(2)\ Lower beams may remain activated when upper beams are activated.
\(3)\ Beam contributor photometric allocation formula of S14.2.5.9 may apply.


                                Table II-c--Headlighting Systems--Integral Beams
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Photometry requirements reference
                                              ------------------------------------------------------------------
                                    Beam               Table XVIII               Tables XIX-a, XIX-b, XIX-c
     System designation         composition   ------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                Upper beam mechanical and  Lower beam mech    Lower beam visual
                                                       visual aim                aim                 aim
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2 LAMP SYSTEM...............  UPPER BEAM &     UB2 \(1)\ OR UB3..........  LB2M \(1)\ OR    LB2V \(1)\ OR LB3V
                               LOWER BEAM.                                  LB3M.
4 LAMP SYSTEM...............  UPPER BEAM.....  UB4.......................  N.A............  N.A.
                              UPPER BEAM &     UB5.......................  LB4M...........  LB2V
                               LOWER BEAM.
4 LAMP SYSTEM...............  UPPER BEAM (U).  UB1.......................  N.A............  N.A.
                              LOWER BEAM (L).  N.A. \(2)\................  LB1M \(2)\.....  LB1V \(2)\
4 LAMP SYSTEM...............  UPPER BEAM.....  UB6.......................  N.A............  N.A.
                              LOWER BEAM.....  N.A. \(3)\................  LB5M \(3)\.....  LB4V \(3)\
BEAM CONTRIBUTOR............  UPPER BEAM &     UB1 \(4)\.................  LB1M \(2)(4)\..  LB1V \(2)(4)\
                               LOWER BEAM.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\(1)\ Headlamps designed to conform to the photometry requirements of UB2 and LB2M or LB2V may allow the lower
  beam light source(s) to remain activated when an upper beam light source is activated if the lower beam light
  source(s) contribute to upper beam photometric compliance.
\(2)\ Lower beams may remain activated when upper beams are activated.
\(3)\ Lower beams must remain activated when upper beams are activated.
\(4)\ Beam contributor photometric allocation formula of S14.2.5.9 applies.


                               Table II-d--Headlighting Systems--Replaceable Bulb
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Photometry requirements reference
                                                ----------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Light source            Table XVIII              Tables XIX-a, XIX-b, XIX-c
      System designation          composition   ----------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Upper beam mechanical and    Lower beam mech     Lower beam
                                                          visual aim                 aim           visual aim
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2 LAMP SYSTEM................  ANY DUAL          UB2 \(1)\ OR UB3...........  LB2M \(1)\ OR     LB2V \(1)\ OR
                                FILAMENT TYPE,                                 LB3M.             LB3V
                                OTHER THAN HB2,
                                USED ALONE OR
                                WITH ANOTHER
                                DUAL FILAMENT
                                TYPE OTHER THAN
                                HB2.
2 LAMP SYSTEM................  HB2 OR ANY        UB2 \(1)\ OR UB3...........  LB2M \(1)\......  LB2V \(1)\
                                SINGLE FILAMENT
                                TYPE USED ALONE
                                OR WITH ANY
                                OTHER SINGLE OR
                                DUAL FILAMENT
                                TYPE.

[[Page 485]]

 
4 LAMP SYSTEM................  ANY DUAL          UB1 \(2)\ OR UB3...........  LB1M \(2)\ OR     LB1V \(2)\ OR
                                FILAMENT TYPE,                                 LB3M.             LB3V
                                OTHER THAN HB2,
                                USED ALONE OR
                                WITH ANOTHER
                                DUAL FILAMENT
                                TYPE OTHER THAN
                                HB2.
4 LAMP SYSTEM................  HB2 OR ANY        UB1 \(2)\..................  LB1M \(2)\......  LB1V \(2)\
                                SINGLE FILAMENT
                                TYPE USED ALONE
                                OR WITH ANY
                                OTHER SINGLE OR
                                DUAL FILAMENT
                                TYPE. (U & L).
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\(1)\ Headlamps designed to conform to the photometry requirements of UB2 and LB2M or LB2V may allow the lower
  beam light source(s) to remain activated when an upper beam light source is activated if the lower beam light
  source(s) contribute to upper beam photometric compliance.
\(2)\ Lower beams may remain activated when upper beams are activated.


                                    Table III--Marking Requirements Location
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Lamp, reflective device, or other
              component                       Marking              Marking location            Requirement
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HEADLAMPS, BEAM CONTRIBUTORS, OR
 HEADLAMP REPLACEABLE LENS.
                                      ``DOT''................  Lens...................  S6.5.1
                                      Optical axis marking...  See requirement........  S10.18.5
                                      Manufacturer name and/   Lens...................  S6.5.3
                                       or trademark.
                                      Voltage................  See requirement........  S6.5.3
                                      Part number or trade     See requirement........  S6.5.3
                                       number.
HEADLAMP REPLACEABLE LENS...........  Manufacturer             Lens...................  S6.5.3
                                       identification.
                                      Headlamp identification
REPLACEABLE BULB HEADLAMPS..........  ``U'' or ``L'' (4 lamp   Lens...................  S10.15.4
                                       system).
                                      Replaceable bulb type..  Lens...................  S6.5.3.4
SEALED BEAM HEADLAMPS...............  ``sealed beam''........  Lens...................  S6.5.3.3
                                      Type designation.......  See requirements.......  S6.5.3.3
INTEGRAL BEAM HEADLAMPS.............  ``U'' or ``L'' (4 lamp   Lens...................  S10.14.4
                                       system).
MOTORCYCLE REPLACEABLE BULB           ``motorcycle''.........  Lens...................  S10.17.2
 HEADLAMPS.
VISUALLY/OPTICALLY AIMED HEADLAMPS..  ``VOR'' or ``VOL'' or    Lens...................  S10.18.9.6
                                       ``VO''.
EXTERNALLY AIMED HEADLAMPS..........  Aim pad location &       Lens...................  S10.18.7.1
                                       ``H'' or ``V``.
VEHICLE HEADLAMP AIMING DEVICES       Aiming scale(s)........  See requirement........  S10.18.8
 (VHAD).
 (HEADLAMP) REPLACEABLE LIGHT         ``DOT''................  See requirement........  S11.1
 SOURCES.
                                      Replaceable light        See requirement........
                                       source designation.
                                      Manufacturer name and/   See requirement........
                                       or trademark.
REPLACEABLE LIGHT SOURCE BALLASTS...  Manufacturer name or     See requirement........  S11.2
                                       logo.
                                      Part number............
                                      Light source
                                       identification.
                                      Rated laboratory life..
                                      High voltage warning...
                                      Output in watts and
                                       volts.
                                      ``DOT''................
LAMPS (OTHER THAN HEADLAMPS),         ``DOT''................  See requirement........  S6.5.1.2
 REFLECTIVE DEVICES, AND ASSOCIATED
 EQUIPMENT.
DAYTIME RUNNING LAMPS (DRL).........  ``DRL''................  Lens...................  S6.5.2
CONSPICUITY REFLEX REFLECTORS.......  ``DOT-C''..............  Exposed surface........  S8.2.2.1

[[Page 486]]

 
RETROREFLECTIVE SHEETING............  ``DOT-C2'' or ``DOT-     Exposed surface........  S8.2.1.3
                                       C3'' or ``DOT-C4''.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                             Table IV-a--Effective Projected Luminous Lens Area Requirements
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Passenger cars, multipurpose passenger       Multipurpose   Motorcycles  minimum effective
                                                           vehicles, trucks, trailers, and buses of less     passenger     projected luminous lens area
                                                              than 2032 mm in overall width  minimum         vehicles,                (sq mm)
                                                            effective projected luminous lens area  (sq       trucks,    -------------------------------
                                                                                mm)                        trailers, and   Multiple compartment lamp or
                                                         ------------------------------------------------  buses 2032 mm          multiple lamps
                                                                           Multiple compartment lamp or     or more in   -------------------------------
                     Lighting device                                              multiple lamps           overall width
                                                                         --------------------------------     minimum
                                                              Single                                         effective         Each          Single or
                                                            compartment        Each          Combined        projected    compartment or     combined
                                                               lamp       compartment or   compartments    luminous lens       lamp        compartments
                                                                               lamp          or lamps     area each lamp                     or lamps
                                                                                                              (sq mm)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Front turn signal lamp..................................            2200  ..............            2200            7500            2200            2258
Rear turn signal lamp...................................            5000            2200            5000            7500            2200            2258
Stop lamp...............................................            5000            2200            5000            7500            2200        \1\ 5000
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ A motor driven cycle whose speed attainable in 1 mile is 30 mph or less may be equipped with a stop lamp whose minimum effective projected luminous
  lens area is not less than 2258 sq mm.


                         Table IV-b--Effective Projected Luminous Lens Area Requirements
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                       Multipurpose passenger
                                                     Passenger cars, multipurpose   vehicles, trucks, and buses
                                                     passenger vehicles, trucks,      of less than 2032 mm in
                                                     and buses of less than 2032   overall width and with a GVWR
                  Lighting device                    mm in overall width and with   of 10,000 lbs or less using
                                                     a GVWR of 10,000 lbs or less   dual lamps of identical size
                                                     using a single lamp minimum    and shape minimum effective
                                                     effective projected luminous   projected luminous lens area
                                                          lens area (sq mm)              each lamp (sq mm)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
High-mounted stop lamp............................                          2903                           1452
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


     Table IV-c--Effective Projected Luminous Lens Area Requirements
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                           School bus  minimum effective
             Lighting device                projected luminous lens area
                                                 each lamp (sq mm)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
School bus signal lamp...................                        12,258
------------------------------------------------------------------------


    Table V-a--Visibility Requirements of Installed Lighting Devices
------------------------------------------------------------------------
       Lighting device                    Required visibility
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Backup lamp..................  Lamps must be mounted so that the optical
                                center of at least one lamp is visible
                                from any eye point elevation from at
                                least 1828 mm (6 ft) to 610 mm (2 ft)
                                above the horizontal plane on which the
                                vehicle is standing; and from any
                                position in the area, rearward of a
                                vertical plane perpendicular to the
                                longitudinal axis of the vehicle, 914 mm
                                (3 ft), to the rear of the vehicle and
                                extending 914 mm (3 ft) beyond each side
                                of the vehicle.
High-mounted stop lamp.......  Signal must be visible to the rear
                                through a horizontal angle from 45[deg]
                                to the left to 45[deg] to the right of
                                the longitudinal axis of the vehicle.
                                (Single lamp or two lamps together where
                                required by S6.1.1.2 of this standard).
School bus signal lamp.......  Signal of front lamps to the front and
                                rear lamps to the rear must be
                                unobstructed within area bounded by
                                5[deg] up to 10[deg] down and 30[deg]
                                left to 30[deg] right.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 487]]


                              Table V-b--Visibility Requirements of Installed Lighting Devices--Lens Area Visibility Option
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lighting device                                                           Corner points\1 2\                                        Required visibility
                                    ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       Motorcycle
                                                        All other
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Turn signal lamp \3\...............  15[deg] UP-20[deg] IB.  15[deg] UP-45[deg] OB.  15[deg] UP-45[deg] IB  15[deg] UP-45[deg] OB  Unobstructed minimum
                                     15[deg] DOWN-20[deg]    15[deg] DOWN-45[deg]    15[deg] DOWN-45[deg]   15[deg] DOWN-45[deg]    effective projected
                                      IB.                     OB.                     IB.                    OB.
Stop lamp..........................  15[deg] UP-45[deg]      15[deg] UP-45[deg]      15[deg] UP-45[deg] IB  15[deg] UP-45[deg] OB   luminous lens area
                                      RIGHT \4\.              LEFT \4\.
                                     15[deg] DOWN-45[deg]    15[deg] DOWN-45[deg]    15[deg] DOWN-45[deg]   15[deg] DOWN-45[deg]    of 1,250 sq mm in
                                      RIGHT \4\.              LEFT \4\.               IB.                    OB.                    any
Taillamp...........................  15[deg] UP-45[deg]      15[deg] UP-45[deg]      15[deg] UP-45[deg] IB  15[deg] UP-45[deg] OB   direction throughout
                                      RIGHT \5\.              LEFT \5\.
                                     15[deg] DOWN-45[deg]    15[deg] DOWN-45[deg]    15[deg] DOWN-45[deg]   15[deg] DOWN-45[deg]    the pattern defined
                                      RIGHT \5\.              LEFT \5\.               IB.                    OB.                    by
Parking lamp.......................  No Requirement........  No Requirement........  15[deg] UP-45[deg] IB  15[deg] UP-45[deg] OB   the specified corner
                                     No Requirement........  No Requirement........  15[deg] DOWN-45[deg]   15[deg] DOWN-45[deg]    points.
                                                                                      IB.                    OB.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ IB indicates an inboard direction (toward the vehicle's longitudinal centerline) and OB indicates an outboard direction.
\2\ Where a lamp is mounted with its axis of reference less than 750 mm above the road surface, the vertical test point angles located below the
  horizontal plane subject to visibility requirements may be reduced to 5[deg] down.
\3\ Where more than one lamp or optical area is lighted at the front on each side of a multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, trailer, or bus, of 2032
  mm or more overall width, only one such area need comply.
\4\ If a multiple lamp arrangement is used for a motorcycle stop lamp, the inboard angle for each lamp shall be 10 degrees.
\5\ If a multiple lamp arrangement is used for a motorcycle tail lamp, the inboard angle for each lamp shall be 45 degrees.


                         Table V-c--Visibility Requirements of Installed Lighting Devices--Luminous Intensity Visibility Option
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lighting device                                                            Corner points 1 2                                        Required visibility
                                                                                                                                      Minimum luminous
                                                                                                                                      intensity in any
                                                                                                                                    direction throughout
                                                                                                                                     the pattern defined
                                                                                                                                      by the specified
                                                                                                                                       corner points.
                                    ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       Motorcycle
                                                        All Other                    Candela..............
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Turn signal lamp...................  15[deg] UP-20[deg] IB.  15[deg] UP-80[deg] OB.  15[deg] UP-45[deg] IB  15[deg] UP-80[deg] OB   0.3
                                     15[deg] DOWN-20[deg]    15[deg] DOWN-80[deg]    15[deg] DOWN-45[deg]   15[deg] DOWN-80[deg]
                                      IB.                     OB.                     IB.                    OB.
Stop lamp..........................  15[deg] UP-45[deg]      15[deg] UP-45[deg]      15[deg] UP-45[deg] IB  15[deg] UP-45[deg] OB   0.3
                                      RIGHT \4\.              LEFT \4\.
                                     15[deg] DOWN-45[deg]    15[deg] DOWN-45[deg]    15[deg] DOWN-45[deg]   15[deg] DOWN-45[deg]
                                      RIGHT \4\.              LEFT \4\.               IB.                    OB.

[[Page 488]]

 
Taillamp \3\.......................  15[deg] UP-80[deg]      15[deg] UP-80[deg]      15[deg] UP-45[deg] IB  15[deg] UP-80[deg] OB  0.05
                                      RIGHT \5\.              LEFT \5\.
                                     15[deg] DOWN-80[deg]    15[deg] DOWN-80[deg]    15[deg] DOWN-45[deg]   15[deg] DOWN-80[deg]
                                      RIGHT \5\.              LEFT \5\.               IB.                    OB.
Parking lamp.......................  No Requirement........  No Requirement........  15[deg] UP-45[deg] IB  15[deg] UP-80[deg] OB  0.05
                                     No Requirement........  No Requirement........  15[deg] DOWN-45[deg]   15[deg] DOWN-80[deg]
                                                                                      IB.                    OB.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ IB indicates an inboard direction (toward the vehicle's longitudinal centerline) and OB indicates an outboard direction.
\2\ Where a lamp is mounted with its axis of reference less than 750 mm above the road surface, the vertical test point angles located below the
  horizontal plane subject to visibility requirements may be reduced to 5[deg] down
\3\ Inboard and outboard corner points are 80[deg] for a single taillamp installed on a motorcycle
\4\ If a multiple lamp arrangement is used for a motorcycle stop lamp, the inboard angle for each lamp shall be 10 degrees.
\5\ If a multiple lamp arrangement is used for a motorcycle tail lamp, the inboard angle for each lamp shall be 45 degrees.


Table V-d--Visibility Requirements of Installed Lighting Devices (Legacy
                         Visibility Alternative)
 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Lighting device                    Required visibility
                                                            \1\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Turn signal lamp.............  All passenger      Unobstructed minimum
                                cars,              effective projected
                                multipurpose       luminous lens area of
                                passenger          1250 sq mm through
                                vehicles,          horizontal angle of H-
                                trucks, buses,     V to H-45[deg] OB.
                                motorcycles, and
                                trailers of less
                                than 2032 mm
                                overall width.
                               All multipurpose   Unobstructed minimum
                                passenger          effective projected
                                vehicles,          luminous lens area of
                                trucks, buses,     1300 sq mm through
                                and trailers of    horizontal angle of H-
                                2032 mm or more    V to H-45[deg] OB.
                                overall width.     Where more than one
                                                   lamp or optical area
                                                   is lighted on each
                                                   side of the vehicle,
                                                   only one such area on
                                                   each side need
                                                   comply.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Stop lamp                                         Unobstructed minimum
                                                   effective projected
                                                   luminous lens area of
                                                   1250 sq mm through
                                                   horizontal angle of H-
                                                   45[deg] IB to H-
                                                   45[deg] OB. Where
                                                   more than one lamp or
                                                   optical area is
                                                   lighted on each side
                                                   of the vehicle, only
                                                   one such area on each
                                                   side need comply.

[[Page 489]]

 
Taillamp                                          Unobstructed minimum
                                                   effective projected
                                                   luminous lens area of
                                                   2 sq in through
                                                   horizontal angle of H-
                                                   45[deg] IB to H-
                                                   45[deg] OB. Where
                                                   more than one lamp or
                                                   optical area is
                                                   lighted on each side
                                                   of the vehicle, only
                                                   one such area on each
                                                   side need comply.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ IB indicates an inboard direction (toward the vehicle's longitudinal
  centerline) and OB indicates an outboard direction.


[[Page 490]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.001


[[Page 491]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.002


[[Page 492]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.003


[[Page 493]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AU11.161


[[Page 494]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AU11.162


[[Page 495]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AU11.163


[[Page 496]]


                                Table X--Side Marker Lamp Photometry Requirements
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                           Minimum photometric           Minimum photometric
                Test point  (degrees)                   intensity (cd) \(2)\  red    intensity (cd) \(2)\  amber
                                                                  lamps                         lamps
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
10U:
    45L \(1)\.......................................                          0.25                          0.62
    V...............................................                          0.25                          0.62
    45R \(1)\.......................................                          0.25                          0.62
H:
    45L \(1)\.......................................                          0.25                          0.62
    V...............................................                          0.25                          0.62
    45R \(1)\.......................................                          0.25                          0.62
10D: \(3)\
    45L \(1)\.......................................                          0.25                          0.62
    V...............................................                          0.25                          0.62
    45R \(1)\.......................................                          0.25                         0.62
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\(1)\ Where a side marker lamp installed on a motor vehicle less than 30 feet in overall length and less than 80
  inches (2 m) in overall width has the lateral angle nearest the other required side marker lamp on the same
  side of the vehicle reduced from 45[deg] by design as specified by S7.4.13.2, the photometric intensity
  measurement may be met at the lesser angle.
\(2)\ The photometric intensity values between test points must not be less than the lower specified minimum
  value of the two closest adjacent test points on a horizontal or vertical line.
\(3)\ Where side marker lamps are mounted with their axis of reference less than 750 mm above the road surface,
  photometry requirements below 5[deg] down may be met at 5[deg] down rather than at the specified required
  downward angle.


                      Table XI--Clearance and Identification Lamps Photometry Requirements
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                           Minimum photometric           Minimum photometric
                Test point  (degrees)                   intensity (cd) \(2)\  red    intensity (cd) \(2)\  amber
                                                                  lamps                         lamps
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
10U:
    45L \(4)\.......................................                          0.25                          0.62
    V...............................................                          0.25                          0.62
    45R \(4)\.......................................                          0.25                          0.62
H:
    45L \(4)\.......................................                          0.25                          0.62
    V...............................................                          0.25                          0.62
    45R \(4)\.......................................                          0.25                          0.62
10D: \(1)\
    45L \(4)\.......................................                          0.25                          0.62
    V...............................................                          0.25                          0.62
    45R \(4)\.......................................                          0.25                          0.62
Maximum photometric intensity \(3)\ (cd) red lamps..                            15
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\(1)\ Where clearance lamps or identification lamps are mounted with their axis of reference less than 750mm
  above the road surface, photometry requirements below 5[deg] down may be met at 5[deg] down rather than at the
  specified required downward angle.
\(2)\ The photometric intensity values between test points must not be less than the lower specified minimum
  value of the two closest adjacent test points on a horizontal or vertical line.
\(3)\ When optically combined with a stop lamp or turn signal lamp, this maximum applies on or above the
  horizontal.
\(4)\ Where clearance lamps are installed at locations other than on the front and rear due to the necessity to
  indicate the overall width of the vehicle, or for protection from damage during normal operation of the
  vehicle, they need not meet the photometric intensity requirement at any test point that is 45[deg] inboard.


[[Page 497]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AU11.164


[[Page 498]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.008


[[Page 499]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.009


[[Page 500]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AU11.165


[[Page 501]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AU11.166


[[Page 502]]


                              Table XVI-a--Reflex Reflector Photometry Requirements
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                           Minimum performance
                                                       ---------------------------------------------------------
                                                          Red reflectors    Amber reflectors    White reflectors
   Observation angle  (degrees)       Entrance angle   ---------------------------------------------------------
                                        (degrees)         (cd/               (cd/                (cd/
                                                        incident   (mcd/   incident    (mcd/   incident   (mcd/
                                                          ft-c)     lux)     ft-c)     lux)      ft-c)     lux)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
0.2..............................  0..................      4.5       420    11.25     1050       18        1680
                                   10U................      3.0       280     7.5       700       12        1120
                                   10D \(1)\..........      3.0       280     7.5       700       12        1120
                                   20L................      1.5       140     3.75      350        6         560
                                   20R................      1.5       140     3.75      350        6         560
1.5..............................  0..................      0.07        6     0.175      15        0.28       24
                                   10U................      0.05        5     0.125      12.5      0.2        20
                                   10D \(1)\..........      0.05        5     0.125      12.5      0.2        20
                                   20L................      0.03        3     0.075       7.5      0.12       12
                                   20R................      0.03        3     0.075       7.5      0.12      12
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\(1)\ Where reflex reflectors are mounted with their axis of reference less than 750 mm above the road surface,
  photometry requirements below 5[deg] down may be met at 5[deg] down rather than at the required specified
  downward angle.


                Table XVI-b--Additional Photometry Requirements for Conspicuity Reflex Reflectors
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                           Minimum performance
                                                        --------------------------------------------------------
   Observation angle  (degrees)       Entrance angle                         White horizontal    White vertical
                                         (degrees)         Red  (mcd/lux)   orientation  (mcd/ orientation  (mcd/
                                                                                   lux)               lux)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
0.2..............................  0...................                300               1250               1680
                                   20L TO 20R..........  .................  .................                560
                                   30L TO 30R..........                300               1250
                                   45L TO 45R..........                 75                300
                                   10U TO 10D..........               1120
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                          Table XVI-c--Retroreflective Sheeting Photometry Requirements
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                             Minimum performance
                                                           -----------------------------------------------------
                                                              Grade dot-C2      Grade dot-C3      Grade dot-C4
                                                  Entrance -----------------------------------------------------
          Observation angle  (degrees)             angle     White     Red     White     Red     White     Red
                                                 (degrees) -----------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                           (cd/
                                                            (cd/lux/ (cd/lux/ (cd/lux/ (cd/lux/ (cd/lux/  lux/sq
                                                             sq m)    sq m)    sq m)    sq m)    sq m)      m)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
0.2............................................        -4       250       60      165       40      125       30
                                                       30       250       60      165       40      125       30
                                                       45        60       15       40       10       30        8
0.5............................................        -4        65       15       43       10       33        8
                                                       30        65       15       43       10       33        8
                                                       45        15        4       10        3        8        2
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


       Table XVII--School Bus Signal Lamp Photometry Requirements
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Minimum            Minimum
                                       photometric        photometric
       Test point  (degrees)          intensity (cd)     intensity (cd)
                                     \(2)\ red lamps      amber lamps
------------------------------------------------------------------------
5U:
    20L...........................                150                375
    10L...........................                300                750
    5L............................                300                750
    V.............................                300                750
    5R............................                300                750
    10R...........................                300                750
    20R...........................                150                375
------------------------------------------------------------------------
H:
    30L...........................                 30                 75
    20L...........................                180                450
    10L...........................                400               1000
    5L............................                500               1250
    V.............................                600               1500
    5R............................                500               1250
    10R...........................                400               1000
    20R...........................                180                450
    30R...........................                 30                 75
------------------------------------------------------------------------
5D:
    30L...........................                 30                 75
    20L...........................                200                500
    10L...........................                300                750
    5L............................                450               1125
    V.............................                450               1125
    5R............................                450               1125
    10R...........................                300                750

[[Page 503]]

 
    20R...........................                200                500
    30R...........................                 30                 75
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10D: \(1)\
    5L............................                 40                100
    V.............................                 40                100
    5R............................                 40               100
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\(1)\ Where school bus signal lamps are mounted with their axis of
  reference less than 750 mm above the road surface, photometry
  requirements below 5[deg] down may be met at 5[deg] down rather than
  at the specified required downward angle.
\(2)\ The photometric intensity values between test points must not be
  less than the lower specified minimum value of the two closest
  adjacent test points on a horizontal or vertical line.


[[Page 504]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.012


[[Page 505]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AU11.167


[[Page 506]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AU11.168


[[Page 507]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AU11.169


[[Page 508]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.016


[[Page 509]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.017


[[Page 510]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.018


[[Page 511]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.019


[[Page 512]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.020


[[Page 513]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.021


[[Page 514]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.022


[[Page 515]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.023


[[Page 516]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.024


[[Page 517]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.025


[[Page 518]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.026


[[Page 519]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.027


[[Page 520]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.028


[[Page 521]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.029


[[Page 522]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.030


[[Page 523]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.031


[[Page 524]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.032


[[Page 525]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.033


[[Page 526]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.034


[[Page 527]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.035


[[Page 528]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.036


[[Page 529]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.037


[[Page 530]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.038


[[Page 531]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.039

               Appendix to Sec. 571.108 Table of Contents

    Sec.
571.108 Standard No. 108; Lamps, reflective devices, and associated 
equipment.
S1 Scope.
S2 Purpose.
S3 Application.
S4 Definitions.

[[Page 532]]

S5 References to SAE publications.
S5.2 Incorporation by reference.
S6 Vehicle requirements.
S6.1 Required lamps, reflective devices, and associated equipment by 
vehicle type.
S6.1.1 Quantity.
S6.1.1.1 Conspicuity systems.
S6.1.1.2 High-mounted stop lamps.
S6.1.1.3 Truck tractor rear turn signal lamps.
S6.1.1.4 Daytime running lamps.
S6.1.2 Color.
S6.1.3 Mounting location.
S6.1.3.3 License plate lamp.
S6.1.3.4 High-mounted stop lamp.
S6.1.3.4.1 Interior mounting.
S6.1.3.4.2 Accessibility.
S6.1.3.5 Headlamp beam mounting.
S6.1.3.5.1 Vertical headlamp arrangement.
S6.1.3.5.2 Horizontal headlamp arrangement.
S6.1.3.6 Auxiliary lamps mounted near identification lamps.
S6.1.4 Mounting height.
S6.1.4.1 High-mounted stop lamps.
S6.1.5 Activation.
S6.1.5.1 Hazard warning signal.
S6.1.5.2 Simultaneous beam activation.
S6.2 Impairment.
S6.2.3 Headlamp obstructions.
S6.3 Equipment combinations.
S6.4 Lens area, visibility and school bus signal lamp aiming.
S6.4.1 Effective projected luminous lens area requirements.
S6.4.2 Visibility.
S6.4.3 Visibility options.
S6.4.3(a) Lens area option.
S6.4.3(b) Luminous intensity option.
S6.4.4 Legacy visibility alternative.
S6.4.5 School bus signal lamp aiming.
S6.5 Marking.
S6.5.1 DOT marking.
S6.5.2 DRL marking.
S6.5.3 Headlamp markings.
S6.5.3.1 Trademark.
S6.5.3.2 Voltage and trade number.
S6.5.3.3 Sealed beam headlamp markings.
S6.5.3.4 Replaceable bulb headlamp markings.
S6.5.3.5 Additional headlamp markings.
S6.6 Associated equipment.
S6.6.3 License plate holder.
S6.7 Replacement equipment.
S6.7.1 General.
S6.7.2 Version of this standard.
S7 Signal lamp requirements.
S7.1 Turn signal lamps.
S7.1.1 Front turn signal lamps.
S7.1.1.1 Number.
S7.1.1.2 Color of light.
S7.1.1.3 Mounting location.
S7.1.1.4 Mounting height.
S7.1.1.5 Activation.
S7.1.1.6 Effective projected luminous lens area.
S7.1.1.7 Visibility.
S7.1.1.8 Indicator.
S7.1.1.9 Markings.
S7.1.1.10 Spacing to other lamps.
S7.1.1.10.2 Spacing measurement for non-reflector lamps.
S7.1.1.10.3 Spacing measurement for lamps with reflectors.
S7.1.1.10.4 Spacing based photometric multipliers.
S7.1.1.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps.
S7.1.1.11.4 Lamps installed on vehicles 2032 mm or more in overall 
width.
S7.1.1.12 Ratio to parking lamps and clearance lamps.
S7.1.1.13 Photometry.
S7.1.1.14 Physical tests.
S7.1.2 Rear turn signal lamps.
S7.1.2.1 Number.
S7.1.2.2 Color of light.
S7.1.2.3 Mounting location.
S7.1.2.4 Mounting height.
S7.1.2.5 Activation.
S7.1.2.6 Effective projected luminous lens area.
S7.1.2.7 Visibility.
S7.1.2.8 Indicator.
S7.1.2.9 Markings.
S7.1.2.10 Spacing to other lamps.
S7.1.2.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps.
S7.1.2.11.4 Lamps installed on vehicles 2032 mm or more in overall 
width.
S7.1.2.12 Ratio to taillamps and clearance lamps.
S7.1.2.13 Photometry.
S7.1.2.14 Physical tests.
S7.1.3 Combined lamp bulb indexing.
S7.2 Taillamps.
S7.2.1 Number.
S7.2.2 Color of light.
S7.2.3 Mounting location.
S7.2.4 Mounting height.
S7.2.5 Activation.
S7.2.6 Effective projected luminous lens area.
S7.2.7 Visibility.
S7.2.8 Indicator.
S7.2.9 Markings.
S7.2.10 Spacing to other lamps.
S7.2.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps.
S7.2.11.4 Taillamps installed on vehicles 2032 mm or more in overall 
width.
S7.2.12 Ratio.
S7.2.13 Photometry.
S7.2.14 Physical tests.
S7.3 Stop lamps.
S7.3.1 Number.
S7.3.2 Color of light.
S7.3.3 Mounting location.
S7.3.4 Mounting height.
S7.3.5 Activation.
S7.3.6 Effective projected luminous lens area.
S7.3.7 Visibility.
S7.3.8 Indicator.
S7.3.9 Markings.
S7.3.10 Spacing to other lamps.
S7.3.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps.
S7.3.11.4 Lamps installed on vehicles 2032 mm or more in overall width.

[[Page 533]]

S7.3.12 Ratio to taillamps.
S7.3.13 Photometry.
S7.3.14 Physical tests.
S7.3.15 Combined lamp bulb indexing.
S7.4 Side marker lamps.
S7.4.1 Number.
S7.4.2 Color of light.
S7.4.3 Mounting location.
S7.4.4 Mounting height.
S7.4.5 Activation.
S7.4.6 Effective projected luminous lens area.
S7.4.7 Visibility.
S7.4.8 Indicator.
S7.4.9 Markings.
S7.4.10 Spacing to other lamps.
S7.4.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps.
S7.4.12 Ratio.
S7.4.13 Photometry.
S7.4.13.2 Inboard photometry.
S7.4.14 Physical tests.
S7.5 Clearance and identification lamps.
S7.5.1 Number.
S7.5.2 Color of light.
S7.5.3 Mounting location.
S7.5.4 Mounting height.
S7.5.5 Activation.
S7.5.6 Effective projected luminous lens area.
S7.5.7 Visibility.
S7.5.8 Indicator.
S7.5.9 Markings.
S7.5.10 Spacing to other lamps.
S7.5.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps.
S7.5.12 Ratio.
S7.5.12.1 Clearance lamps.
S7.5.12.2 Identification lamps.
S7.5.13 Photometry.
S7.5.14 Physical tests.
S7.6 Backup lamps.
S7.6.1 Number.
S7.6.2 Color of light.
S7.6.3 Mounting location.
S7.6.4 Mounting height.
S7.6.5 Activation.
S7.6.6 Effective projected luminous lens area.
S7.6.7 Visibility.
S7.6.8 Indicator.
S7.6.9 Markings.
S7.6.10 Spacing to other lamps.
S7.6.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps.
S7.6.12 Ratio.
S7.6.13 Photometry.
S7.6.14 Physical tests.
S7.7 License plate lamps.
S7.7.1 Number.
S7.7.2 Color of light.
S7.7.3 Mounting location.
S7.7.4 Mounting height.
S7.7.5 Activation.
S7.7.6 Effective projected luminous lens area.
S7.7.7 Visibility.
S7.7.8 Indicator.
S7.7.9 Markings.
S7.7.10 Spacing to other lamps.
S7.7.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps.
S7.7.12 Ratio.
S7.7.13 Photometry.
S7.7.14 Physical tests.
S7.7.15 Installation.
S7.7.15.4 Incident light from single lamp.
S7.7.15.5 Incident light from multiple lamps.
S7.8 Parking lamps.
S7.8.1 Number.
S7.8.2 Color of light.
S7.8.3 Mounting location.
S7.8.4 Mounting height.
S7.8.5 Activation.
S7.8.6 Effective projected luminous lens area.
S7.8.7 Visibility.
S7.8.8 Indicator.
S7.8.9 Markings.
S7.8.10 Spacing to other lamps.
S7.8.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps.
S7.8.12 Ratio.
S7.8.13 Photometry.
S7.8.14 Physical tests.
S7.9 High-mounted stop lamps.
S7.9.1 Number.
S7.9.2 Color of light.
S7.9.3 Mounting location.
S7.9.4 Mounting height.
S7.9.5 Activation.
S7.9.6 Effective projected luminous lens area.
S7.9.7 Visibility.
S7.9.8 Indicator.
S7.9.9 Markings.
S7.9.10 Spacing to other lamps.
S7.9.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps.
S7.9.12 Ratio.
S7.9.13 Photometry.
S7.9.14 Physical tests.
S7.10 Daytime running lamps (DRLs).
S7.10.1 Number.
S7.10.2 Color of light.
S7.10.3 Mounting location.
S7.10.4 Mounting height.
S7.10.5 Activation.
S7.10.6 Effective projected luminous lens area.
S7.10.7 Visibility.
S7.10.8 Indicator.
S7.10.9 Markings.
S7.10.10 Spacing to other lamps.
S7.10.10.1 Spacing to turn signal lamps.
S7.10.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps.
S7.10.12 Ratio.
S7.10.13 Photometry.
S7.10.14 Physical tests.
S7.11 School bus signal lamps.
S7.11.1 Number.
S7.11.2 Color of light.
S7.11.3 Mounting location.
S7.11.4 Mounting height.
S7.11.5 Activation.
S7.11.6 Effective projected luminous lens area.
S7.11.7 Visibility.
S7.11.8 Indicator.
S7.11.9 Markings.
S7.11.10 Spacing to other lamps.
S7.11.11 Multiple compartments and multiple lamps.

[[Page 534]]

S7.11.12 Ratio.
S7.11.13 Photometry.
S7.11.14 Physical tests.
S8 Reflective device requirements.
S8.1 Reflex reflectors.
S8.1.1 Number.
S8.1.2 Color.
S8.1.3 Mounting location.
S8.1.4 Mounting height.
S8.1.5 Activation.
S8.1.6 Effective projected luminous lens area.
S8.1.7 Visibility.
S8.1.8 Indicator.
S8.1.9 Markings.
S8.1.10 Spacing to other lamps or reflective devices.
S8.1.11 Photometry.
S8.1.12 Physical tests.
S8.1.13 Alternative side reflex reflector material.
S8.2 Conspicuity systems.
S8.2.1 Retroreflective sheeting.
S8.2.1.2 Retroreflective sheeting material.
S8.2.1.3 Certification marking.
S8.2.1.4 Application pattern.
S8.2.1.4.1 Alternating red and white materials.
S8.2.1.5 Application location.
S8.2.1.6 Application spacing.
S8.2.1.7 Photometry.
S8.2.2 Conspicuity reflex reflectors.
S8.2.2.1 Certification marking.
S8.2.2.2 Application pattern.
S8.2.2.2.1 Alternating red and white materials.
S8.2.2.2.2 White material.
S8.2.2.3 Photometry.
S8.2.3 Conspicuity system installation on trailers.
S8.2.3.1 Trailer rear.
S8.2.3.1.1 Element 1-alternating red and white materials.
S8.2.3.1.2 Element 2-white.
S8.2.3.1.3 Element 3-alternating red and white materials.
S8.2.3.2 Trailer side-alternating red and white materials.
S8.2.4 Conspicuity system installation on truck tractors.
S8.2.4.1 Element 1-alternating red and white materials.
S8.2.4.2 Element 2-white.
S9 Associated equipment requirements.
S9.1 Turn signal operating unit.
S9.1.2 Physical tests.
S9.2 Turn signal flasher.
S9.2.2 Physical tests.
S9.3 Turn signal pilot indicator.
S9.3.4 Indicator size and color.
S9.3.6 Turn signal lamp failure.
S9.4 Headlamp beam switching device.
S9.4.1 Semi-automatic headlamp beam switching device.
S9.4.1.1 Operating instructions.
S9.4.1.2 Manual override.
S9.4.1.3 Fail safe operation.
S9.4.1.4 Automatic dimming indicator.
S9.4.1.5 Lens accessibility.
S9.4.1.6 Mounting height.
S9.4.1.7 Physical tests.
S9.5 Upper beam headlamp indicator.
S9.5.1 Indicator size and location.
S9.6 Vehicular hazard warning signal operating unit.
S9.6.2 Operating unit switch.
S9.6.3 Physical tests.
S9.7 Vehicular hazard warning signal flasher.
S9.7.2 Physical tests.
S9.8 Vehicular hazard warning signal pilot indicator.
S9.8.4 Indicator size and color.
S10 Headlighting system requirements.
S10.1 Vehicle headlighting systems.
S10.2 Aiming.
S10.3 Number.
S10.4 Color of light.
S10.5 Mounting location.
S10.6 Mounting height.
S10.7 Activation.
S10.8 Effective projected luminous lens area.
S10.9 Visibility.
S10.10 Indicator.
S10.11 Markings.
S10.12 Spacing to other lamps.
S10.13 Sealed beam headlighting systems.
S10.13.1 Installation.
S10.13.2 Simultaneous aim.
S10.13.3 Photometry.
S10.13.4 Physical tests.
S10.14 Integral beam headlighting systems.
S10.14.1 Installation.
S10.14.2 Aimability.
S10.14.3 Simultaneous aim.
S10.14.4 Markings.
S10.14.5 Additional light sources.
S10.14.6 Photometry.
S10.14.7 Physical tests.
S10.15 Replaceable bulb headlighting systems.
S10.15.1 Installation.
S10.15.2 Aiming restrictions.
S10.15.3 Replacement lens reflector units.
S10.15.4 Markings.
S10.15.5 Additional light sources.
S10.15.6 Photometry.
S10.15.7 Physical tests.
S10.16 Combination headlighting systems.
S10.16.1 Installation.
S10.16.2 Photometry.
S10.16.3 Physical tests.
S10.17 Motorcycle headlighting systems.
S10.17.1 Installation.
S10.17.1.1 Single headlamp.
S10.17.1.2 Two headlamps with both beams.
S10.17.1.3 Two headlamps, upper beam and lower beam.
S10.17.2 Motorcycle replaceable bulb headlamp marking.
S10.17.3 Photometry.
S10.17.4 Physical tests.
S10.17.5 Motorcycle headlamp modulation system.
S10.17.5.1. Modulation.
S10.17.5.2 Replacement modulators.
S10.17.5.2.1 Replacement performance.
S10.17.5.2.2 Replacement instructions.

[[Page 535]]

S10.18 Headlamp aimability performance requirements.
S10.18.1 Headlamp mounting and aiming.
S10.18.2 Headlamp aiming systems.
S10.18.3 Aim adjustment interaction.
S10.18.4 Horizontal adjustment-visually aimed headlamp.
S10.18.5 Optical axis marking.
S10.18.5.1 Optical axis marking-vehicle.
S10.18.5.2 Optical axis marking-lamp.
S10.18.5.3 Optical axis marking-visual aim headlamp.
S10.18.6 Moveable reflectors.
S10.18.7 External aiming.
S10.18.7.1 Headlamp aiming device locating plates.
S10.18.7.2 Nonadjustable headlamp aiming device locating plates.
S10.18.8 On-vehicle aiming.
S10.18.8.1 Aim.
S10.18.8.1.1 Vertical aim.
S10.18.8.1.2 Horizontal aim.
S10.18.8.2 Aiming instructions.
S10.18.8.3 Permanent calibration.
S10.18.8.4 Replacement units.
S10.18.8.5 Physical tests.
S10.18.9 Visual/optical aiming.
S10.18.9.1 Vertical aim, lower beam.
S10.18.9.1.1 Vertical position of the cutoff.
S10.18.9.1.2 Vertical gradient.
S10.18.9.1.3 Horizontal position of the cutoff.
S10.18.9.1.4 Maximum inclination of the cutoff.
S10.18.9.1.5 Measuring the cutoff parameter.
S10.18.9.2 Horizontal aim, lower beam.
S10.18.9.3 Vertical aim, upper beam.
S10.18.9.4 Horizontal aim, upper beam.
S10.18.9.5 Photometry.
S10.18.9.6 Visual/optical identification marking.
S11 Replaceable light source requirements.
S11.1 Markings.
S11.2 Ballast markings.
S11.3 Gas discharge laboratory life.
S11.4 Physical tests.
S12 Headlamp concealment device requirements.
S12.7 Certification election.
S13 Replaceable headlamp lens requirements.
S14 Physical and photometry test procedures and performance 
requirements.
S14.1 General test procedures and performance requirements.
S14.1.2 Plastic optical materials.
S14.1.4 Samples.
S14.1.5 Laboratory facilities.
S14.2 Photometric test procedures.
S14.2.1 Photometry measurements for all lamps except license lamps, 
headlamps, and DRLs.
S14.2.1.1 Mounting.
S14.2.1.2 School bus signal lamp aiming.
S14.2.1.3 Measurement distance.
S14.2.1.4 Location of test points.
S14.2.1.5 Multiple compartment and multiple lamp photometry of turn 
signal lamps, stop lamps, and taillamps.
S14.2.1.6 Bulbs.
S14.2.2 License plate lamp photometry.
S14.2.2.1 Illumination surface.
S14.2.2.2 Test stations.
S14.2.3 Reflex reflector and retroreflective sheeting photometry.
S14.2.3.1 Mounting.
S14.2.3.2 Illumination source.
S14.2.3.3 Measurement distance.
S14.2.3.4 Test setup.
S14.2.3.5 Photodetector .
S14.2.3.6 Photometry surface.
S14.2.3.7 Procedure.
S14.2.3.8 Measurements.
S14.2.3.8.1 Reflex reflectors.
S14.2.3.8.2 Retroreflective sheeting.
S14.2.3.8.3 Reflex reflector photometry measurement adjustments.
S14.2.4 Daytime running lamp (DRL) photometry measurements.
S14.2.5 Headlamp photometry measurements.
S14.2.5.1 Mounting.
S14.2.5.3 Measurement distance.
S14.2.5.4 Seasoning and test voltage.
S14.2.5.5 Aiming.
S14.2.5.5.1 Mechanically aimable headlamps using an external aimer.
S14.2.5.5.2 Mechanically aimable headlamps equipped with a VHAD.
S14.2.5.5.3 Visually aimable lower beam headlamps-vertical aim.
S14.2.5.5.4 Visually aimable lower beam headlamps-horizontal aim.
S14.2.5.5.5 Visually aimable upper beam headlamps-vertical aim.
S14.2.5.5.6 Visually aimable upper beam headlamps-horizontal aim.
S14.2.5.5.7 Simultaneous aim Type F sealed beam headlamps and beam 
contributor integral beam headlamps.
S14.2.5.5.8 Motorcycle headlamp-upper beam headlamps designed to comply 
with Table XX.
S14.2.5.5.9 Motorcycle headlamp-lower beam headlamps designed to comply 
with Table XX.
S14.2.5.6 Positioner.
S14.2.5.7 Photometer.
S14.2.5.7.2 Sensor.
S14.2.5.8 Location of test points.
S14.2.5.9 Beam contributor photometry measurements.
S14.2.5.10 Moveable reflector aimed headlamp photometry measurements.
S14.3 Motorcycle headlamp out of focus test procedure and performance 
requirements.
S14.3.1 Procedure.
S14.3.2 Performance requirements.
S14.4 General test procedures and performance requirements.
S14.4.1 Color test.
S14.4.1.1 Samples.
S14.4.1.2 General procedure.
S14.4.1.3 Visual method.
S14.4.1.3.1 Visual method procedure.
S14.4.1.3.2 Visual method performance requirements.
S14.4.1.3.2.1 Red.
S14.4.1.3.2.2 Yellow (Amber).

[[Page 536]]

S14.4.1.3.2.3 White.
S14.4.1.4 Tristimulus method.
S14.4.1.4.1 Tristimulus method procedure.
S14.4.1.4.2 Tristimulus method performance requirements.
S14.4.1.4.2.1 Red.
S14.4.1.4.2.2 Yellow (Amber).
S14.4.1.4.2.3 White (achromatic).
S14.4.2 Plastic optical materials tests.
S14.4.2.1 Samples.
S14.4.2.2 Outdoor exposure test.
S14.4.2.2.3 Procedure.
S14.4.2.2.4 Performance requirements.
S14.4.2.3 Heat test.
S14.4.2.3.1 Procedure.
S14.4.2.3.2 Performance requirements.
S14.5 Signal lamp and reflective device physical test procedures and 
performance requirements.
S14.5.1 Vibration test.
S14.5.1.1 Procedure.
S14.5.1.2 Performance requirements.
S14.5.2 Moisture test.
S14.5.2.1 Procedure.
S14.5.2.2 Performance requirements.
S14.5.3 Dust test.
S14.5.3.1 Samples.
S14.5.3.2 Procedure.
S14.5.3.3 Performance requirements.
S14.5.4 Corrosion test.
S14.5.4.1 Procedure.
S14.5.4.2 Performance requirements.
S14.6 Headlamp physical test procedures and performance requirements.
S14.6.1 Abrasion test.
S14.6.1.1 Procedure.
S14.6.1.1.1 Abrading pad.
S14.6.1.1.2 Abrading pad alignment.
S14.6.1.1.3 Abrasion test procedure.
S14.6.1.2 Performance requirements.
S14.6.2 Chemical resistance test.
S14.6.2.1 Procedure.
S14.6.2.1.1 Test fluids.
S14.6.2.1.2 Fluid application.
S14.6.2.1.3 Test duration.
S14.6.2.2 Performance requirements.
S14.6.3 Corrosion test.
S14.6.3.1 Procedure.
S14.6.3.2 Performance requirements.
S14.6.4 Corrosion-connector test.
S14.6.4.1 Procedure.
S14.6.4.2 Performance requirements.
S14.6.5 Dust test.
S14.6.5.1 Procedure.
S14.6.5.2 Performance requirements.
S14.6.6 Temperature cycle test and internal heat test.
S14.6.6.1 Samples.
S14.6.6.2 General procedure.
S14.6.6.3 Temperature cycle test.
S14.6.6.3.1 Procedure.
S14.6.6.3.2 Performance requirements.
S14.6.6.4 Internal heat test.
S14.6.6.4.1 Procedure.
S14.6.6.4.2 Performance requirements.
S14.6.7 Humidity test.
S14.6.7.1 Procedure.
S14.6.7.2 Performance requirements.
S14.6.8 Vibration test.
S14.6.8.1 Samples.
S14.6.8.2 Procedure.
S14.6.8.3 Performance requirements.
S14.6.9 Sealing test.
S14.6.9.1 Procedure.
S14.6.9.2 Performance requirements.
S14.6.10 Chemical resistance test of reflectors of replaceable lens 
headlamps.
S14.6.10.1 Procedure.
S14.6.10.1.1 Test fluids.
S14.6.10.1.2 Fluid application.
S14.6.10.1.3 Test duration.
S14.6.10.2 Performance requirements.
S14.6.11 Corrosion resistance test of reflectors of replaceable lens 
headlamps.
S14.6.11.1 Procedure.
S14.6.11.2 Performance requirements.
S14.6.12 Inward force test.
S14.6.12.1 Procedure.
S14.6.12.2 Performance requirements.
S14.6.13 Torque deflection test.
S14.6.13.1 Procedure.
S14.6.13.2 Performance requirements.
S14.6.14 Retaining ring test.
S14.6.14.1 Procedure.
S14.6.14.2 Performance requirements.
S14.6.15 Headlamp connector test.
S14.6.15.1 Procedure.
S14.6.15.2 Performance requirements.
S14.6.16 Headlamp wattage test.
S14.6.16.1 Procedure.
S14.6.16.2 Performance requirements.
S14.6.17 Aiming adjustment test-laboratory.
S14.6.17.1 Procedure.
S14.6.17.2 Performance requirements.
S14.6.18 Aiming adjustment test-on vehicle.
S14.6.18.1 Procedure.
S14.6.18.2 Performance requirements.
S14.7 Replaceable light source physical test procedures and performance 
requirements.
S14.7.1 Deflection test for replaceable light sources.
S14.7.1.1 Procedure.
S14.7.1.2 Performance requirements.
S14.7.2 Pressure test for replaceable light sources.
S14.7.2.1 Procedure.
S14.7.2.2 Performance requirements.
S14.7.3 Replaceable light source power and flux measurement procedure.
S14.7.3.1 Seasoning.
S14.7.3.1.1 Resistive filament source.
S14.7.3.1.2 Discharge source.
S14.7.3.2 Test voltage.
S14.7.3.3 Luminous flux measurement.
S14.7.3.3.3.2 Discharge light source setup.
S14.8 Vehicle headlamp aiming devices (VHAD) physical test procedures 
and performance requirements.
S14.8.1 Samples.
S14.8.2 Scale graduation test.
S14.8.2.1 Procedure.
S14.8.2.2 Performance requirements.
S14.8.3 Cold scale graduation test.
S14.8.3.1 Procedure.

[[Page 537]]

S14.8.3.2 Performance requirements.
S14.8.4 Hot scale graduation test.
S14.8.4.1 Procedure.
S14.8.4.2 Performance requirements.
S14.8.5 Thermal cycle test.
S14.8.5.1 Procedure.
S14.8.5.2 Performance requirements.
S14.8.6 Corrosion test.
S14.8.6.1 Procedure.
S14.8.6.2 Performance requirements.
S14.8.7 Photometry test.
S14.8.7.1 Procedure.
S14.8.7.2 Performance requirements.
S14.9 Associated equipment physical test procedures and performance 
requirements.
S14.9.1 Turn signal operating unit durability test.
S14.9.1.1 Power supply specifications.
S14.9.1.2 Procedure.
S14.9.1.3 Performance requirements.
S14.9.2 Vehicular hazard warning signal operating unit durability test.
S14.9.2.1 Procedure.
S14.9.2.2 Performance requirements.
S14.9.3 Turn signal flasher and vehicular hazard warning flasher tests.
S14.9.3.1 Standard test circuit.
S14.9.3.1.1 Test circuit setup.
S14.9.3.2 Power supply specifications.
S14.9.3.2.1 Starting time, voltage drop, and flash rate and percent 
current ``on'' time tests.
S14.9.3.2.2 Durability tests.
S14.9.3.3 Turn signal flasher starting time test.
S14.9.3.3.1 Samples.
S14.9.3.3.2 Procedure.
S14.9.3.3.3 Performance requirements.
S14.9.3.4 Turn signal flasher voltage drop test.
S14.9.3.4.1 Samples.
S14.9.3.4.2 Procedure.
S14.9.3.4.3 Performance requirements.
S14.9.3.5 Turn signal flasher flash rate and percent current ``on'' time 
test.
S14.9.3.5.1 Samples.
S14.9.3.5.2 Procedure.
S14.9.3.5.3 Performance requirements.
S14.9.3.6 Turn signal flasher durability test.
S14.9.3.6.1 Samples.
S14.9.3.6.2 Procedure.
S14.9.3.6.3 Performance requirements.
S14.9.3.7 Vehicular hazard warning signal flasher starting time test.
S14.9.3.7.1 Samples.
S14.9.3.7.2 Procedure.
S14.9.3.7.3 Performance requirements.
S14.9.3.8 Vehicular hazard warning signal flasher voltage drop test.
S14.9.3.8.1 Samples.
S14.9.3.8.2 Procedure.
S14.9.3.8.3 Performance requirements.
S14.9.3.9 Vehicular hazard warning signal flasher flash rate and percent 
``on'' time test.
S14.9.3.9.1 Samples.
S14.9.3.9.2 Procedure.
S14.9.3.9.3 Performance requirements.
S14.9.3.10 Vehicular hazard warning signal flasher durability test.
S14.9.3.10.1 Samples.
S14.9.3.10.2 Procedure.
S14.9.3.10.3 Performance requirements.
S14.9.3.11 Semiautomatic headlamp beam switching device tests.
S14.9.3.11.1 Test conditions.
S14.9.3.11.2 Sensitivity test.
S14.9.3.11.2.1 Samples.
S14.9.3.11.2.2 Procedure.
S14.9.3.11.2.3 Performance requirements.
S14.9.3.11.2.3.1 Operating limits.
S14.9.3.11.3 Voltage regulation test.
S14.9.3.11.3.1 Procedure.
S14.9.3.11.3.2 Performance requirements.
S14.9.3.11.4 Manual override test.
S14.9.3.11.4.1 Procedure.
S14.9.3.11.4.2 Performance requirements.
S14.9.3.11.5 Warmup test.
S14.9.3.11.5.1 Procedure.
S14.9.3.11.5.2 Performance requirements.
S14.9.3.11.6 Temperature test.
S14.9.3.11.6.1 Procedure.
S14.9.3.11.6.2 Performance requirements.
S14.9.3.11.7 Dust test.
S14.9.3.11.7.1 Procedure.
S14.9.3.11.7.2 Performance requirements.
S14.9.3.11.8 Corrosion test.
S14.9.3.11.8.1 Procedure.
S14.9.3.11.8.2 Performance requirements.
S14.9.3.11.9 Vibration test.
S14.9.3.11.9.1 Procedure.
S14.9.3.11.9.2 Performance requirements.
S14.9.3.11.10 Sunlight test.
S14.9.3.11.10.1 Procedure.
S14.9.3.11.10.2 Performance requirements.
S14.9.3.11.11 Durability test.
S14.9.3.11.11.1 Procedure.
S14.9.3.11.11.2 Performance requirements.
S14.9.3.11.12 Return to upper beam test.
S14.9.3.11.12.1 Procedure.
S14.9.3.11.12.2 Performance requirements.
Table I-a Required lamps and reflective devices All passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles (MPV), trucks, and buses
Table I-b Required lamps and reflective devices All trailers
Table I-c Required lamps and reflective devices All motorcycles
Table II-a Headlighting systems Sealed beams
Table II-b Headlighting systems Combination
Table II-c Headlighting systems Integral beams
Table II-d Headlighting systems Replaceable bulb
Table III Marking requirements location
Table IV-a Effective projected luminous lens area requirements
Table IV-b Effective projected luminous lens area requirements
Table IV-c Effective projected luminous lens area requirements
Table V-a Visibility requirements of installed lighting devices

[[Page 538]]

Table V-b Visibility requirements of installed lighting devices Lens 
area visibility option
Table V-c Visibility requirements of installed lighting devices Luminous 
intensity visibility option
Table V-d Visibility requirements of installed lighting devices (Legacy 
visibility alternative)
Table VI-a Front turn signal lamp photometry requirements
Table VI-b Front turn signal lamp photometry requirements
Table VII Rear turn signal lamp photometry requirements
Table VIII Taillamp photometry requirements
Table IX Stop lamp photometry requirements
Table X Side marker lamp photometry requirements
Table XI Clearance and identification lamps photometry requirements
Table XII Backup lamp photometry requirements
Table XIII-a Motorcycle turn signal lamp alternative photometry 
requirements
Table XIII-b Motor driven cycle stop lamp alternative photometry 
requirements
Table XIV Parking lamp photometry requirements
Table XV High-mounted stop lamp photometry requirements
Table XVI-a Reflex reflector photometry requirements
Table XVI-b Additional photometry requirements for conspicuity reflex 
reflectors
Table XVI-c Retroreflective sheeting photometry requirements
Table XVII School bus signal lamp photometry requirements
Table XVIII Headlamp upper beam photometry requirements
Table XIX-a Headlamp lower beam photometry requirements
Table XIX-b Headlamp lower beam photometry requirements
Table XIX-c Headlamp lower beam photometry requirements
Table XX Motorcycle and motor driven cycle headlamp photometry 
requirements
Figure 1 Chromaticity diagram
Figure 2 Flasher performance chart
Figure 3 Replaceable bulb headlamp aim pads
Figure 4 Headlamp connector test setup
Figure 5 Headlamp abrasion test fixture
Figure 6 Thermal cycle test profile
Figure 7 Dirt/Ambient test setup
Figure 8 Replaceable light source deflection test setup
Figure 9 Environmental test profile
Figure 10 Replaceable light source pressure test setup
Figure 11 Trailer conspicuity treatment examples
Figure 12-1 Trailer conspicuity detail I
Figure 12-2 Trailer conspicuity detail II
Figure 13 Tractor conspicuity treatment examples
Figure 14 92x150 Headlamp aim deflection test setup
Figure 15 Types G and H headlamp aim deflection test setup
Figure 16 Types A and E headlamp aim deflection test setup
Figure 17 Type B headlamp aim deflection test setup
Figure 18 Types C and D headlamp aim deflection test setup
Figure 19 License plate lamp target locations
Figure 20 License plate lamp measurement of incident light angle
Figure 21 Vibration test machine
Figure 22 Flasher standard test circuit


<R05>
Sec. 571.109  Standard No. 109; New pneumatic and certain specialty tires.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies tire dimensions and laboratory 
test requirements for bead unseating resistance, strength, endurance, 
and high speed performance; defines tire load ratings; and specifies 
labeling requirements for passenger car tires.
    S2 Application. This standard applies to new pneumatic radial tires 
for use on passenger cars manufactured before 1975, new pneumatic bias 
ply tires, T-type spare tires, ST, FI, and 8-12 rim diameter and below 
tires for use on passenger cars manufactured after 1948. However, it 
does not apply to any tire that has been so altered so as to render 
impossible its use, or its repair for use, as motor vehicle equipment.
    S3. Definitions.
    Bead means that part of the tire made of steel wires, wrapped or 
reinforced by ply cords, that is shaped to fit the rim.
    Bead separation means a breakdown of bond between components in the 
bead area.
    Bias ply tire means a pneumatic tire in which the ply cords that 
extend to the beads are laid at alternate angles substantially less than 
90[deg] to the centerline of the tread.
    Carcass means the tire structure, except tread and sidewall rubber.
    Chunking means the breaking away of pieces of the tread or sidewall.
    Cord means the strands forming the plies in the tire.
    Cord separation means cords parting away from adjacent rubber 
compounds.
    Cracking means any parting within the tread, sidewall, or innerliner 
of the tire extending to cord material.

[[Page 539]]

    CT means a pneumatic tire with an inverted flange tire and rim 
system in which the rim is designed with rim flanges pointed radially 
inward and the tire is designed to fit on the underside of the rim in a 
manner that encloses the rim flanges inside the air cavity of the tire.
    Groove means the space between two adjacent tread ribs.
    Innerliner means the layer(s) forming the inside surface of a 
tubeless tire that contains the inflating medium within the tire.
    Innerliner separation means the parting of the innerliner from cord 
material in the carcass.
    Load rating means the maximum load a tire is rated to carry for a 
given inflation pressure.
    Maximum permissible inflation pressure means the maximum cold 
inflation pressure to which a tire may be inflated.
    Maximum load rating means the load rating at the maximum permissible 
inflation pressure for that tire.
    Open splice means any parting at any junction of tread, sidewall, or 
innerliner that extends to cord material.
    Overall width means the linear distance between the exteriors of the 
sidewalls of an inflated tire, including elevations due to labeling, 
decorations, or protective bands or ribs.
    Ply means a layer of rubber-coated parallel cords.
    Ply separation means a parting of rubber compound between adjacent 
plies.
    Pneumatic tire means a mechanical device made of rubber, chemicals, 
fabric and steel or other materials, which, when mounted on an 
automotive wheel, provides the traction and contains the gas or fluid 
that sustains the load.
    Radial ply tire means a pneumatic tire in which the ply cords which 
extend to the beads are laid at substantially 90[deg] to the centerline 
of the tread.
    Rim means a metal support for a tire or a tire and tube assembly 
upon which the tire beads are seated.
    Section width means the linear distance between the exteriors of the 
sidewalls of an inflated tire, excluding elevations due to labeling, 
decoration, or protective bands.
    Sidewall means that portion of a tire between the tread and the 
bead.
    Sidewall separation means the parting of the rubber compound from 
the cord material in the sidewall.
    Test rim means, with reference to a tire to be tested, any rim that 
is listed as appropriate for use with that tire in accordance with S4.4. 
For purposes of this section and Sec. 571.110, each rim listing shall 
include dimensional specifications and a diagram of the rim.
    Tread means that portion of a tire that comes into contact with the 
road.
    Tread rib means a tread section running circumferentially around a 
tire.
    Tread separation means pulling away of the tread from the tire 
carcass.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1 Size and construction. Each tire shall be designed to fit each 
rim specified for its size designation in each reference cited in the 
definition of test rim in S3.
    S4.2 Performance requirements.
    S4.2.1 General. Each tire shall conform to each of the following:
    (a) It shall meet the requirements specified in S4.2.2 for its tire 
size designation, type, and maximum permissible inflation pressure.
    (b) Its maximum permissible inflation pressure shall be either 32, 
36, 40, or 60 psi, or 240, 280, 300, 340, or 350 kPa. For a CT tire, the 
maximum permissible inflation pressure shall be either 290, 330, 350, or 
390 kPa.
    (c) Its load rating shall be that specified in a submission made by 
an individual manufacturer, pursuant to S4.4.1(a), or in one of the 
publications described in S4.4.1(b) for its size designation, type and 
each appropriate inflation pressure. If the maximum load rating for a 
particular tire size is shown in more than one of the publications 
described in S4.4.1(b), each tire of that size designation shall have a 
maximum load rating that is not less than the published maximum load 
rating, or if there are differing maximum load ratings for the same tire 
size designation, not less than the lowest published maximum load 
rating.
    (d) It shall incorporate a tread wear indicator that will provide a 
visual indication that the tire has worn to a tread depth of 1.6 mm (\1/
16\ inch).

[[Page 540]]

    (e) It shall, before being subjected to either the endurance test 
procedure specified in S5.4 or the high speed performance procedure 
specified in S5.5, exhibit no visual evidence of tread, sidewall, ply, 
cord, innerliner, or bead separation, chunking, broken cords, cracking, 
or open splices.
    (f) It shall meet the requirements of S4.2.2.5 and S4.2.2.6 when 
tested on a test wheel described in S5.4.2.1 either alone or 
simultaneously with up to 5 other tires.
    S4.2.2 Test requirements.
    S4.2.2.1 Test sample. For each test sample use:
    (a) One tire for physical dimensions, resistance to bead unseating, 
and strength, in sequence;
    (b) Another tire for tire endurance; and
    (c) A third tire for high speed performance.
    S4.2.2.2 Physical dimensions. The actual section width and overall 
width for each tire measured in accordance with S5.1, shall not exceed 
the section width specified in a submission made by an individual 
manufacturer, pursuant to S4.4.1(a) or in one of the publications 
described in S4.4.1(b) for its size designation and type by more than:
    (a) (For tires with a maximum permissible inflation pressure of 32, 
36, or 40 psi) 7 percent, or
    (b) (For tires with a maximum permissible inflation pressure of 240, 
280, 290, 300, 330, 350 or 390 kPa, or 60 psi) 7 percent or 10 mm (0.4 
inches), whichever is larger.
    S4.2.2.3 Tubeless tire resistance to bead unseating.
    S4.2.2.3.1 When a tubeless tire that has a maximum inflation 
pressure other than 420 kPa (60 psi) is tested in accordance with S5.2, 
the applied force required to unseat the tire bead at the point of 
contact shall be not less than:
    (a) 6,670 N (1,500 pounds) for tires with a designated section width 
of less than 160 mm (6 inches);
    (b) 8,890 N (2,000 pounds) for tires with a designated section width 
of 160 mm (6 inches) or more but less than 205 mm (8 inches);
    (c) 11,120 N (2,500 pounds) for tires with a designated section 
width of 205 mm (8 inches) or more, using the section width specified in 
a submission made by an individual manufacturer, pursuant to S4.4.1(a), 
or in one of the publications described in S4.4.1(b) for the applicable 
tire size designation and type.
    S4.2.2.3.2 When a tire that has a maximum inflation pressure of 420 
kPa (60 psi) is tested in accordance with S5.2, the applied force 
required to unseat the bead at the point of contact shall be not less 
than:
    (a) 6,670 N (1,500 pounds) for tires with a maximum load rating of 
less than 399 kg (880 pounds);
    (b) 8,890 N (2,000 pounds) for tires with a maximum load rating of 
399 kg (880 pounds) or more but less than 635 kg (1,400 pounds);
    (c) 11,120 N (2,500 pounds) for tires with a maximum load rating of 
635 kg (1,400 pounds) or more, using the maximum load rating marked on 
the sidewall of the tire.
    S4.2.2.4 Tire strength. Each tire shall meet the requirements for 
minimum breaking energy specified in Table 1 when tested in accordance 
with S5.3.
    S4.2.2.5 Tire endurance. When the tire has been subjected to the 
laboratory endurance test specified in S5.4, using a test rim that 
undergoes no permanent deformation and allows no loss of air through the 
portion that it comprises of the tire-rim pressure chamber:
    (a) There shall be no visual evidence of tread, sidewall, ply, cord, 
innerliner, or bead separation, chunking, broken cords, cracking, or 
open splices.
    (b) The tire pressure at the end of the test shall be not less than 
the initial pressures specified in S5.4.1.1.
    S4.2.2.6 High speed performance. When the tire has been subjected to 
the laboratory high speed performance test specified in S5.5, using a 
test rim that undergoes no permanent deformation and allows no loss of 
air through the portion that it comprises of the tire-rim pressure 
chamber, the tire shall meet the requirements set forth in S4.2.2.5 (a) 
and (b).
    S4.3 Labeling Requirements. Except as provided in S4.3.1 and S4.3.2 
of this standard, each tire, except for those certified to comply with 
S5.5 of Sec. 571.139, shall have permanently molded into or onto both 
sidewalls, in letters and numerals not less than 0.078 inches high, the 
information shown in

[[Page 541]]

paragraphs S4.3 (a) through (g) of this standard. On at least one 
sidewall, the information shall be positioned in an area between the 
maximum section width and bead of the tire, unless the maximum section 
width of the tire falls between the bead and one-fourth of the distance 
from the bead to the shoulder of the tire. For tires where the maximum 
section width falls in that area, locate all required labeling between 
the bead and a point one-half the distance from the bead to the shoulder 
of the tire. However, in no case shall the information be positioned on 
the tire so that it is obstructed by the flange or any rim designated 
for use with that tire in Standards Nos. 109 and 110 (Sec. 571.109 and 
Sec. 571.110 of this part).
    (a) One size designation, except that equivalent inch and metric 
size designations may be used;
    (b) Maximum permissible inflation pressure;
    (c) Maximum load rating;
    (d) The generic name of each cord material used in the plies (both 
sidewall and tread area) of the tire;
    (e) Actual number of plies in the sidewall, and the actual number of 
plies in the tread area if different;
    (f) The words ``tubeless'' or ``tube type'' as applicable; and
    (g) The word ``radial'' if the tire is a radial ply tire.
    S4.3.1 Each tire shall be labeled with the symbol DOT in the manner 
specified in part 574 of this chapter, which shall constitute a 
certification that the tire conforms to applicable Federal motor vehicle 
safety standards.
    S4.3.2 Each tire shall be labeled with the name of the manufacturer, 
or brand name and number assigned to the manufacturer in the manner 
specified in part 574.
    S4.3.3 [Reserved]
    S4.3.4 If the maximum inflation pressure of a tire is 240, 280, 290, 
300, 330, 340, 350, or 390 kPa, then:
    (a) Each marking of that inflation pressure pursuant to S4.3(b) 
shall be followed in parenthesis by the equivalent inflation pressure in 
psi, rounded to the next higher whole number; and
    (b) Each marking of the tire's maximum load rating pursuant to 
S4.3(c) in kilograms shall be followed in parenthesis by the equivalent 
load rating in pounds, rounded to the nearest whole number.
    S4.3.5 If the maximum inflation pressure of a tire is 420 kPa (60 
psi), the tire shall have permanently molded into or onto both 
sidewalls, in letters and numerals not less than 12.7 mm (\1/2\ inch), 
the words ``Inflate to 420 kPa (60 psi)''. On both sidewalls, the words 
shall be positioned in an area between the tire shoulder and the bead of 
the tire. However, in no case shall the words be positioned on the tire 
so that they are obstructed by the flange of any rim designated for use 
with that tire in this standard or in Standard No. 110 (Sec. 571.110 of 
this part).
    S4.4 Tire and rim matching information.
    S4.4.1 Each manufacturer of tires not certified to comply with S4 of 
Sec. 571.139 shall ensure that a listing of the rims that may be used 
with each tire that he produces is provided to the public. A listing 
compiled in accordance with paragraph (a) of S4.4.1 of this standard 
need not include dimensional specifications or diagram of a rim if the 
rim's dimensional specifications and diagram are contained in each 
listing published in accordance with paragraph (b) of S4.4.1 of this 
standard. The listing shall be in one of the following forms:
    (a) Listed by manufacturer name or brand name in a document 
furnished to dealers of the manufacturer's tires, to any person upon 
request, and in duplicate to the Docket Section, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 
20590; or
    (b) Contained in publications, current at the date of manufacture of 
the tire or any later date, of at least one of the following 
organizations:

The Tire and Rim Association
The European Tyre and Rim Technical Organisation
Japan Automobile Tire Manufacturers' Association, Inc.
Deutsche Industrie Norm
British Standards Institution
Scandinavian Tire and Rim Organization
The Tyre and Rim Association of Australia

    S4.4.2 Information contained in any publication specified in 
S4.4.1(b) of this

[[Page 542]]

standard which lists general categories of tires and rims by size 
designation, type of construction and/or intended use, shall be 
considered to be manufacturer's information pursuant to S4.4.1 of this 
standard for the listed tires and rims, unless the publication itself or 
specific information provided according to S4.4.1(a) of this standard 
indicates otherwise.
    S5. Test procedures.
    S5.1 Physical Dimensions. Determine tire physical dimensions under 
uniform ambient conditions as follows:
    (a) Mount the tire on a test rim having the test rim width specified 
in a submission made by an individual manufacturer, pursuant to 
S4.4.1(a), or in one of the publications described in S4.4.1(b) for that 
tire size designation and inflate it to the applicable pressure 
specified in Table II.
    (b) Condition it at ambient room temperature for at least 24 hours.
    (c) Readjust pressure to that specified in (a).
    (d) Caliper the section width and overall width at six points 
approximately equally spaced around the tire circumference.
    (e) Record the average of these measurements as the section width 
and overall width, respectively.
    (f) Determine tire outer diameter by measuring the maximum 
circumference of the tire and dividing this dimension by pi (3.14).
    S5.2 Tubeless tire bead unseating resistance.
    S5.2.1 Preparation of tire-wheel assembly.
    S5.2.1.1 Wash the tire, dry it at the beads, and mount it without 
lubrication or adhesives on a clean, painted test rim.
    S5.2.1.2 Inflate it to the applicable pressure specified in Table II 
at ambient room temperature.
    S5.2.1.3 Mount the wheel and tire in a fixture shown in Figure 1, 
and force the bead unseating block shown in Figure 2 or Figure 2A 
against the tire sidewall as required by the geometry of the fixture. 
However, in testing a tire that has an inflation pressure of 60 psi, 
only use the bead unseating block described in Figure 2A.
    S5.2.2 Test procedure.
    S5.2.2.1 Apply a load through the block to the tire's outer sidewall 
at the distance specified in Figure 1 for the applicable wheel size at a 
rate of 50 mm (2 inches) per minute, with the load arm substantially 
parallel to the tire and rim assembly at the time of engagement.
    S5.2.2.2 Increase the load until the bead unseats or the applicable 
value specified in S4.2.2.3 is reached.
    S5.2.2.3 Repeat the test at least four places equally spaced around 
the tire circumference.
    S5.3 Tire strength.
    S5.3.1 Preparation of tire.
    S5.3.1.1 Mount the tire on a test rim and inflate it to the 
applicable pressure specified in Table II.
    S5.3.1.2 Condition it at room temperature for at least 3 hours; and
    S5.3.1.3 Readjust its pressure to that specified in S5.3.1.1.
    S5.3.2 Test procedure.
    S5.3.2.1 Force a 19 mm (\3/4\ inch) diameter cylindrical steel 
plunger with a hemispherical end perpendicularly into the tread rib as 
near to the centerline as possible, avoiding penetration into the tread 
groove, at the rate of 50 mm (2 inches) per minute.
    S5.3.2.2 Record the force and penetration at five test points 
equally spaced around the circumference of the tire. If the tire fails 
to break before the plunger is stopped by reaching the rim, record the 
force and penetration as the rim is reached and use these values in 
S5.3.2.3.
    S5.3.2.3 Compute the breaking energy for each test point by means of 
one of the two following formulas:

W=[(FxP)/2]x10<SUP>x3</SUP> (joules)


Where

W=Energy, in joules;
F=Force, Newtons; and
P=Penetration, mm; or

W=[(FxP)/2]


Where

W=Energy, inch-pounds;
F=Force, pounds; and
P=Penetration, inches.

    S5.3.2.4 Determine the breaking energy value for the tire by 
computing the average of the five values obtained in accordance with 
S5.3.2.3.
    S5.4 Tire endurance.

[[Page 543]]

    S5.4.1 Preparation of tire.
    S5.4.1.1 Mount a new tire on a test rim and inflate it to the 
applicable pressure specified in Table II.
    S5.4.1.2 Condition the tire assembly to 38[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3 [deg]C (100[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]F) for 
at least three hours.
    S5.4.1.3 Readjust tire pressure to that specified in S5.4.1.1 
immediately before testing.
    S5.4.2 Test procedure.
    S5.4.2.1 Mount the tire and wheel assembly on a test axle and press 
it against a flat-faced steel test wheel 1708 mm (67.23 inches) in 
diameter and at least as wide as the section width of the tire to be 
tested or an approved equivalent test wheel, with the applicable test 
load specified in the table in S5.4.2.3 for the tire's size designation, 
type and maximum permissible inflation pressure.
    S5.4.2.2 During the test, the air surrounding the test area shall be 
38[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 [deg]C (100[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 
[deg]F).
    S5.4.2.3 Conduct the test at 80 kilometers per hour (km/h)(50 miles 
per hour) in accordance with the following schedule without pressure 
adjustment or other interruptions:
    The loads for the following periods are the specified percentage of 
the maximum load rating marked on the tire sidewall:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Percent
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4 hours.......................................................        85
6 hours.......................................................        90
24 hours......................................................       100
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S5.4.2.4 Immediately after running the tire the required time, 
measure its inflation pressure. Allow the tire to cool for one hour. 
Then deflate the tire, remove it from the test rim, and inspect it for 
the conditions specified in S4.2.2.5(a).
    S5.5 High speed performance.
    S5.5.1 After preparing the tire in accordance with S5.4.1, mount the 
tire and wheel assembly in accordance with S5.4.2.1, and press it 
against the test wheel with a load of 88 percent of the tire's maximum 
load rating as marked on the tire sidewall.
    S5.5.2 Break in the tire by running it for 2 hours at 80 km/h (50 
mph).
    S5.5.3 Allow to cool to 38[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 [deg]C 
(100[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]F) and readjust the inflation 
pressure to the applicable pressure specified in Table II.
    S5.5.4 Without readjusting inflation pressure, test at 121 km/h (75 
mph) for 30 minutes, 129 km/h (80 mph) for 30 minutes, and 137 km/h (85 
mph) for 30 minutes.
    S5.5.5 Immediately after running the tire the required time, measure 
its inflation pressure. Allow the tire to cool for one hour. Then 
deflate the tire, remove it from the test rim, and inspect it for the 
conditions specified in S4.2.2.5(a).
    S6. Nonconforming tires. No tire that is designed for use on 
passenger cars and manufactured on or after October 1, 1972, but does 
not conform to all the requirements of this standard, shall be sold, 
offered for sale, introduced or delivered for introduction into 
interstate commerce, or imported into the United States, for any 
purpose.

[[Page 544]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.013


                                            Figures for FMVSS No. 109
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               Dimension ``A'' for tires with maximum inflation pressure
                                     ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
             Wheel size                                         Other than
                                       Other than 60 psi (in)    420 kPa          60 psi (in)          420 kPa
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
20..................................  13.50..................          345  .......................  ...........
19..................................  13.00..................          330  12.00..................          305
18..................................  12.50..................          318  11.40..................          290
17..................................  12.00..................          305  10.60..................          269
16..................................  11.50..................          292  9.90...................          251
15..................................  11.00..................          279  9.40...................          239
14..................................  10.50..................          267  8.90...................          226
13..................................  10.00..................          254  8.40...................          213
12..................................  9.50...................          241  .......................  ...........
11..................................  9.00...................          229  .......................  ...........
10..................................  8.50...................          216  .......................
320.................................  8.50...................          216  .......................  ...........
340.................................  9.00...................          229  .......................  ...........
345.................................  9.25...................          235  .......................  ...........
365.................................  9.75...................          248  .......................  ...........
370.................................  10.00..................          254  .......................  ...........
390.................................  11.00..................          279  .......................  ...........
415.................................  11.50..................          292  .......................  ...........
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 545]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.014


[[Page 546]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.015

        Appendix A--Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 109

    The following tables list tire sizes and tire constructions with 
proper load and inflation values. The tables group tires of related 
constructions and load/inflation values. Persons requesting the addition 
of new tire sizes to the tables or the addition of tables for new tire 
constructions may, when the additions requested are compatible with 
existent groupings, or when adequate justification for new tables 
exists, submit five (5) copies of information and data supporting the 
request to

[[Page 547]]

the Vehicle Dynamics Division, Office of Crash Avoidance Standards, 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., 
Washington, DC 20590.
    The information should contain the following:
    1. The tire size designation, and a statement either that the tire 
is an addition to a category of tires listed in the tables or that it is 
in a new category for which a table has not been deloped.
    2. The tire dimensions, including aspect ratio, size factor, section 
width, overall width, and test rim size.
    3. The load-inflation schedule of the tire.
    4. A statement as to whether the tire size designation and load 
inflation schedule has been coordinated with the Tire and Rim 
Association, the European Tyre and Rim Technical Organisation, the Japan 
Automobile Tire Manufacturers' Association, Inc., the Deutsche Industrie 
Norm, the British Standards Institution, the Scandinavian Tire and Rim 
Organization, and the Tyre and Rim Association of Australia.
    5. Copies of test data sheets showing test conditions, results and 
conclusions obtained for individual tests specified in Sec. 571.109.
    6. Justification for the additional tire sizes.

                               Table I-A--For Bias Ply Tires With Designated Section Width of 152 mm (6 Inches) and Above
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Cord material                             32 psi       36 psi       40 psi      240 kPa      280 kPa      300 kPa      340 kPa
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rayon:
    (in-lbs).................................................        1,650        2,574        3,300        1,650        3,300        1,650        3,300
    (joules).................................................          186          291          373          186          373          186          373
Nylon or polyester:
    (in-lbs).................................................        2,600        3,900        5,200        2,600        5,200        2,600        5,200
    (joules).................................................          294          441          588          294          588          294          588
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                   Table I-B--For Bias Ply Tires With Designated Section Width Below 152 mm (6 Inches)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Cord material                             32 psi       36 psi       40 psi      240 kPa      280 kPa      300 kPa      340 kPA
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rayon:
    (in-lbs).................................................        1,000        1,875        2,500        1,000        2,500        1,000        2,500
    (joules).................................................          113          212          282          113          282          113          282
Nylon or polyester:
    (in-lbs).................................................        1,950        2,925        3,900        1,950        3,900        1,950        3,900
    (joules).................................................          220          330          441          220          441          220          441
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                                             Table I-C--For Radial Ply Tires
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                           Maximum permissible inflation
                                                         -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                             Tires other than CT tires                               CT tires
                    Size designation                     -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    psi                             kPa                                 kPa
                                                         -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                            32      36      40      240     280     300     340     350     290     330     350     390
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Below 160 mm:
    (in-lbs)............................................   1,950   2,925   3,900   1,950   3,900   1,950   3,900   1,950   1,950   3,900   1,950   3,900
    (joules)............................................     220     330     441     220     441     220     441     220     220     441     220     441
160 mm or above:
    (in-lbs)............................................   2,600   3,900   5,200   2,600   5,200   2,600   5,200   2,600   2,600   5,200   2,600   5,200
    (joules)............................................     294     441     588     294     588     294     588     294     294     588     294     588
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Table I-D--For Tires With 420 kPa (60 psi) Maximum Permissible Inflation Pressure and Maximum Load Rating 399 kg
                                               (880 lb) and Above
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     Cord material                                       Inch-pounds joules (J)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rayon.................................................  1,650 inch pounds 186 joules (J).
Nylon or Polyester....................................  2,600 inch pounds 294 joules (J).
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


 Table I-E--For Tires With 420 kPa (60 psi) Maximum Permissible Inflation Pressure and Maximum Load Rating Below
                                                 399 kg (880 lb)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     Cord material                                       Inch-pounds joules (J)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rayon.................................................  1,000 inch pounds 113 joules (J).

[[Page 548]]

 
Nylon or Polyester....................................  1,950 inch pounds 220 joules (J).
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                                           Table II--Test Inflation Pressures
                                       [Maximum permissible inflation pressure to be used for the following test]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                 Tires other than CT tires                             CT tires
                                                              ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                          Test type                                        psi                            kPa                             kPa
                                                              ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 32     36     40     60    240    280    300    340    350    290    300    350    390
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Physical dimensions, bead unseating, tire strength, and tire      24     28     32     52    180    220    180    220    180    230    270    230    270
 endurance...................................................
High speed performance.......................................     30     34     38     58    220    260    220    260    220    270    310    270    310
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[38 FR 30235, Nov. 1, 1973]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.109, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.


<R05>
Sec. 571.110  Tire selection and rims and motor home/recreation vehicle 

trailer load carrying capacity information for motor vehicles with a GVWR of 

4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds) or less.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard specifies requirements for tire 
selection to prevent tire overloading and for motor home/recreation 
vehicle trailer load carrying capacity information.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to motor vehicles with a 
gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR or 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds) or 
less, except for motorcycles, and to non-pneumatic spare tire assemblies 
for those vehicles.
    S3. Definitions.
    Accessory weight means the combined weight (in excess of those 
standard items which may be replaced) of automatic transmission, power 
steering, power brakes, power windows, power seats, radio, and heater, 
to the extent that these items are available as factory-installed 
equipment (whether installed or not).
    Curb weight means the weight of a motor vehicle with standard 
equipment including the maximum capacity of fuel, oil, and coolant, and, 
if so equipped, air conditioning and additional weight optional engine.
    Maximum loaded vehicle weight means the sum of--
    (a) Curb weight;
    (b) Accessory weight;
    (c) Vehicle capacity weight; and
    (d) Production options weight.
    Light truck (LT) tire means a tire designated by its manufacturer as 
primarily intended for use on lightweight trucks or multipurpose 
passenger vehicles.
    Non-pneumatic rim is used as defined in Sec. 571.129.
    Non-pneumatic spare tire assembly means a non-pneumatic tire 
assembly intended for temporary use in place of one of the pneumatic 
tires and rims that are fitted to a passenger car in compliance with the 
requirements of this standard.
    Non-pneumatic tire and non-pneumatic tire assembly are used as 
defined in Sec. 571.129.
    Normal occupant weight means 68 kilograms times the number of 
occupants specified in the second column of Table I.
    Occupant distribution means distribution of occupants in a vehicle 
as specified in the third column of Table I.
    Passenger car tire means a tire intended for use on passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, and trucks, that have a gross vehicle

[[Page 549]]

weight rating (GVWR) of 10,000 pounds or less.
    Production options weight means the combined weight of those 
installed regular production options weighing over 2.3 kilograms in 
excess of those standard items which they replace, not previously 
considered in curb weight or accessory weight, including heavy duty 
brakes, ride levelers, roof rack, heavy duty battery, and special trim.
    Rim is used as defined in Sec. 571.109.
    Rim diameter means nominal diameter of the bead seat.
    Rim size designation means rim diameter and width.
    Rim type designation means the industry of manufacturer's 
designation for a rim by style or code.
    Rim width means nominal distance between rim flanges.
    Vehicle capacity weight means the rated cargo and luggage load plus 
68 kilograms times the vehicle's designated seating capacity.
    Vehicle maximum load on the tire means that load on an individual 
tire that is determined by distributing to each axle its share of the 
maximum loaded vehicle weight and dividing by two.
    Vehicle normal load on the tire means that load on an individual 
tire that is determined by distributing to each axle its share of the 
curb weight, accessory weight, and normal occupant weight (distributed 
in accordance with Table I) and dividing by 2.
    Wheel center member is used as defined in Sec. 571.129.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1 General. Vehicles shall be equipped with tires that meet the 
requirements of Sec. 571.139, New pneumatic tires for light vehicles, 
except that passenger cars may be equipped with a pneumatic T-type 
temporary spare tire assembly that meets the requirements of Sec. 
571.109, or equipped with a non-pneumatic spare tire assembly that meets 
the requirements of Sec. 571.129, New non-pneumatic tires for passenger 
cars, and S6 and S8 of this standard. Passenger cars equipped with a 
non-pneumatic spare tire assembly shall meet the requirements of 
S4.3(e), and S5, and S7 of this standard.
    S4.2 Tire load limits.
    S4.2.1 Tire load limits for passenger cars.
    S4.2.1.1 The vehicle maximum load on the tire shall not be greater 
than the applicable maximum load rating as marked on the sidewall of the 
tire.
    S4.2.1.2 The vehicle normal load on the tire shall not be greater 
than 94 percent of the load rating at the vehicle manufacturer's 
recommended cold inflation pressure for that tire.
    S4.2.2 Tire load limits for multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, 
buses, and trailers.
    S4.2.2.1 Except as provided in S4.2.2.2, the sum of the maximum load 
ratings of the tires fitted to an axle shall not be less than the GAWR 
of the axle system as specified on the vehicle's certification label 
required by 49 CFR part 567. If the certification label shows more than 
one GAWR for the axle system, the sum shall be not less than the GAWR 
corresponding to the size designation of the tires fitted to the axle.
    S4.2.2.2 When passenger car tires are installed on an MPV, truck, 
bus, or trailer, each tire's load rating is reduced by dividing it by 
1.10 before determining, under S4.2.2.1, the sum of the maximum load 
ratings of the tires fitted to an axle.
    S4.2.2.3 (a) For vehicles, except trailers with no designated 
seating positions, equipped with passenger car tires, the vehicle normal 
load on the tire shall be no greater than 94 percent of the derated load 
rating at the vehicle manufacturer's recommended cold inflation pressure 
for that tire.
    (b) For vehicles, except trailers with no designated seating 
positions, equipped with LT tires, the vehicle normal load on the tire 
shall be no greater than 94 percent of the load rating at the vehicle 
manufacturer's recommended cold inflation pressure for that tire.
    S4.3 Placard. Each vehicle, except for a trailer or incomplete 
vehicle, shall show the information specified in S4.3 (a) through (g), 
and may show, at the manufacturer's option, the information specified in 
S4.3 (h) and (i), on a placard permanently affixed to the driver's side 
B-pillar. In each vehicle without a driver's side B-pillar and with two 
doors on the driver's side of

[[Page 550]]

the vehicle opening in opposite directions, the placard shall be affixed 
on the forward edge of the rear side door. If the above locations do not 
permit the affixing of a placard that is legible, visible and prominent, 
the placard shall be permanently affixed to the rear edge of the 
driver's side door. If this location does not permit the affixing of a 
placard that is legible, visible and prominent, the placard shall be 
affixed to the inward facing surface of the vehicle next to the driver's 
seating position. This information shall be in the English language and 
conform in color and format, not including the border surrounding the 
entire placard, as shown in the example set forth in Figure 1 in this 
standard. At the manufacturer's option, the information specified in 
S4.3 (c), (d), and, as appropriate, (h) and (i) may be shown, 
alternatively to being shown on the placard, on a tire inflation 
pressure label which must conform in color and format, not including the 
border surrounding the entire label, as shown in the example set forth 
in Figure 2 in this standard. The label shall be permanently affixed and 
proximate to the placard required by this paragraph. The information 
specified in S4.3 (e) shall be shown on both the vehicle placard and on 
the tire inflation pressure label (if such a label is affixed to provide 
the information specified in S4.3 (c), (d), and, as appropriate, (h) and 
(i)) may be shown in the format and color scheme set forth in Figures 1 
and 2. If the vehicle is a motor home and is equipped with a propane 
supply, the weight of full propane tanks must be included in the 
vehicle's unloaded vehicle weight. If the vehicle is a motor home and is 
equipped with an on-board potable water supply, the weight of such on-
board water must be treated as cargo.
    (a) Vehicle capacity weight expressed as ``The combined weight of 
occupants and cargo should never exceed XXX kilograms or XXX pounds'';
    (b) Designated seated capacity (expressed in terms of total number 
of occupants and number of occupants for each front and rear seat 
location);
    (c) Vehicle manufacturer's recommended cold tire inflation pressure 
for front, rear and spare tires, subject to the limitations of S4.3.4. 
For full size spare tires, the statement ``see above'' may, at the 
manufacturer's option replace manufacturer's recommended cold tire 
inflation pressure. If no spare tire is provided, the word ``none'' must 
replace the manufacturer's recommended cold tire inflation pressure.
    (d) Tire size designation, indicated by the headings ``size'' or 
``original tire size'' or ``original size,'' and ``spare tire'' or 
``spare,'' for the tires installed at the time of the first purchase for 
purposes other than resale. For full size spare tires, the statement 
``see above'' may, at the manufacturer's option replace the tire size 
designation. If no spare tire is provided, the word ``none'' must 
replace the tire size designation;
    (e) On the vehicle placard, ``Tire and Loading Information and, on 
the tire inflation pressure label, ``Tire Information'';
    (f) ``See Owner's Manual for Additional Information'';
    (g) For a vehicle equipped with a non-pneumatic spare tire assembly, 
the tire identification code with which that assembly is labeled 
pursuant to the requirements of S4.3(a) of 571.129, New Non-Pneumatic 
Tires for Passenger Cars;
    (h) At the manufacturer's option, identifying information provided 
in any alphanumeric and or barcode form, located vertically, along the 
right edge or the left edge of the placard or the label, or 
horizontally, along the bottom edge of the placard or the label; and
    (i) At the manufacturer's option, the load range identification 
symbol, load index, and speed rating, located immediately to the right 
of the tire size designation listed in accordance with S4.3(d) above.
    S4.3.1 Requirements for vehicles manufactured in two or more stages. 
A placard or placard and label shall be affixed to the completed vehicle 
by the final-stage manufacturer in accordance with S4.3 and with the 
vehicle capacity weight and seating designations as finally 
manufactured.
    S4.3.2 Requirements for altered vehicles. Except as provided in S10, 
a new

[[Page 551]]

placard or placard and label shall be affixed, so as to obscure the 
original placard, to an altered vehicle that has previously been 
certified in accordance with Sec. 567.4 or Sec. 567.5, other than by 
the addition, substitution, or removal of readily attachable components 
such as mirrors or tire and rim assemblies, or minor finishing 
operations such as painting, or who alters the vehicle in such a manner 
that its stated weight ratings are no longer valid, before the first 
purchase of the vehicle in good faith for purposes other than resale, 
containing accurate information for the altered vehicle, in accordance 
with S4.3.
    S4.3.3 Additional labeling information for vehicles other than 
passenger cars. Each vehicle shall show the size designation and, if 
applicable, the type designation of rims (not necessarily those on the 
vehicle) appropriate for the tire appropriate for use on that vehicle, 
including the tire installed as original equipment on the vehicle by the 
vehicle manufacturer, after each GAWR listed on the certification label 
required by Sec. 567.4 or Sec. 567.5 of this chapter. This information 
shall be in the English language, lettered in block capitals and 
numerals not less than 2.4 millimeters high and in the following format:

                 Truck Example--Suitable Tire-Rim Choice

    GVWR: 2,441 kilograms (5381 pounds).
    GAWR: Front--1,299 kilograms (2,864 pounds) with P265/70R16 tires, 
16 x 8.0 rims at 248 kPa (36 psi) cold single.
    GAWR: Rear--1,299 kilograms (2,864 pounds) with P265/70R16 tires, 16 
x 8.00 rims, at 248 kPa (36 psi) cold single.

    S4.3.4 No inflation pressure other than the maximum permissible 
inflation pressure may be shown on the placard and, if any, tire 
inflation pressure label unless--
    (a) It is less than the maximum permissible inflation pressure;
    (b) It is appropriate for the load limits as calculated in 
accordance with S4.2; and
    (c) The tire load rating specified in a submission by an individual 
manufacturer, pursuant to S4.1.1(a) of Sec. 571.139 or contained in one 
of the publications described in S4.1.1(b) of Sec. 571.139, for the 
tire size at that inflation pressure is not less than the vehicle 
maximum load and the vehicle normal load on the tire for those vehicle 
loading conditions.
    S4.3.5 Requirements for trailers. Each trailer, except for an 
incomplete vehicle, must show the information specified in S4.3 (c) 
through (g), and may show the information specified in S4.3 (h) and (i), 
on a placard permanently affixed proximate to the certification label 
specified in 49 CFR part 567. Additionally, each trailer must on its 
placard contain a cargo capacity statement expressed as ``The weight of 
cargo should never exceed XXX kilograms or XXX pounds'' in the same 
location on the placard specified for the ``vehicle capacity weight'' 
statement required by this standard. At the manufacturer's option, the 
information specified in S4.3 (c), (d), (h) and (i) may be shown, 
alternatively, on a tire inflation pressure label, and conform in color 
and format, not including the border surrounding the entire label, as 
specified in the example set forth in Figure 2 in this standard. The 
label shall be permanently affixed and proximate to the placard required 
by this paragraph. The information specified in S4.3 (e) shall be shown 
on both the vehicle placard and on the tire inflation pressure label (if 
such a label is affixed to provide the information specified in S4.3 
(c), (d), (h) and (i)) in the format and color scheme set forth in 
Figures 1 and 2. If the vehicle is a recreation vehicle trailer and is 
equipped with a propane supply, the weight of full propane tanks must be 
included in the vehicle's unloaded vehicle weight. If the vehicle is a 
recreation vehicle trailer and is equipped with an on-board potable 
water supply, the weight of such on-board water must be treated as 
cargo.
    S4.4 Rims.
    S4.4.1 Requirements. Each rim shall:
    (a) Be constructed to the dimensions of a rim that is listed by the 
manufacturer of the tires as suitable for use with those tires, in 
accordance with S4 of Sec. 571.139.
    (b) In the event of rapid loss of inflation pressure with the 
vehicle traveling in a straight line at a speed of 97 kilometers per 
hour, retain the deflated

[[Page 552]]

tire until the vehicle can be stopped with a controlled braking 
application.

 Table I--Occupant Loading and Distribution for Vehicle Normal Load for
                  Various Designated Seating Capacities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Vehicle
                                  normal
 Designated seating capacity,     load,      Occupant distribution in a
      number of occupants       number of     normally loaded vehicle
                                occupants
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2 through 4                             2  2 in front.
5 through 10                            3  2 in front, 1 in second seat.
11 through 15                           5  2 in front, 1 in second seat,
                                            1 in third seat, 1 in fourth
                                            seat.
16 through 22                           7  2 in front, 2 in second seat,
                                            2 in third seat, 1 in fourth
                                            seat.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S4.4.2. Rim markings for vehicles other than passenger cars. Each 
rim or, at the option of the manufacturer in the case of a single-piece 
wheel, each wheel disc shall be marked with the information listed in 
S4.4.2 (a) through (e), in lettering not less than 3 millimeters in 
height, impressed to a depth or, at the option of the manufacturer, 
embossed to a height of not less than 0.125 millimeters. The information 
listed in S4.4.2 (a) through (c) shall appear on the outward side. In 
the case of rims of multi piece construction, the information listed in 
S4.4.2 (a) through (e) shall appear on the rim base and the information 
listed in S4.4.2 (b) and (d) shall also appear on each other part of the 
rim.
    (a) A designation that indicates the source of the rim's published 
nominal dimensions, as follows:
    (1) ``T'' indicates The Tire and Rim Association.
    (2) ``E'' indicates The European Tyre and Rim Technical 
Organization.
    (3) ``J'' indicates Japan Automobile Tire Manufacturers'' 
Association, Inc.
    (4) ``L'' indicates ABPA (Brazil), a.k.a. Associacao Latino 
Americana De Pneus E Aros.
    (5) ``F'' indicates Tire and Rim Engineering Data Committee of South 
Africa (Tredco).
    (6) ``S'' indicates Scandinavian Tire and Rim Organization (STRO).
    (7) ``A'' indicates The Tyre and Rim Association of Australia.
    (8) ``I'' indicates Indian Tyre Technical Advisory Committee 
(ITTAC).
    (9) ``R'' indicates Argentine Institute of Rationalization of 
Materials, a.k.a. Instituto Argentino de Racionalizacion de Materiales, 
(ARAM).
    (10) ``N'' indicates an independent listing pursuant to S4.1 of 
Sec. 571.139 or S5.1(a) of Sec. 571.119.
    (b) The rim size designation, and in case of multipiece rims, the 
rim type designation. For example: 20 x 5.50, or 20 x 5.5.
    (c) The symbol DOT, constituting a certification by the manufacturer 
of the rim that the rim complies with all applicable Federal motor 
vehicle safety standards.
    (d) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of the rim by 
name, trademark, or symbol.
    (e) The month, day and year or the month and year of manufacture, 
expressed either numerically or by use of a symbol, at the option of the 
manufacturer. For example: ``September 4, 2001'' may be expressed 
numerically as: ``90401'', ``904, 01'' or ``01, 904''; ``September 
2001'' may be expressed as: ``901'', ``9, 01'' or ``01, 9''.
    (1) Any manufacturer that elects to express the date of manufacture 
by means of a symbol shall notify NHTSA in writing of the full names and 
addresses of all manufacturers and brand name owners utilizing that 
symbol and the name and address of the trademark owner of that symbol, 
if any. The notification shall describe in narrative form and in detail 
how the month, day, and year or the month and year are depicted by the 
symbol. Such description shall include an actual size graphic depiction 
of the symbol, showing and/or explaining the interrelationship of the 
component parts of the symbol as they will appear on the rim or single 
piece wheel disc, including dimensional specifications, and where the 
symbol will be located on the rim or single piece wheel disc. The 
notification shall be received by NHTSA not less than 60 calendar days 
before the first use of the symbol. The notification shall be mailed to 
the Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance (NVS-222), National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 
20590. All information provided to NHTSA under this paragraph will be 
placed in the public docket.

[[Page 553]]

    (2) Each manufacturer of wheels shall provide an explanation of its 
date of manufacture symbol to any person upon request.
    S5. Load Limits for Non-Pneumatic Spare Tires. The highest vehicle 
maximum load on the tire for the vehicle shall not be greater than the 
load rating for the non-pneumatic spare tire.
    S6 Labeling Requirements for Non-Pneumatic Spare Tires or Tire 
Assemblies. Each non-pneumatic tire or, in the case of a non-pneumatic 
tire assembly in which the non-pneumatic tire is an integral part of the 
assembly, each non-pneumatic tire assembly shall include, in letters or 
numerals not less than 4 millimeters high, the information specified in 
paragraphs S6 (a) and (b). The information shall be permanently molded, 
stamped, or otherwise permanently marked into or onto the non-pneumatic 
tire or non-pneumatic tire assembly, or shall appear on a label that is 
permanently attached to the tire or tire assembly. If a label is used, 
it shall be subsurface printed, made of material that is resistant to 
fade, heat, moisture and abrasion, and attached in such a manner that it 
cannot be removed without destroying or defacing the label on the non-
pneumatic tire or tire assembly. The information specified in paragraphs 
S6 (a) and (b) shall appear on both sides of the non-pneumatic tire or 
tire assembly, except, in the case of a non-pneumatic tire assembly 
which has a particular side that must always face outward when mounted 
on a vehicle, in which case the information specified in paragraphs S6 
(a) and (b) shall only be required on the outward facing side. The 
information shall be positioned on the tire or tire assembly such that 
it is not placed on the tread or the outermost edge of the tire and is 
not obstructed by any portion of any non-pneumatic rim or wheel center 
member designated for use with that tire in this standard or in Standard 
No. 129.
    (a) FOR TEMPORARY USE ONLY; and
    (b) MAXIMUM 80 KM/H (50 M.P.H.).
    S7. Requirements for Passenger Cars Equipped with Non-Pneumatic 
Spare Tire Assemblies
    S7.1 Vehicle Placarding Requirements. A placard, permanently affixed 
to the inside of the vehicle trunk or an equally accessible location 
adjacent to the non-pneumatic spare tire assembly, shall display the 
information set forth in S6 in block capitals and numerals not less than 
6 millimeters high preceded by the words ``IMPORTANT--USE OF SPARE 
TIRE'' in letters not less than 9 millimeters high.
    S7.2 Supplementary Information. The owner's manual of the passenger 
car shall contain, in writing in the English language and in not less 
than 10 point type, the following information under the heading 
``IMPORTANT--USE OF SPARE TIRE'':
    (a) A statement indicating the information related to appropriate 
use for the non-pneumatic spare tire including at a minimum the 
information set forth in S6 (a) and (b) and either the information set 
forth in S4.3(g) or a statement that the information set forth in 
S4.3(g) is located on the vehicle placard and on the non-pneumatic tire;
    (b) An instruction to drive carefully when the non-pneumatic spare 
tire is in use, and to install the proper pneumatic tire and rim at the 
first reasonable opportunity; and
    (c) A statement that operation of the passenger car is not 
recommended with more than one non-pneumatic spare tire in use at the 
same time.
    S8. Non-Pneumatic Rims and Wheel Center Members
    S8.1 Non-Pneumatic Rim Requirements. Each non-pneumatic rim that is 
part of a separable non-pneumatic spare tire assembly shall be 
constructed to the dimensions of a non-pneumatic rim that is listed 
pursuant to S4.4 of Sec. 571.129 for use with the non-pneumatic tire, 
designated by its non-pneumatic tire identification code, with which the 
vehicle is equipped.
    S8.2 Wheel Center Member Requirements. Each wheel center member that 
is part of a separable non-pneumatic spare tire assembly shall be 
constructed to the dimensions of a wheel center member that is listed 
pursuant to S4.4 of Sec. 571.129 for use with the non-pneumatic tire, 
designated by its non-pneumatic tire identification code, with which the 
vehicle is equipped.

[[Page 554]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR22MR05.000


[[Page 555]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR22MR05.001

    S9. Each motor home and recreation vehicle (RV) trailer must meet 
the applicable requirements in S9.
    S9.1 On motor homes, the sum of the gross axle weight ratings (GAWR) 
of all axles on the vehicle must not be less than the gross vehicle 
weight rating (GVWR).
    S9.2 On RV trailers, the sum of the GAWRs of all axles on the 
vehicle plus the vehicle manufacturer's recommended tongue weight must 
not be less than the GVWR. If tongue weight is specified as a range, the 
minimum value must be used.
    S9.3 Each motor home and RV trailer single stage or final stage 
manufacturer must affix either a motor home occupant and cargo carrying 
capacity (OCCC) label (Figure 3) or a RV trailer cargo carrying capacity 
(CCC) label (Figure 4) to its vehicles that meets the following 
criteria:
    S9.3.1 The RV load carrying capacity labels (Figures 3 and 4) and 
the RV supplemental labels (Figures 5 and 6) required by S9.3.3(b) must 
be legible, visible, moisture resistant, presented in the English 
language, have a minimum print size of 2.4 millimeters (3/32 inches) 
high and be printed in black print on a yellow background.
    S9.3.2 The weight value for load carrying capacity on the RV load 
carrying capacity labels (Figures 3 and 4) must be displayed to the 
nearest kilogram with conversion to the nearest pound and must be such 
that the vehicle does not exceed its GVWR when loaded with the stated 
load carrying capacity. The UVW and the GVWR used to determine the RV's 
load carrying capacity must reflect the weights and design of the motor 
home or RV trailer as configured for delivery to the dealer/service 
facility. If applicable, the weight of full propane tanks must be 
included in the RV's UVW and the weight of on-board potable water must 
be treated as cargo.
    S9.3.3 An RV load carrying capacity label (Figures 3 or 4) must be:
    (a) Permanently affixed and must be visibly located on the interior 
of the forward-most exterior passenger door

[[Page 556]]

on the right side of the vehicle or; at the option of the manufacturer,
    (b) A temporary version of the RV load carrying capacity label 
(Figures 3 or 4) must be visibly located on the interior of the forward-
most exterior passenger door on the right side of the vehicle. A 
permanent motor home or RV trailer supplemental label (Figures 5 or 6) 
must be permanently affixed within 25 millimeters of the placard 
specified in S4.3 for motor homes and S4.3.5 for RV trailers.
    S9.3.4 Permanent and temporary motor home OCCC labels must contain 
the following information in accordance with Figure 3:
    (a) The statement: ``MOTOR HOME OCCUPANT AND CARGO CARRYING 
CAPACITY'' in block letters.
    (b) The Vehicle Identification Number (VIN).
    (c) The statement ``THE COMBINED WEIGHT OF OCCUPANTS AND CARGO 
SHOULD NEVER EXCEED: XXX kg or XXX lbs'' in block letters with 
appropriate values included.
    (d) The statement ``Safety belt equipped seating capacity: XXX'' 
with the appropriate value included. This is the total number of safety 
belt equipped seating positions.
    (e) The statement ``CAUTION: A full load of water equals XXX kg or 
XXX lbs of cargo @ 1 kg/L (8.3 lb/gal) and the tongue weight of a towed 
trailer counts as cargo'' with appropriate values included.
    S9.3.5 Permanent and temporary RV trailer CCC labels must contain 
the following information in accordance with Figure 4:
    (a) The statement: ``RECREATION VEHICLE TRAILER CARGO CARRYING 
CAPACITY'' in block letters.
    (b) The Vehicle Identification Number (VIN).
    (c) The statement ``THE WEIGHT OF CARGO SHOULD NEVER EXCEED: XXX kg 
or XXX lbs'' in block letters with appropriate values included.
    (d) The statement ``CAUTION: A full load of water equals XXX kg or 
XXX lbs of cargo @ 1 kg/L (8.3 lb/gal)'' with appropriate values 
included.
    S9.3.6 For RVs, the vehicle capacity weight values and the seating 
capacity values (motor homes only) on the placard required by S4.3 or 
S4.3.5 must agree with the load carrying capacity weight values and the 
safety belt equipped seating capacity (motor homes only) on the RV load 
carrying capacity labels (Figures 3 and 4).
    S9.3.7 The permanent motor home supplemental label must contain the 
following information in accordance with Figure 5:
    (a) The statement ``CAUTION: A full load of water equals XXX kg or 
XXX lbs of cargo @ 1 kg/L (8.3 lb/gal) and the tongue weight of a towed 
trailer counts as cargo'' with appropriate values included.
    S9.3.8 The permanent RV trailer supplemental label must contain the 
following information in accordance with Figure 6:
    (a) The statement ``CAUTION: A full load of water equals XXX kg or 
XXX lbs of cargo @ 1 kg/L (8.3 lb/gal)'' with appropriate values 
included.
    S10. Weight added to vehicles between final vehicle certification 
and first retail sale of the vehicle.
    S10.1 If weight exceeding the lesser of 1.5 percent of GVWR or 45.4 
kg (100 pounds) is added to a vehicle between final vehicle 
certification and first retail sale of the vehicle, the vehicle capacity 
weight values on the placard required by S4.3 or S4.3.5 and the load 
carrying capacity weight values on the RV load carrying capacity labels 
(Figures 3 and 4) required by S9.3 must be corrected using one or a 
combination of the following methods:
    (a) Permanently affix load carrying capacity modification labels 
(Figure 7), which display the amount the load carrying capacity is 
reduced to the nearest kilogram with conversion to the nearest pound, 
within 25 millimeters of the original, permanent RV load carrying 
capacity label (Figure 3 or 4) and the original placard (Figure 1). The 
load carrying capacity modification labels must be legible, visible, 
permanent, moisture resistant, presented in the English language, have a 
minimum print size of 2.4 millimeters (3/32 inches) high and be printed 
in black print on a yellow background, or
    (b) If the manufacturer selects S9.3.3(b), apply a temporary version 
of the load carrying capacity modification label (Figure 7) within 25 
millimeters of the original, temporary RV load

[[Page 557]]

carrying capacity label (Figure 3 or 4) on the interior of the forward-
most exterior passenger door on the right side of the vehicle, in 
addition to applying a permanent version of the same label within 25 mm 
of the placard required by S4.3 or S4.3.5. Both temporary and permanent 
versions of the load carrying capacity modification label (Figure 7) may 
be printed without values and values may be legibly applied to the label 
with a black, fine point, indelible marker. The label must contain the 
statements ``CAUTION--LOAD CARRYING CAPACITY REDUCED'' in block letters 
and ``Modifications to this vehicle have reduced the original load 
carrying capacity by XXX kg or XXX lbs'' in accordance with Figure 7. If 
two load carrying capacity modification labels are required (one 
permanent and one temporary), the weight values on each must agree, or
    (c) Modify the original, permanent RV load carrying capacity labels 
(Figures 3 and 4) and the placard (Figure 1) with correct vehicle 
capacity weight values. If the manufacturer selects S9.3.3(b), the 
temporary RV load carrying capacity labels (Figures 3 and 4) must also 
be modified with correct vehicle capacity weight values. Modification of 
labels requires a machine printed overlay with printed corrected values 
or blanks for corrected values that may be entered with a black, fine-
point, indelible marker. Crossing out old values and entering corrected 
values on the original label is not permissible, or
    (d) Replace the original, permanent RV load carrying capacity labels 
(Figures 3 and 4) and the placard (Figure 1) with the same labels/
placard containing correct vehicle capacity weight values. If the 
manufacturer selects S9.3.3(b), the temporary RV load carrying capacity 
labels (Figures 3 and 4) must also be replaced with the same labels 
containing correct vehicle capacity weight values.
    S10.2 Corrected load carrying capacity weight values or the weight 
amount the load carrying capacity is reduced, must reflect the total 
weight added between final vehicle certification and first retail sale 
and must be accurate within one percent of the actual added weight. No 
action is required if the weight of the vehicle is reduced between final 
vehicle certification and first retail sale.

[[Page 558]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.043


[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.111 see the List of CFR Sections Affected which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.

[[Page 559]]


<R05>
Sec. 571.111  Standard No. 111; Rearview mirrors.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for the performance 
and location of rearview mirrors.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce the number of 
deaths and injuries that occur when the driver of a motor vehicle does 
not have a clear and reasonably unobstructed view to the rear.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, buses, schoolbuses and 
motorcycles.
    S4. Definitions.
    Convex mirror means a mirror having a curved reflective surface 
whose shape is the same as that of the exterior surface of a section of 
a sphere.
    Effective mirror surface means the portions of a mirror that reflect 
images, excluding the mirror rim or mounting brackets.
    Unit magnification mirror means a plane or flat mirror with a 
reflective surface through which the angular height and width of the 
image of an object is equal to the angular height and width of the 
object when viewed directly at the same distance except for flaws that 
do not exceed normal manufacturing tolerances. For the purposes of this 
regulation a prismatic day-night adjustment rearview mirror one of whose 
positions provides unit magnification is considered a unit magnification 
mirror.
    S5. Requirements for passenger cars.
    S5.1 Inside rearview mirror. Each passenger car shall have an inside 
rearview mirror of unit magnification.
    S5.1.1 Field of view. Except as provided in S5.3, the mirror shall 
provide a field of view with an included horizontal angle measured from 
the projected eye point of at least 20 degrees, and a sufficient 
vertical angle to provide a view of a level road surface extending to 
the horizon beginning at a point not greater than 61 m to the rear of 
the vehicle when the vehicle is occupied by the driver and four 
passengers or the designated occupant capacity, if less, based on an 
average occupant weight of 68 kg. The line of sight may be partially 
obscured by seated occupants or by head restraints. The location of the 
driver's eye reference points shall be those established in Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standard No. 104 (Sec. 571.104) or a nominal location 
appropriate for any 95th percentile male driver.
    S5.1.2 Mounting. The mirror mounting shall provide a stable support 
for the mirror, and shall provide for mirror adjustment by tilting in 
both the horizontal and vertical directions. If the mirror is in the 
head impact area, the mounting shall deflect, collapse or break away 
without leaving sharp edges when the reflective surface of the mirror is 
subjected to a force of 400 N in any forward direction that is not more 
than 45[deg] from the forward longitudinal direction.
    S5.2 Outside rearview mirror--driver's side.
    S5.2.1 Field of view. Each passenger car shall have an outside 
mirror of unit magnification. The mirror shall provide the driver a view 
of a level road surface extending to the horizon from a line, 
perpendicular to a longitudinal plane tangent to the driver's side of 
the vehicle at the widest point, extending 2.4 m out from the tangent 
plane 10.7 m behind the driver's eyes, with the seat in the rearmost 
position. The line of sight may be partially obscured by rear body or 
fender contours. The location of the driver's eye reference points shall 
be those established in Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 104 (Sec. 
571.104) or a nominal location appropriate for any 95th percentile male 
driver.
    S5.2.2 Mounting. The mirror mounting shall provide a stable support 
for the mirror, and neither the mirror nor the mounting shall protrude 
farther than the widest part of the vehicle body except to the extent 
necessary to produce a field of view meeting or exceeding the 
requirements of S5.2.1. The mirror shall not be obscured by the unwiped 
portion of the windshield, and shall be adjustable by tilting in both 
horizontal and vertical directions from the driver's seated position. 
The mirror and mounting shall be free of sharp points or edges that 
could contribute to pedestrian injury.
    S5.3 Outside rearview mirror passenger's side. Each passenger car 
whose inside rearview mirror does not meet the field of view 
requirements of S5.1.1 shall have an outside mirror of unit

[[Page 560]]

magnification or a convex mirror installed on the passenger's side. The 
mirror mounting shall provide a stable support and be free of sharp 
points or edges that could contribute to pedestrian injury. The mirror 
need not be adjustable from the driver's seat but shall be capable of 
adjustment by tilting in both horizontal and vertical directions.
    S5.4 Convex mirror requirements. Each motor vehicle using a convex 
mirror to meet the requirements of S5.3 shall comply with the following 
requirements:
    S5.4.1 When each convex mirror is tested in accordance with the 
procedures specified in S12. of this standard, none of the radii of 
curvature readings shall deviate from the average radius of curvature by 
more than plus or minus 12.5 percent.
    S5.4.2 Each convex mirror shall have permanently and indelibly 
marked at the lower edge of the mirror's reflective surface, in letters 
not less than 4.8 mm nor more than 6.4 mm high the words ``Objects in 
Mirror Are Closer Than They Appear.''
    S5.4.3 The average radius of curvature of each such mirror, as 
determined by using the procedure in S12., shall be not less than 889 mm 
and not more than 1,651 mm.
    S6. Requirements for multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and 
buses, other than school buses, with GVWR of 4,536 kg or less.
    S6.1 Each multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck and bus, other than 
a school bus, with a GVWR of 4,536 kg or less shall have either--
    (a) Mirrors that conform to the requirements of S5.; or
    (b) Outside mirrors of unit magnification, each with not less than 
126 cm\2\ of reflective surface, installed with stable supports on both 
sides of the vehicle, located so as to provide the driver a view to the 
rear along both sides of the vehicle, and adjustable in both the 
horizontal and vertical directions to view the rearward scene.
    S7. Requirements for multipurpose passenger vehicles and trucks with 
a GVWR of more than 4,536 kg and less than 11,340 kg and buses, other 
than school buses, with a GVWR of more than 4,536 kg.
    S7.1 Each multipurpose passenger vehicle and truck with a GVWR of 
more than 4,536 kg and less than 11,340 kg and each bus, other than a 
school bus, with a GVWR of more than 4,536 kg shall have outside mirrors 
of unit magnification, each with not less than 323 cm\2\ of reflective 
surface, installed with stable supports on both sides of the vehicle. 
The mirrors shall be located so as to provide the driver a view to the 
rear along both sides of the vehicle and shall be adjustable both in the 
horizontal and vertical directions to view the rearward scene.
    S8. Requirements for multipurpose passenger vehicles and trucks with 
a GVWR of 11,340 kg or more.
    S8.1 Each multipurpose passenger vehicle and truck with a GVWR of 
11,340 kg or more shall have outside mirrors of unit magnification, each 
with not less than 323 cm\2\ of reflective surface, installed with 
stable supports on both sides of the vehicle. The mirrors shall be 
located so as to provide the driver a view to the rear along both sides 
of the vehicle and shall be adjustable both in the horizontal and 
vertical directions to view the rearward scene.
    S9. Requirements for School Buses. When a school bus is tested in 
accordance with the procedures of S13, it shall meet the requirements of 
S9.1 through S9.4.
    S9.1 Outside Rearview Mirrors. Each school bus shall have two 
outside rearview mirror systems: System A and System B.
    S9.2. System A shall be located with stable supports so that the 
portion of the system on the bus's left side, and the portion on its 
right side, each:
    (a) Includes at least one mirror of unit magnification with not less 
than 323 cm\2\ of reflective surface; and
    (b) Includes one or more mirrors which together provide, at the 
driver's eye location, a view of:
    (1) For the mirror system on the right side of the bus, the entire 
top surface of cylinder N in Figure 2, and that area of the ground which 
extends rearward from cylinder N to a point not less than 61 meters from 
the mirror surface.
    (2) For the mirror system on the left side of the bus, the entire 
top surface of cylinder M in Figure 2, and that area

[[Page 561]]

of the ground which extends rearward from cylinder M to a point not less 
than 61 meters from the mirror surface.
    S9.3(a) For each of the cylinders A through P whose entire top 
surface is not directly visible from the driver's eye location, System B 
shall provide, at that location:

    (1) A view of the entire top surface of that cylinder.
    (2) A view of the ground that overlaps with the view of the ground 
provided by System A.
    (b) Each mirror installed in compliance with S9.3(a) shall meet the 
following requirements:
    (1) Each mirror shall have a projected area of at least 258 cm\2\, 
as measured on a plane at a right angle to the mirror's axis.
    (2) Each mirror shall be located such that the distance from the 
center point of the eye location of a 25th percentile adult female 
seated in the driver's seat to the center of the mirror shall be at 
least 95 cm.
    (3) Each mirror shall have no discontinuities in the slope of the 
surface of the mirror.
    (4) Each mirror shall be installed with a stable support.
    (c) Each school bus which has a mirror installed in compliance with 
S9.3(a) that has an average radius of curvature of less than 889 mm, as 
determined under S12, shall have a label visible to the seated driver. 
The label shall be printed in a type face and color that are clear and 
conspicuous. The label shall state the following:


``USE CROSS VIEW MIRRORS TO VIEW PEDESTRIANS WHILE BUS IS STOPPED. DO 
NOT USE THESE MIRRORS TO VIEW TRAFFIC WHILE BUS IS MOVING. IMAGES IN 
SUCH MIRRORS DO NOT ACCURATELY SHOW ANOTHER VEHICLE'S LOCATION.''
    S9.4(a) Each image required by S9.3(a)(1) to be visible at the 
driver's eye location shall be separated from the edge of the effective 
mirror surface of the mirror providing that image by a distance of not 
less than 3 minutes of arc.
    (b) The image required by S9.3(a)(1) of cylinder P shall meet the 
following requirements:
    (1) The angular size of the shortest dimension of that cylinder's 
image shall be not less than 3 minutes of arc; and
    (2) The angular size of the longest dimension of that cylinder's 
image shall be not less than 9 minutes of arc.
    S10. Requirements for motorcycles.
    S10.1 Each motorcycle shall have either a mirror of unit 
magnification with not less than 8065 mm\2\ of reflective surface, or a 
convex mirror with not less than 6450 mm\2\ of reflective surface and an 
average radius of curvature not less than 508 mm and not greater than 
1524 mm, installed with a stable support, and mounted so that the 
horizontal center of the reflective surface is at least 279 mm outward 
of the longitudinal centerline of the motorcycle. The mirror shall be 
adjustable by tilting in both the horizontal and vertical directions.
    S11. Mirror Construction. The average reflectance of any mirror 
required by this standard shall be determined in accordance with SAE 
Recommended Practice J964, OCT84. All single reflectance mirrors shall 
have an average reflectance of at least 35 percent. If a mirror is 
capable of multiple reflectance levels, the minimum reflectance level in 
the day mode shall be at least 35 percent and the minimum reflectance 
level in the night mode shall be at least 4 percent. A multiple 
reflectance mirror shall either be equipped with a means for the driver 
to adjust the mirror to a reflectance level of at least 35 percent in 
the event of electrical failure, or achieve such reflectance level 
automatically in the event of electrical failure.
    S12. Determination of radius of curvature.
    S12.1 To determine the average radius of curvature of a convex 
mirror, use a 3-point linear spherometer, which meets the requirements 
of S12.2, at the 10 test positions shown in Figure 1 and record the 
readings for each position.
    S12.2 The 3-point linear spherometer has two outer fixed legs 38 mm 
apart and one inner movable leg at the midpoint. The spherometer has a 
dial indicator with a scale that can be read accurately to .0025 mm, 
with the zero reading being a flat surface.
    S12.3 The 10 test positions on the image display consist of two 
positions at right angles to each other at each of

[[Page 562]]

five locations as shown in Figure 1. The locations are at the center of 
the mirror, at the left and right ends of a horizontal line that bisects 
the mirror and at the top and bottom ends of a vertical line that 
bisects the mirror. None of the readings are within a 6.4 mm border on 
the edge of the image display.
    S12.4 At each position, the spherometer is held perpendicular to the 
convex mirror-surface and a record is made of the reading on the dial 
indicator to the nearest .0025 mm.
    S12.5 Convert the dial reading data for each of the 10 test 
positions to radius of curvature calculations using Table I. Consider 
the change as linear for dial readings that fall between two numbers in 
Table I.
    S12.6 Calculate the average radius of curvature by adding all 10 
radius of curvature calculations and dividing by ten.
    S12.7 Determine the numerical difference between the average radius 
of curvature and each of the 10 individual radius of curvature 
calculations determined in S12.5.
    S12.8 Calculate the greatest percentage deviation by dividing the 
greatest numerical difference determined in S12.7 by the average radius 
of curvature and multiply by 100.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR24SE98.034


  Table I--Conversion Table From Spherometer Dial Reading to Radius of
                                Curvature
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                 Radius of    Radius of
                 Dial reading                    curvature    curvature
                                                  (Inches)       (mm)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
.00330........................................         85.2       2164.1
.00350........................................         80.4      2042.92
.00374........................................         75.2       1910.1
.00402........................................         70.0       1778.0
.00416........................................         67.6       1717.0
.00432........................................         65.1       1653.5
.00450........................................         62.5       1587.5
.00468........................................         60.1       1526.5
.00476........................................         59.1       1501.1
.00484........................................         58.1       1475.7
.00492........................................         57.2       1452.9
.00502........................................         56.0       1422.4
.00512........................................         54.9       1394.5
.00522........................................         53.9       1369.1
.00536........................................         52.5       1333.5
.00544........................................         51.7       1313.2
.00554........................................         50.8       1290.3
.00566........................................         49.7       1262.4

[[Page 563]]

 
.00580........................................         48.5       1231.9
.00592........................................         47.5       1206.5
.00606........................................         46.4       1178.6
.00622........................................         45.2       1148.1
.00636........................................         44.2       1122.7
.00654........................................         43.0       1092.2
.00668........................................         42.1       1069.3
.00686........................................         41.0       1041.4
.00694........................................         40.5       1028.7
.00720........................................         39.1        993.1
.00740........................................         38.0        965.2
.00760........................................         37.0        939.8
.00780........................................         36.1        916.9
.00802........................................         35.1        891.5
.00822........................................         34.2        868.7
.00850........................................         33.1        840.7
.00878........................................         32.0        812.8
.00906........................................         31.0        787.4
.00922........................................         30.5        774.7
.00938........................................         30.0        762.0
.00960........................................         29.3        744.2
.00980........................................         28.7        729.0
.01004........................................         28.0        711.2
.01022........................................         27.5        698.5
.01042........................................         27.0        685.8
.01060........................................         26.5        673.1
.01080........................................         26.0        660.4
.01110........................................         25.3        642.6
.01130........................................         24.9        632.5
.01170........................................         24.0        609.6
.01200........................................         23.4        594.4
.01240........................................         22.7        576.6
.01280........................................         22.0        558.8
.01310........................................         21.5        546.1
.01360........................................         20.7        525.8
.01400........................................         20.1        510.5
.01430........................................         19.7        500.4
.01480........................................         19.0        482.6
.01540........................................         18.3        464.8
.01570........................................         17.9        454.7
.01610........................................         17.5        444.5
.01650........................................         17.1        434.3
.01700........................................         16.6        421.6
.01750........................................         16.1        408.9
.01800........................................         15.6        396.2
.01860........................................         15.1        383.5
.01910........................................         14.7        373.4
.01980........................................         14.2        360.7
.02040........................................         13.8        350.5
.02100........................................         13.4        340.4
.02160........................................         13.0        330.2
.02250........................................         12.5        317.5
.02340........................................         12.0        304.8
.02450........................................         11.5        292.1
.02560........................................         11.0        279.4
.02680........................................         10.5        266.7
.02810........................................         10.0        254.0
.02960........................................          9.5        241.3
.03130........................................          9.0        228.6
.03310........................................          8.5        215.9
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S13. School bus mirror test procedures. The requirements of S9.1 
through S9.4 shall be met when the vehicle is tested in accordance with 
the following conditions.
    S13.1 The cylinders shall be a color which provides a high contrast 
with the surface on which the bus is parked.
    S13.2 The cylinders are 0.3048 m high and 0.3048 m in diameter, 
except for cylinder P which is 0.9144 m high and 0.3048 m in diameter.
    S13.3 Place cylinders at locations as specified in S13.3(a) through 
S13.3(g) and illustrated in Figure 2. Measure the distances shown in 
Figure 2 from a cylinder to another object from the center of the 
cylinder as viewed from above.
    (a) Place cylinders G, H, and I so that they are tangent to a 
transverse vertical plane tangent to the forward-most surface of the 
bus's front bumper. Place cylinders D, E, F so that their centers are 
located in a transverse vertical plane that is 1.8288 meters (6 feet) 
forward of a transverse vertical plane passing through the centers of 
cylinders G, H, and I. Place cylinders A, B, and C so that their centers 
are located in a transverse vertical plane that is 3.6576 meters (12 
feet) forward of the transverse vertical plane passing through the 
centers of cylinders G, H, and I.
    (b) Place cylinders B, E, and H so that their centers are in a 
longitudinal vertical plane that passes through the bus's longitudinal 
centerline.
    (c) Place cylinders A, D, and G so that their centers are in a 
longitudinal vertical plane that is tangent to the most outboard edge of 
the left side of the bus's front bumper.
    (d) Place cylinders C, F, and I so that their centers are in a 
longitudinal vertical plane that is tangent to the most outboard edge of 
the right side of the bus's front bumper.
    (e) Place cylinder J so that its center is in a longitudinal 
vertical plane 0.3048 meters (1 foot) to the left of the longitudinal 
vertical plane passing through the centers of cylinders A, D, and G, and 
is in the transverse vertical plane that passes through the centerline 
of the bus's front axle.
    (f) Place cylinder K so that its center is in a longitudinal 
vertical plane 0.3048 meters (1 foot) to the right of the longitudinal 
vertical plane passing through the centers of cylinders C, F, and I, and 
is in the transverse vertical

[[Page 564]]

plane that passes through the centerline of the bus's front axle.
    (g) Place cylinders L, M, N, O, and P so that their centers are in 
the transverse vertical plane that passes through the centerline of the 
bus's rear axle. Place cylinder L so that its center is in a 
longitudinal vertical plane that is 1.8288 meters (6 feet) to the left 
of the longitudinal vertical plane tangent to the bus's most outboard 
left surface (excluding the mirror system). Place cylinder M so that its 
center is in a longitudinal vertical plane that is 0.3048 meters (1 
foot) to the left of the longitudinal vertical plane tangent to the left 
side of the bus. Place cylinder N so that its center is in a 
longitudinal vertical plane that is 0.3048 meters (1 foot) to the right 
of the longitudinal vertical plane tangent to the right side of the bus. 
Place cylinder O so that its center is in a longitudinal vertical plane 
that is 1.8288 meters (6 feet) to the right of the longitudinal vertical 
plane tangent to the right side of the bus. Place cylinder P so that its 
center is in a longitudinal vertical plane that is 3.6576 meters (12 
feet) to the right of the longitudinal vertical plane tangent to the 
right side of the bus.

[[Page 565]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.002


[[Page 566]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.041

    S13.4 The driver's eye location is the eye location of a 25th 
percentile adult female, when seated in the driver's seat as follows:
    (a) The center point of the driver's eye location is the point 
located 68.58 centimeters (27 inches) vertically above the intersection 
of the seat cushion and the seat back at the longitudinal centerline of 
the seat.
    (b) Adjust the driver's seat to the midway point between the 
forward-most and rear-most positions, and if separately adjustable in 
the vertical direction, adjust to the lowest position. If an adjustment 
position does not

[[Page 567]]

exist at the midway point, use the closest adjustment position to the 
rear of the midpoint. If a seat back is adjustable, adjust the seat back 
angle to the manufacturer's nominal design riding position in accordance 
with the manufacturer's recommendations.
    S13.5 Adjustable mirrors are adjusted before the test in accordance 
with the manufacturer's recommendations. Such mirrors are not moved or 
readjusted at any time during the test.
    13.6 Place a 35 mm or larger format camera, or video camera, so that 
its image plane is located at the center point of the driver's eye 
location or at any single point within a semicircular area established 
by a 15.24 centimeter (6 inch) radius parallel to and forward of the 
center point (see figure 3). With the camera at any single location on 
or within that semicircle look through the camera and the windows of the 
bus and determine whether the entire top surface of each cylinder is 
directly visible.
    S13.7 For each cylinder whose entire top surface is determined under 
paragraph 13.4 of this section not to be directly visible at the 
driver's eye location,
    (a) Place a comparison chart (see figure 4) above the mirror that 
provides the fullest view of the cylinder in situations where a cylinder 
is partially visible through more than one mirror.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.042

    The width of the bars in Figure 4 indicating three minutes of arc 
and nine minutes of arc are derived from the following formula:

    For 3 minutes of arc:


[[Page 568]]


X=Dx0.000873,

    Where:

X=the width of a line, in the unit of measurement D, representing 3 
minutes of arc;
D=distance from center point of driver's eye location to the center of 
the mirror's surface; and

0.000873=tangent of 3 minutes of arc.

    For 9 minutes of arc:

X=Dx0.002618,

Where:

X=the width of a line, in the unit of measurement D, representing 9 
minutes of arc;
D=distance from center point of driver's eye location to the center of 
the mirror's surface; and

0.002618=tangent of 9 minutes of arc.

    (b) Photograph each cylinder through the mirror(s) that provides a 
view of the cylinder. Photograph each cylinder with the camera located 
so that the view through its film or image plane is located at any 
single location within the semicircle established under 13.4, [POINT 
A,B,C, OR D] ensuring that the image of the mirror and comparison chart 
fill the camera's view finder to the extent possible.
    13.8 Make all observations and take all photographs with the 
service/entry door in the closed position and the stop signal arm(s) in 
the fully retracted position.

[41 FR 36025, Aug. 26, 1976, as amended at 41 FR 56813, Dec. 30, 1976; 
47 FR 38700, Sept. 2, 1982; 48 FR 38844, Aug. 26, 1983; 48 FR 40262, 
Sept. 6, 1983; 56 FR 58516, Nov. 20, 1991; 57 FR 57015, Dec. 2, 1992; 58 
FR 60402, Nov. 16, 1993; 60 FR 15692, Mar. 27, 1995; 63 FR 28929-28931, 
May 27, 1998; 63 FR 51000, Sept. 24, 1998; 69 FR 18497, Apr. 8, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 571.112  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 571.113  Standard No. 113; Hood latch system.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard establishes the requirement for 
providing a hood latch system or hood latch systems.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses.
    S3. Definitions. Hood means any exterior movable body panel forward 
of the windshield that is used to cover an engine, luggage, storage, or 
battery compartment.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1 Each hood must be provided with a hood latch system.
    S4.2 A front opening hood which, in any open position, partially or 
completely obstructs a driver's forward view through the windshield must 
be provided with a second latch position on the hood latch system or 
with a second hood latch system.


<R05>
Sec. 571.114  Standard No. 114; Theft protection and rollaway prevention.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies vehicle performance requirements 
intended to reduce the incidence of crashes resulting from theft and 
accidental rollaway of motor vehicles.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to decrease the 
likelihood that a vehicle is stolen, or accidentally set in motion.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to all passenger cars, and to 
trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 4,536 
kilograms (10,000 pounds) or less. However, it does not apply to walk-in 
van-type vehicles. Additionally, paragraph S5.3 of this standard applies 
to all motor vehicles, except trailers and motorcycles, with a GVWR of 
4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds) or less.
    S4. Definitions.
    Combination means a variation of the key that permits the starting 
system of a particular vehicle to be operated.
    Key means a physical device or an electronic code which, when 
inserted into the starting system (by physical or electronic means), 
enables the vehicle operator to activate the engine or motor.
    Open-body type vehicle means a vehicle having no occupant 
compartment doors or vehicle having readily detachable occupant 
compartment doors.
    Starting system means the vehicle system used in conjunction with 
the key to activate the engine or motor.
    Vehicle type, as used in S5.1.2, refers to passenger car, truck, or 
multipurpose passenger vehicle, as those terms are defined in 49 CFR 
571.3.
    S5 Requirements. Each vehicle subject to this standard must meet the 
requirements of S5.1, S5.2, and S5.3. Open-body type vehicles are not 
required to comply with S5.1.3.
    S5.1 Theft protection.

[[Page 569]]

    S5.1.1 Each vehicle must have a starting system which, whenever the 
key is removed from the starting system prevents:
    (a) The normal activation of the vehicle's engine or motor; and
    (b) Either steering, or forward self-mobility, of the vehicle, or 
both.
    S5.1.2 For each vehicle type manufactured by a manufacturer, the 
manufacturer must provide at least 1,000 unique key combinations, or a 
number equal to the total number of the vehicles of that type 
manufactured by the manufacturer, whichever is less. The same 
combinations may be used for more than one vehicle type.
    S5.1.3 Except as specified below, an audible warning to the vehicle 
operator must be activated whenever the key is in the starting system 
and the door located closest to the driver's designated seating position 
is opened. An audible warning to the vehicle operator need not activate:
    (a) After the key has been inserted into the starting system, and 
before the driver takes further action; or
    (b) If the key is in the starting system in a manner or position 
that allows the engine or motor to be started or to continue operating; 
or
    (c) For mechanical keys and starting systems, after the key has been 
withdrawn to a position from which it may not be turned.
    S5.1.4 If a vehicle is equipped with a transmission with a ``park'' 
position, the means for deactivating the vehicle's engine or motor must 
not activate any device installed pursuant to S5.1.1(b), unless the 
transmission is locked in the ``park'' position.
    S5.2 Rollaway prevention in vehicles equipped with transmissions 
with a ``park'' position.
    S5.2.1 Except as specified in S5.2.3, the starting system required 
by S5.1 must prevent key removal when tested according to the procedures 
in S6, unless the transmission or gear selection control is locked in 
``park'' or becomes locked in ``park'' as a direct result of key 
removal.
    S5.2.2 Except as specified in S5.2.4, the vehicle must be designed 
such that the transmission or gear selection control cannot move from 
the ``park'' position, unless the key is in the starting system.
    S5.2.3 Key removal override option. At the option of the 
manufacturer, the key may be removed from the starting system without 
the transmission or gear selection control in the ``park'' position 
under one of the following conditions:
    (a) In the event of electrical failure, including battery discharge, 
the vehicle may permit key removal from the starting system without the 
transmission or gear selection control locked in the ``park'' position; 
or
    (b) Provided that steering or self-mobility is prevented, the 
vehicle may have a device by which the user can remove the key from the 
starting system without the transmission or gear selection control 
locked in ``park.'' This device must require:
    (i) The use of a tool, and
    (ii) Simultaneous activation of the device and removal of the key; 
or
    (c) Provided that steering or self-mobility is prevented, the 
vehicle may have a device by which the user can remove the key from the 
starting system without the transmission or gear selection control 
locked in ``park.'' This device must be covered by an opaque surface 
which, when installed:
    (i) Prevents sight of and use of the device, and
    (ii) Can be removed only by using a screwdriver or other tool.
    S5.2.4 Gear selection control override option. The vehicle may have 
a device by which the user can move the gear selection control from 
``park'' after the key has been removed from the starting system. This 
device must be operable by one of the three options below:
    (a) By use of the key; or
    (b) By a means other than the key, provided steering or forward 
self-mobility is prevented when the key is removed from the starting 
system. Such a means must require:
    (i) The use of a tool, and
    (ii) Simultaneous activation of this means and movement of the gear 
selection control from ``park;'' or
    (c) By a means other than the key, provided steering or forward 
self-mobility is prevented when the key is removed from the starting 
system. This

[[Page 570]]

device must be covered by an opaque surface which, when installed:
    (i) Prevents sight of and use of the device, and
    (ii) Can be removed only by using a screwdriver or other tool.
    S5.2.5 When tested in accordance with S6.2.2, each vehicle must not 
move more than 150 mm on a 10 percent grade when the gear selection 
control is locked in ``park.''
    S5.3 Brake transmission shift interlock. Each motor vehicle 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2010 with a GVWR of 4,536 
kilograms (10,000 pounds) or less with an automatic transmission that 
includes a ``park'' position shall be equipped with a system that 
requires the service brake to be depressed before the transmission can 
be shifted out of ``park.'' This system shall function in any starting 
system key position in which the transmission can be shifted out of 
``park.'' This section does not apply to trailers or motorcycles.
    S6. Compliance test procedure for vehicles with transmissions with a 
``park'' position.
    S6.1 Test conditions.
    S6.1.1 The vehicle shall be tested at curb weight plus 91 kg 
(including the driver).
    S6.1.2 Except where specified otherwise, the test surface shall be 
level.
    S6.2 Test procedure.
    S6.2.1
    (a) Activate the starting system using the key.
    (b) Move the gear selection control to any gear selection position 
or any other position where it will remain without assistance, including 
a position between any detent positions, except for the ``park'' 
position.
    (c) Attempt to remove the key in each gear selection position.
    S6.2.2
    (a) Drive the vehicle forward up a 10 percent grade and stop it with 
the service brakes.
    (b) Apply the parking brake (if present).
    (c) Move the gear selection control to ``park.''
    (d) Note the vehicle position.
    (e) Release the parking brake. Release the service brakes.
    (f) Remove the key.
    (g) Verify that the gear selection control or transmission is locked 
in ``park.''
    (h) Verify that the vehicle, at rest, has moved no more than 150 mm 
from the position noted prior to release of the brakes.
    S6.2.3
    (a) Drive the vehicle forward down a 10 percent grade and stop it 
with the service brakes.
    (b) Apply the parking brake (if present).
    (c) Move the gear selection control to ``park.''
    (d) Note the vehicle position.
    (e) Release the parking brake. Release the service brakes.
    (f) Remove the key.
    (g) Verify that the gear selection control or transmission is locked 
in ``park.''
    (h) Verify that the vehicle, at rest, has moved no more than 150 mm 
from the position noted prior to release of the brakes.

[71 FR 17755, Apr. 7, 2006, as amended at 75 FR 15624, Mar. 30, 2010]


<R05>
Sec. 571.115  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 571.116  Standard No. 116; Motor vehicle brake fluids.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for fluids for use 
in hydraulic brake systems of motor vehicles, containers for these 
fluids, and labeling of the containers.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce failures in 
the hydraulic braking systems of motor vehicles which may occur because 
of the manufacture or use of improper or contaminated fluid.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to all fluid for use in 
hydraulic brake systems of motor vehicles. In addition, S5.3 applies to 
passenger cars, multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, buses, 
trailers, and motorcycles.
    S4. Definitions.
    Blister means a cavity or sac on the surface of a brake cup.
    Brake fluid means a liquid designed for use in a motor vehicle 
hydraulic brake system in which it will contact elastomeric components 
made of styrene and butadiene rubber (SBR), ethylene and propylene 
rubber (EPR),

[[Page 571]]

polychloroprene (CR) brake hose inner tube stock or natural rubber (NR).
    Chipping means a condition in which small pieces are missing from 
the outer surface of a brake cup.
    Duplicate samples means two samples of brake fluid taken from a 
single packaged lot and tested simultaneously.
    Hydraulic system mineral oil means a mineral-oil-based fluid 
designed for use in motor vehicle hydraulic brake systems in which the 
fluid is not in contact with components made of SBR, EPR or NR.
    Packager means any person who fills containers with brake fluid that 
are subsequently distributed for retail sale.
    Packaged lot is that quantity of brake fluid shipped by the 
manufacturer to the packager in a single container, or that quantity of 
brake fluid manufactured by a single plant run of 24 hours or less, 
through the same processing equipment and with no change in ingredients.
    Scuffing means a visible erosion of a portion of the outer surface 
of a brake cup.
    A silicone base brake fluid (SBBF) is a brake fluid which consists 
of not less than 70 percent by weight of a diorgano polysiloxane.
    Sloughing means degradation of a brake cup as evidenced by the 
presence of carbon black loosely held on the brake cup surface, such 
that a visible black streak is produced when the cup, with a 500 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 gram deadweight on it, is drawn base down over a 
sheet of white bond paper placed on a firm flat surface.
    Stickiness means a condition on the surface of a brake cup such that 
fibers will be pulled from a wad of U.S.P. absorbent cotton when it is 
drawn across the surface.
    S5. Requirements. This section specifies performance requirements 
for DOT 3, DOT 4 and DOT 5 brake fluids; requirements for brake fluid 
certification; and requirements for container sealing, labeling and 
color coding for brake fluids and hydraulic system mineral oils. Where a 
range of tolerances is specified, the brake fluid shall meet the 
requirements at all points within the range.
    S5.1 Brake fluid. When tested in accordance with S6, brake fluids 
shall meet the following requirements:
    S5.1.1 Equilibrium reflux boiling point (ERBP). When brake fluid is 
tested according to S6.1, the ERBP shall not be less than the following 
value for the grade indicated:
    (a) DOT 3: 205 [deg]C. (401 [deg]F.).
    (b) DOT 4: 230 [deg]C. (446 [deg]F.).
    (c) DOT 5: 260 [deg]C. (500 [deg]F.).
    S5.1.2 Wet ERBP. When brake fluid is tested according to S6.2, the 
wet ERBP shall not be less than the following value for the grade 
indicated:
    (a) DOT 3: 140 [deg]C. (284 [deg]F.).
    (b) DOT 4: 155 [deg]C. (311 [deg]F.).
    (c) DOT 5: 1 180 [deg]C. (356 [deg]F.).
    S5.1.3. Kinematic viscosities. When brake fluid is tested according 
to S6.3, the kinematic viscosities in square millimeters per second at 
stated temperatures shall be neither less than 1.5 mm\2\/s at 100 
[deg]C. (212 [deg]F.) nor more than the following maximum value for the 
grade indicated:
    (a) DOT 3: 1,500 mm\2\/s at minus 40 [deg]C. (minus 40 [deg]F.).
    (b) DOT 4: 1,800 mm\2\/s at minus 40 [deg]C. (minus 40 [deg]F.).
    (c) DOT 5: 900 mm\2\/s at minus 40 [deg]C. (minus 40 [deg]F.).
    S5.1.4 pH value. When brake fluid, except DOT 5 SBBF, is tested 
according to S6.4, the pH value shall not be less than 7.0 nor more than 
11.5.
    S5.1.5 Brake fluid stability.
    S5.1.5.1 High-temperature stability. When brake fluid is tested 
according to S6.5.3 the ERBP shall not change by more than 3 [deg]C. 
(5.4 [deg]F.) plus 0.05[deg] for each degree that the ERBP of the fluid 
exceeds 225 [deg]C. (437 [deg]F.).
    S5.1.5.2 Chemical stability. When brake fluid, except DOT 5 SBBF, is 
tested according to S6.5.4, the change in temperature of the refluxing 
fluid mixture shall not exceed 3.0 [deg]C (5.4 [deg]F.) plus 0.05[deg] 
for each degree that the ERBP of the fluid exceeds 225 [deg]C (437 
[deg]F.).
    S5.1.6 Corrosion. When brake fluid is tested according to S6.6--
    (a) The metal test strips shall not show weight changes exceeding 
the limits stated in Table I.

[[Page 572]]



                                 Table I
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Maximum
                                                             permissible
                                                                weight
                    Test strip material                      change, mg./
                                                              sq. cm. of
                                                               surface
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Steel, tinned iron, cast iron..............................          0.2
Aluminum...................................................           .1
Brass, copper..............................................           .4
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Excluding the area of contact (13 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 mm. 
(\1/2\ <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>\1/32\ inch) measured from the bolt hole 
end of the test strip), the metal test strips shall not show pitting or 
etching to an extent discernible without magnification;
    (c) The water-wet brake fluid at the end of the test shall show no 
jelling at 23 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C (73.4 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.);
    (d) No crystalline deposit shall form and adhere to either the glass 
jar walls or the surface of the metal strips;
    (e) At the end of the test, sedimentation of the water-wet brake 
fluid shall not exceed 0.10 percent by volume;
    (f) The pH value of water-wet brake fluid, except DOT 5 SBBF, at the 
end of the test shall not be less than 7.0 nor more than 11.5;
    (g) The cups at the end of the test shall show no disintegration, as 
evidenced by blisters or sloughing;
    (h) The hardness of the cup shall not decrease by more than 15 
International Rubber Hardness Degrees (IRHD); and
    (i) The base diameter of the cups shall not increase by more than 
1.4 mm. (0.055 inch).
    S5.1.7 Fluidity and appearance at low temperature. When brake fluid 
is tested according to S6.7, at the storage temperature and for the 
storage times given in Table II--
    (a) The fluid shall show no sludging, sedimentation, 
crystallization, or stratification;
    (b) Upon inversion of the sample bottle, the time required for the 
air bubble to travel to the top of the fluid shall not exceed the bubble 
flow times shown in Table II; and
    (c) On warming to room temperature, the fluid shall resume the 
appearance and fluidity that it had before chilling.

          Table II--Fluidity and Appearance at Low Temperatures
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Maximum
                                                    Storage     bubble
               Storage temperature                   time      flow time
                                                    (hours)    (seconds)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Minus 40 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. (minus   144 <plus-          10
 40 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F.)..........  minus<ls-t
                                                        h4.0
Minus 50 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. (minus     6 <plus-          35
 58 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F.)..........  minus<ls-t
                                                        h0.2
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S5.1.8 [Reserved]
    S5.1.9 Water tolerance. (a) At low temperature. When brake fluid is 
tested according to S6.9.3(a)--
    (1) The fluid shall show no sludging, sedimentation, 
crystallization, or stratification;
    (2) Upon inversion of the centrifuge tube, the air bubble shall 
travel to the top of the fluid in not more than 10 seconds;
    (3) If cloudiness has developed, the wet fluid shall regain its 
original clarity and fluidity when warmed to room temperature; and
    (b) At 60 [deg]C. (140 [deg]F.). When brake fluid is tested 
according to S6.9.3(b)--
    (1) The fluid shall show no stratification; and
    (2) Sedimentation shall not exceed 0.15 percent by volume after 
centrifuging.
    S5.1.10 Compatibility.
    (a) At low temperature. When brake fluid is tested according to 
S6.10.3(a), the test specimen shall show no sludging, sedimentation, or 
crystallization. In addition, fluids, except DOT 5 SBBF, shall show no 
stratification.
    (b) At 60 [deg]C. (140 [deg]F.). When brake fluid is tested 
according to S6.10.3(b)--
    (1) Sedimentation shall not exceed 0.05 percent by volume after 
centrifuging; and
    (2) Fluids, except DOT 5 SBBF, shall show no stratification.
    S5.1.11 Resistance to oxidation. When brake fluid is tested 
according to S6.11--
    (a) The metal test strips outside the areas in contact with the 
tinfoil shall not show pitting or etching to an extent discernible 
without magnification;
    (b) No more than a trace of gum shall be deposited on the test 
strips outside the areas in contact with the tinfoil;
    (c) The aluminum strips shall not change in weight by more than 0.05 
mg./sq. cm.; and

[[Page 573]]

    (d) The cast iron strips shall not change in weight by more than 0.3 
mg./sq. cm.
    S5.1.12 Effects on cups. When brake cups are subjected to brake 
fluid in accordance with S6.12--
    (a) The increase in the diameter of the base of the cups shall be 
not less than 0.15 mm. (0.006 inch) or more than 1.40 mm. (0.055 inch);
    (b) The decrease in hardness of the cups shall be not more than 10 
IRHD at 70 [deg]C. (158 [deg]F.) or more than 15 IRHD at 120 [deg]C. 
(248 [deg]F.), and there shall be no increase in hardness of the cups; 
and
    (c) The cups shall show no disintegration as evidenced by 
stickiness, blisters, or sloughing.
    S5.1.13 Stroking properties. When brake fluid is tested according to 
S6.13--
    (a) Metal parts of the test system shall show no pitting or etching 
to an extent discernible without magnification;
    (b) The change in diameter of any cylinder or piston shall not 
exceed 0.13 mm. (0.005 inch);
    (c) The average decrease in hardness of seven of the eight cups 
tested (six wheel cylinder and one master cylinder primary) shall not 
exceed 15 IRHD. Not more than one of the seven cups shall have a 
decrease in hardness greater than 17 IRHD;
    (d) None of the eight cups shall be in an unsatisfactory operating 
condition as evidenced by stickiness, scuffing, blisters, cracking, 
chipping, or other change in shape from its original appearance;
    (e) None of the eight cups shall show an increase in base diameter 
greater than 0.90 mm (0.035 inch);
    (f) The average lip diameter set of the eight cups shall not be 
greater than 65 percent.
    (g) During any period of 24,000 strokes, the volume loss of fluid 
shall not exceed 36 milliliters;
    (h) The cylinder pistons shall not freeze or function improperly 
throughout the test;
    (i) The total loss of fluid during the 100 strokes at the end of the 
test shall not exceed 36 milliliters;
    (j) The fluid at the end of the test shall show no formation of 
gels;
    (k) At the end of the test the amount of sediment shall not exceed 
1.5 percent by volume; and
    (l) Brake cylinders shall be free of deposits that are abrasive or 
that cannot be removed when rubbed moderately with a nonabrasive cloth 
wetted with ethanol.
    S5.1.14 Fluid color. Brake fluid and hydraulic system mineral oil 
shall be of the color indicated:

DOT 3, DOT 4, and DOT 5.1 non-SBBF--colorless to amber.
DOT 5 SBBF--purple.
Hydraulic system mineral oil--green.

    S5.2 Packaging and labeling requirements for motor vehicle brake 
fluids.
    S5.2.1 Container sealing. Each brake fluid or hydraulic system 
mineral oil container with a capacity of 177 mL or more shall be 
provided with a resealable closure that has an inner seal impervious to 
the packaged brake fluid. The container closure shall include a tamper-
proof feature that will either be destroyed or substantially altered 
when the container closure is initially opened.
    S5.2.2 Certification, marking, and labeling.
    S5.2.2.1 Each manufacturer of a DOT grade brake fluid shall furnish 
to each packager, distributor, or dealer to whom he delivers brake 
fluid, the following information:
    (a) A serial number identifying the production lot and the date of 
manufacture of the brake fluid.
    (b) The grade (DOT 3, DOT 4, DOT 5) of the brake fluid. If DOT 5 
grade brake fluid , it shall be further distinguished as ``DOT 5 
SILICONE BASE'' or ``DOT 5.1 NON-SILICONE BASE.''
    (c) The minimum wet boiling point in Fahrenheit of the brake fluid.
    (d) Certification that the brake fluid conforms to Sec. 571.116.
    S5.2.2.2 Each packager of brake fluid shall furnish the information 
specified in paragraphs (a) through (g) of this S5.2.2.2 by clearly 
marking it on each brake fluid container or on a label (labels) 
permanently affixed to the container, in any location except a removable 
part such as a lid. After being subjected to the operations and 
conditions specified in S6.14, the information required by this section 
shall be legible to an observer having corrected visual

[[Page 574]]

acuity of 20/40 (Snellen ratio) at a distance of 305 mm, and any label 
affixed to the container in compliance with this section shall not be 
removable without its being destroyed or defaced.
    (a) Certification that the brake fluid conforms to Sec. 571.116.
    (b) The name of the packager of the brake fluid, which may be in 
code form.
    (c) The name and complete mailing address of the distributor.
    (d) A serial number identifying the packaged lot and date of 
packaging.
    (e) Designation of the contents as ``DOT--MOTOR VEHICLE BRAKE 
FLUID'' (Fill in DOT 3, DOT 4, DOT 5 SILICONE BASE, or DOT 5.1 NON-
SILICONE BASE as applicable).
    (f) The minimum wet boiling point in Fahrenheit of the DOT brake 
fluid in the container.
    (g) The following safety warnings in capital and lower case letters 
as indicated:
    (1) FOLLOW VEHICLE MANUFACTURER'S RECOMMENDATIONS WHEN ADDING BRAKE 
FLUID.
    (2) KEEP BRAKE FLUID CLEAN AND DRY. Contamination with dirt, water, 
petroleum products or other materials may result in brake failure or 
costly repairs.
    (3) STORE BRAKE FLUID ONLY IN ITS ORIGINAL CONTAINER. KEEP CONTAINER 
CLEAN AND TIGHTLY CLOSED TO PREVENT ABSORPTION OF MOISTURE.
    (4) CAUTION: DO NOT REFILL CONTAINER, AND DO NOT USE FOR OTHER 
LIQUIDS. (Not required for containers with a capacity in excess of 19 
L.)
    S5.2.2.3 Each packager of hydraulic system mineral oil shall furnish 
the information specified in paragraphs (a) through (e) of this S5.2.2.3 
by clearly marking it on each brake fluid container or on a label 
(labels) permanently affixed to the container, in any location except a 
removable part such as a lid. After being subjected to the operations 
and conditions specified in S6.14, the information required by this 
section shall be legible to an observer having corrected visual acuity 
of 20/40 (Snellen ratio) at a distance of 305 mm and any label affixed 
to the container in compliance with this section shall not be removable 
without its being destroyed or defaced.
    (a) The name of the packager of the hydraulic system mineral oil, 
which may be in code form.
    (b) The name and complete mailing address of the distributor.
    (c) A serial number identifying the packaged lot and date of 
packaging.
    (d) Designation of the contents as ``HYDRAULIC SYSTEM MINERAL OIL'' 
in capital letters at least 3 mm high.
    (e) The following safety warnings in capital and lower case letters 
as indicated:
    (1) FOLLOW VEHICLE MANUFACTURER'S RECOMMENDATIONS WHEN ADDING 
HYDRAULIC SYSTEM MINERAL OIL.
    (2) Hydraulic System Mineral Oil is NOT COMPATIBLE with the rubber 
components of brake systems designed for use with DOT brake fluids.
    (3) KEEP HYDRAULIC SYSTEM MINERAL OIL CLEAN. Contamination with dust 
or other materials may result in brake failure or costly repair.
    (4) CAUTION: STORE HYDRAULIC SYSTEM MINERAL OIL ONLY IN ITS ORIGINAL 
CONTAINER. KEEP CONTAINER CLEAN AND TIGHTLY CLOSED. DO NOT REFILL 
CONTAINER OR USE OTHER LIQUIDS. (The last sentence is not required for 
containers with a capacity in excess of 19 L.)
    S5.2.2.4 If a container for brake fluid or hydraulic system mineral 
oil is not normally visible but designed to be protected by an outer 
container or carton during use, the outer container or carton rather 
than the inner container shall meet the labeling requirements of 
S5.2.2.2 or S5.2.2.3, as appropriate.
    S5.3 Motor vehicle requirement. Each passenger car, multipurpose 
passenger vehicle, truck, bus, trailer, and motorcycle that has a 
hydraulic brake system shall be equipped with fluid that has been 
manufactured and packaged in conformity with the requirements of this 
standard.
    S6. Test procedures.
    S6.1 Equilibrium reflux boiling point. Determine the ERBP of a brake 
fluid by running duplicate samples according to the following procedure 
and averaging the results.

[[Page 575]]

    S6.1.1 Summary of procedure. Sixty milliliters (ml.) of brake fluid 
are boiled under specified equilibrium conditions (reflux) at 
atmospheric pressure in a 100-ml. flask. The average temperature of the 
boiling fluid at the end of the reflux period, corrected for variations 
in barometric pressure if necessary, is the ERBP.
    S6.1.2 Apparatus. (See Figure 1) The test apparatus shall consist 
of--
    (a) Flask. (See Figure 2) A 100-ml. round-bottom, short-neck heat-
resistant glass flask having a neck with a \19/38\ standard taper, 
female ground-glass joint and a side-entering tube, with an outside 
diameter of 10 millimeters (mm.), which centers the thermometer bulb in 
the flask 6.5 mm. from the bottom;
    (b) Condenser. A water-cooled, reflux, glass-tube type, condenser 
having a jacket 200 mm. in length, the bottom end of which has a \19/38\ 
standard-taper, drip-tip, male ground-glass joint;
    (c) Boiling stones. Three clean, unused silicon carbide grains 
(approximately 2 mm. (0.08 inch) in diameter, grit No. 8);
    (d) Thermometer. Standardized calibrated partial immersion (76 mm.), 
solid stem, thermometers conforming to the requirements for an ASTM 2C 
or 2F, and an ASTM 3C or 3F thermometer; and
    (e) Heat source. Variable autotransformer-controlled heating mantle 
designed to fit the flask, or an electric heater with rheostat heat 
control.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.043

                  Fig. 1--Boiling Point Test Apparatus
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.044

                Fig. 2--Detail of 100 ml Short-Neck Flask
    S6.1.3 Preparation of apparatus. (a) Thoroughly clean and dry all 
glassware.

[[Page 576]]

    (b) Insert thermometer through the side tube until the tip of the 
bulb is 6.5 mm. (\1/4\ inch) from the bottom center of the flask. Seal 
with a short piece of natural rubber, EPDM, SBR, or butyl tubing.
    (c) Place 60 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml. of brake fluid and the 
silicon carbide grains into the flask.
    (d) Attach the flask to the condenser. When using a heating mantle, 
place the mantle under the flask and support it with a ring-clamp and 
laboratory-type stand, holding the entire assembly in place by a clamp. 
When using a rheostat-controlled heater, center a standard porcelain or 
hard asbestos refractory, having a diameter opening 32 to 38 mm., over 
the heating element and mount the flask so that direct heat is applied 
only through the opening in the refractory. Place the assembly in an 
area free from drafts or other types of sudden temperature changes. 
Connect the cooling water inlet and outlet tubes to the condenser. Turn 
on the cooling water. The water supply temperature shall not exceed 28 
[deg]C. (82.4 [deg]F.) and the temperature rise through the condenser 
shall not exceed 2 [deg]C. (3.6 [deg]F.).
    S6.1.4 Procedure. Apply heat to the flask so that within 10 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 minutes the fluid is refluxing in excess of 1 drop per 
second. The reflux rate shall not exceed 5 drops per second at any time. 
Immediately adjust the heating rate to obtain an equilibrium reflux rate 
of 1 to 2 drops per second over the next 5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 
minutes. Maintain this rate for an additional 2 minutes, taking four 
temperature readings at 30-second intervals. Record the average of these 
as the observed ERBP. If no reflux is evident when the fluid temperature 
reaches 260 [deg]C (500 [deg]F), discontinue heating and report ERBP as 
in excess of 260 [deg]C (500 [deg]F).
    S6.1.5 Calculation. (a) Thermometer inaccuracy. Correct the observed 
ERBP by applying any correction factor obtained in standardizing the 
thermometer.
    (b) Variation from standard barometric pressure. Apply the factor 
shown in Table III to calculate the barometric pressure correction to 
the ERBP.

              Table III--Correction for Barometric Pressure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    Correction per 1 mm
                                                  difference in pressure
     Observed ERBP corrected for thermometer                \a\
                   inaccuracy                    -----------------------
                                                    [deg]C.   ( [deg]F.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
100 [deg]C. (212 [deg]F.) to 190 [deg]C. (374          0.039      (0.07)
 [deg]F.).......................................
Over 190 [deg]C. (374 [deg]F.)..................        0.04      (0.08)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\a\ To be added in case barometric pressure is below 760 mm.; to be
  subtracted in case barometric pressure is above 670 mm.

    (c) If the two corrected observed ERBP's agree within 2 [deg]C. (4 
[deg]C. for brake fluids having an ERBP over 230 [deg]C./446 [deg]F.) 
average the duplicate runs as the ERBP; otherwise, repeat the entire 
test, averaging the four corrected observed values to determine the 
original ERBP.
    S6.2 Wet ERBP. Determine the wet ERBP of a brake fluid by running 
duplicate samples according to the following procedure.
    S6.2.1. Summary of procedure. A 350 ml. sample of the brake fluid is 
humidified under controlled conditions; 350 ml. of SAE triethylene 
glycol monomethyl ether, brake fluid grade, referee material (TEGME) as 
described in appendix E of SAE Standard J1703 Nov. 83, ``Motor Vehicle 
Brake Fluid,'' November 1983, is used to establish the end point for 
humidification. After humidification, the water content and ERBP of the 
brake fluid are determined.
    S6.2.2 Apparatus for humidification. (See Figure 3).
    Test apparatus shall consist of--
    (a) Glass jars. Four SAE RM-49 corrosion test jars or equivalent 
screwtop, straight-sided, round glass jars each having a capacity of 
about 475 ml. and approximate inner dimensions of 100 mm. in height by 
75 mm. in diameter, with matching lids having new, clean inserts 
providing water-vapor-proof seals;
    (b) Desiccator and cover. Two bowl-form glass desiccators, 250-mm. 
inside diameter, having matching tubulated covers fitted with No. 8 
rubber stoppers; and
    (c) Desiccator plate. Two 230-mm. diameter, perforated porcelain 
desiccator plates, without feet, glazed on one side.
    S6.2.3 Reagents and materials. (a) Distilled water, see S7.1.
    (b) SAE TEGME referee material.

[[Page 577]]

    S6.2.4 Preparation of apparatus. Lubricate the ground-glass joint of 
the desiccator. Pour 450 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 ml. of distilled water 
into each desiccator and insert perforated porcelain desiccator plates. 
Place the desiccators in an oven with temperature controlled at 50 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 [deg]C. (122 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1.8 [deg]F.) 
throughout the humidification procedure.
    S6.2.5 Procedure. Pour 350 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 ml. of brake 
fluid into an open corrosion test jar. Prepare in the same manner a 
duplicate test fluid sample and two duplicate specimens of the SAE TEGME 
referee material (350 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 ml. of TEGME in each jar). 
The water content of the SAE TEGME fluid is adjusted to 0.50 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 percent by weight at the start of the test in 
accordance with S7.2. Place one sample each of the test brake fluid and 
the prepared TEGME sample into the same desiccator. Repeat for the 
second sample of test brake fluid and TEGME in a second desiccator. 
Place the desiccators in the 50 [deg]C. (122 [deg]F.) controlled oven 
and replace desiccator covers. At intervals, during oven humidification, 
remove the rubber stoppers in the tops of desiccators. Using a long 
needled hypodermic syringe, take a sample of not more than 2 ml. from 
each TEGME sample and determine its water content. Remove no more than 
10 ml. of fluid from each SAE TEGME sample during the humidification 
procedure. When the water content of the SAE fluid reaches 3.70 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 percent by weight (average of the duplicates). 
remove the two test fluid specimens from their desiccators and promptly 
cap each jar tightly. Allow the sealed jars to cool for 60 to 90 minutes 
at 23[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. (73.4[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.). Measure the water contents of the test fluid 
specimens in accordance with S7.2 and determine their ERBP's in 
accordance with S6.1. If the two ERBPs agree within 4 [deg]C. (8 
[deg]F.), average them to determine the wet ERBP; otherwise repeat and 
average the four individual ERBPs as the wet ERBP of the brake fluid.

[[Page 578]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.045

    S6.3 Kinematic viscosities. Determine the kinematic viscosity of a 
brake fluid in mm\2\/s by the following procedure. Run duplicate samples 
at each of the specified temperatures, making two timed runs on each 
sample.
    S6.3.1 Summary of the procedure. The time is measured for a fixed 
volume of the brake fluid to flow through a calibrated glass capillary 
viscometer under an accurately reproducible head and at a closely 
controlled temperature. The kinematic viscosity is then calculated from 
the measured flow time and the calibration constant of the viscometer.
    S6.3.2 Apparatus.
    (a) Viscometers. Calibrated glass capillary-type viscometers, ASTM 
D2515-66, ``Standard Specification for Kinematic Glass Viscometers,'' 
measuring viscosity within the precision limits of S6.4.7. Use suspended 
level viscometers for viscosity measurements at low temperatures. Use 
Cannon-Fenske Routine or other modified Ostwald viscometers at ambient 
temperatures and above.
    (b) Viscometer holders and frames. Mount a viscometer in the 
constant-temperature bath so that the mounting tube is held within 
1[deg] of the vertical.
    (c) Viscometer bath. A transparent liquid bath of sufficient depth 
such that

[[Page 579]]

at no time during the measurement will any portion of the sample in the 
viscometer be less than 2 cm. below the surface or less than 2 cm. above 
the bottom. The bath shall be cylindrical in shape, with turbulent 
agitation sufficient to meet the temperature control requirements. For 
measurements within 15[deg] to 100 [deg]C. (60[deg] to 212 [deg]F.) the 
temperature of the bath medium shall not vary by more than 0.01 [deg]C. 
(0.02 [deg]F.) over the length of the viscometers, or between the 
positions of the viscometers, or at the locations of the thermometers. 
Outside this range, the variation shall not exceed 0.03 [deg]C. (0.05 
[deg]F.).
    (d) Thermometers. Liquid-in-Glass Kinematic Viscosity Test 
Thermometers, covering the range of test temperatures indicated in Table 
IV and conforming to ASTM E1-68, ``Specifications for ASTM 
Thermometers,'' and in the IP requirements for IP Standard Thermometers. 
Standardize before use (see S6.3.3(b)). Use two standardized 
thermometers in the bath.

                                                       Table IV--Kinematic Viscosity Thermometers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     Temperature range                                      For tests at                    Subdivisions         Thermometer number
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
              [deg]C.                       [deg]F.                [deg]C.                [deg]F.         [deg]C.  [deg]F.   ASTM            IP
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Minus 55.3 to minus 52.5...........  Minus 67.5 to minus    Minus 55.............  Minus 67.............    0.05      0.1    74 F  69 F. or C.
                                      62.5.
Minus 41.4 to minus 38.6...........  Minus 42.5 to minus    Minus 40.............  Minus 40.............    0.05      0.1    73 F  68 F. or C.
                                      37.5.
98.6 to 101.4......................  207.5 to 212.5.......  100..................  212..................    0.05      0.1    30 F  32 F. or C.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (e) Timing device. Stop watch or other timing device graduated in 
divisions representing not more than 0.2 second, with an accuracy of at 
least <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 percent when tested over intervals of 
15 minutes. Electrical timing devices may be used when the current 
frequency is controlled to an accuracy of 0.01 percent or better.
    S6.3.3 Standardization.
    (a) Viscometers. Use viscometers calibrated in accordance with 
appendix 1 of ASTM D445-65, ``Viscosity of Transparent and Opaque 
Liquids (Kinematic and Dynamic Viscosities).'' The calibration constant, 
C, is dependent upon the gravitational acceleration at the place of 
calibration. This must, therefore, be supplied by the standardization 
laboratory together with the instrument constant. Where the acceleration 
of gravity, g, in the two locations differs by more than 0.1 percent, 
correct the calibration constant as follows:

C<INF>2</INF>=(g<INF>2</INF>/g<INF>1</INF>)xC<INF>1</INF>


where the subscripts 1 and 2 indicate respectively the standardization 
laboratory and the testing laboratory.

    (b) Thermometers. Check liquid-in-glass thermometers to the nearest 
0.01 [deg]C. (0.02 [deg]F.) by direct comparison with a standardized 
thermometer. Kinematic Viscosity Test Thermometers shall be standardized 
at ``total immersion.'' The ice point of standardized thermometers shall 
be determined before use and the official corrections shall be adjusted 
to conform to the changes in ice points. (See ASTM E77-66, 
``Verification and Calibration of Liquid-in-Glass Thermometers.'')
    (c) Timers. Time signals are broadcast by the National Bureau of 
Standards, Station WWV, Washington, DC at 2.5, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 
and 35 Mc/sec (MHz). Time signals are also broadcast by Station CHU from 
Ottawa, Canada, at 3.330, 7.335, and 14.670 Mc/sec, and Station MSF at 
Rugby, United Kingdom, at 2.5, 5, and 10 Mc/sec.
    S6.3.4 Procedure. (a) Set and maintain the bath at the appropriate 
test temperature (see S5.1.3) within the limits specified in S6.3.2(c). 
Apply the necessary corrections, if any, to all thermometer readings.
    (b) Select a clean, dry, calibrated viscometer giving a flow time 
not less than its specified minimum, or 200 seconds, whichever is the 
greater.
    (c) Charge the viscometer in the manner used when the instrument was 
calibrated. Do not filter or dry the brake fluid, but protect it from 
contamination by dirt and moisture during filling and measurements.
    (1) Charge the suspended level viscometers by tilting about 30[deg] 
from

[[Page 580]]

the vertical and pouring sufficient brake fluid through the fill tube 
into the lower reservoir so that when the viscometer is returned to 
vertical position the meniscus is between the fill marks. For 
measurements below 0 [deg]C. (32 [deg]F.), before placing the filled 
viscometer into the constant temperature bath, draw the sample into the 
working capillary and timing bulb and insert small rubber stoppers to 
suspend the fluid in this position, to prevent accumulation of water 
condensate on the walls of the critical portions of the viscometer. 
Alternatively, fit loosely packed drying tubes into the open ends of the 
viscometer to prevent water condensation, but do not restrict the flow 
of the sample under test by the pressures created in the instrument.
    (2) If a Cannon-Fenske Routine viscometer is used, charge by 
inverting and immersing the smaller arm into the brake fluid and 
applying vacuum to the larger arm. Fill the tube to the upper timing 
mark, and return the viscometer to an upright position.
    (d) Mount the viscometer in the bath in a true vertical position 
(see S6.3.2(b)).
    (e) The viscometer shall remain in the bath until it reaches the 
test temperature.
    (f) At temperatures below 0 [deg]C. (32 [deg]F.) conduct an untimed 
preliminary run by allowing the brake fluid to drain through the 
capillary into the lower reservoir after the test temperature has been 
established.
    (g) Adjust the head level of the brake fluid to a position in the 
capillary arm about 5 mm. above the first timing mark.
    (h) With brake fluid flowing freely measure to within 0.2 second the 
time required for the meniscus to pass from the first timing mark to the 
second. If this flow time is less than the minimum specified for the 
viscometer, or 200 seconds, whichever is greater, repeat using a 
viscometer with a capillary of smaller diameter.
    (i) Repeat S6.3.4 (g) and (h). If the two timed runs do not agree 
within 0.2 percent, reject and repeat using a fresh sample of brake 
fluid.
    S6.3.5 Cleaning the viscometers. (a) Periodically clean the 
instrument with chromic acid to remove organic deposits. Rinse 
thoroughly with distilled water and acetone, and dry with clean dry air.
    (b) Between successive samples rinse the viscometer with ethanol 
(isopropanol when testing DOT 5 fluids) followed by an acetone or ether 
rinse. Pass a slow stream of filtered dry air through the viscometer 
until the last trace of solvent is removed.
    S6.3.6 Calculation. (a) The following viscometers have a fixed 
volume charged at ambient temperature, and as a consequence C varies 
with test temperature: Cannon-Fenske Routine, Pinkevitch, Cannon-Manning 
Semi-Micro, and Cannon Fenske Opaque. To calculate C at test 
temperatures other than the calibration temperature for these 
viscometers, see ASTM D2515-66, ``Kinematic Glass Viscometers'' or 
follow instructions given on the manufacturer's certificate of 
calibration.
    (b) Average the four timed runs on the duplicate samples to 
determine the kinematic viscosities.
    S6.3.7 Precision (at 95 percent confidence level).
    (a) Repeatability. If results on duplicate samples by the same 
operator differ by more than 1 percent of their mean, repeat the tests.
    S6.4 pH value. Determine the pH value of a brake fluid by running 
one sample according to the following procedure.
    S6.4.1 Summary of the procedure. Brake fluid is diluted with an 
equal volume of an ethanol-water solution. The pH of the resultant 
mixture is measured with a prescribed pH meter assembly at 23 [deg]C. 
(73.4 [deg]F.).
    S6.4.2 Apparatus. The pH assembly consists of the pH meter, glass 
electrode, and calomel electrode, as specified in Appendices A1.1, A1.2, 
and A1.3 of ASTM D 1121-67, ``Standard Method of Test for Reserve 
Alkalinity of Engine Antifreezes and Antirusts.'' The glass electrode is 
a full range type (pH 0-14), with low sodium error.
    S6.4.3 Reagents. Reagent grade chemicals conforming to the 
specifications of the Committee on Analytical Reagents of the American 
Chemical Society.

[[Page 581]]

    (a) Distilled water. Distilled water (S7.1) shall be boiled for 
about 15 minutes to remove carbon dioxide, and protected with a soda-
lime tube or its equivalent while cooling and in storage. (Take 
precautions to prevent contamination by the materials used for 
protection against carbon dioxide.) The pH of the boiled distilled water 
shall be between 6.2 and 7.2 at 25 [deg]C. (77 [deg]F.).
    (b) Standard buffer solutions. Prepare buffer solutions for 
calibrating the pH meter and electrode pair from salts sold specifically 
for use, either singly or in combination, as pH standards. Dry salts for 
1 hour at 110 [deg]C. (230 [deg]F.) before use except for borax which 
shall be used as the decahydrate. Store solutions with pH less than 9.5 
in bottles of chemically resistant glass or polyethylene. Store the 
alkaline phosphate solution in a glass bottle coated inside with 
paraffin. Do not use a standard with an age exceeding three months.
    (1) Potassium hydrogen phthalate buffer solution (0.05 M, pH=4.01 at 
25 [deg]C. (77 [deg]F.)). Dissolve 10.21 g. of potassium hydrogen 
phthalate (KHC<INF>8</INF> H<INF>4</INF> O<INF>4</INF>) in distilled 
water. Dilute to 1 liter.
    (2) Neutral phosphate buffer solution (0.025 M with respect to each 
phosphate salt, pH=6.86 at 25 [deg]C. (77 [deg]F.)). Dissolve 3.40 g. of 
potassium dihydrogen phosphate (KH<INF>2</INF> PO<INF>4</INF>) and 3.55 
g. of anhydrous disodium hydrogen phosphate (Na<INF>2</INF> 
HPO<INF>4</INF>) in distilled water.
    (3) Borax buffer solution (0.01 M, pH=9.18 at 25 [deg]C. (77 
[deg]F.)). Dissolve 3.81 g. of disodium tetraborate decahydrate 
(Na<INF>2</INF> B<INF>4</INF> O<INF>7</INF>[deg]10H<INF>2</INF>O) in 
distilled water, and dilute to 1 liter. Stopper the bottle except when 
actually in use.
    (4) Alkaline phosphate buffer solution (0.01 M trisodium phosphate, 
pH=11.72 at 25 [deg]C. (77 [deg]F.)). Dissolve 1.42 g. of anhydrous 
disodium hydrogen phosphate (Na<INF>2</INF> HPO<INF>4</INF>) in 100 ml. 
of a 0.1 M carbonate-free solution of sodium hydroxide. Dilute to 1 
liter with distilled water.
    (5) Potassium chloride electrolyte. Prepare a saturated solution of 
potassium chloride (KCl) in distilled water.
    (c) Ethanol-water mixture. To 80 parts by volume of ethanol (S7.3) 
add 20 parts by volume of distilled water. Adjust the pH of the mixture 
to 7 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 using 0.1 N sodium hydroxide (NaOH) 
solution. If more than 4 ml. of NaOH solution per liter of mixture is 
required for neutralization, discard the mixture.
    S6.4.4 Preparation of electrode system.
    (a) Maintenance of electrodes. Clean the glass electrode before 
using by immersing in cold chromic-acid cleaning solution. Drain the 
calomel electrode and fill with KCl electrolyte, keeping level above 
that of the mixture at all times. When not in use, immerse the lower 
halves of the electrodes in distilled water, and do not immerse in the 
mixture for any appreciable period of time between determinations.
    (b) Preparation of electrodes. Condition new glass electrodes and 
those that have been stored dry as recommended by the manufacturer. 
Before and after using, wipe the glass electrode thoroughly with a clean 
cloth, or a soft absorbent tissue, and rinse with distilled water. 
Before each pH determination, soak the prepared electrode in distilled 
water for at least 2 minutes. Immediately before use, remove any excess 
water from the tips of the electrode.
    S6.4.5 Standardization of the pH assembly and testing of the 
electrodes. (a) Immediately before use, standardize the pH assembly with 
a standard buffer solution. Then use a second standard buffer solution 
to check the linearity of the response of the electrodes at different pH 
values, and to detect a faulty glass electrode or incorrect temperature 
compensation. The two buffer solutions bracket the anticipated pH value 
of the test brake fluid.
    (b) Allow instrument to warm up, and adjust according to the 
manufacturer's instructions. Immerse the tips of the electrodes in a 
standard buffer solution and allow the temperature of the buffer 
solution and the electrodes to equalize. Set the temperature knob at the 
temperature of the buffer solution. Adjust the standardization or 
asymmetry potential control until the meter registers a scale reading, 
in pH units, equal to the known pH of the standardizing buffer solution.
    (c) Rinse the electrodes with distilled water and remove excess 
water from the tips. Immerse the electrodes in a second standard buffer 
solution. The reading of the meter shall agree with the known pH of the 
second standard

[[Page 582]]

buffer solution within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 unit without changing 
the setting of the standardization of asymmetry potential control.
    (d) A faulty electrode is indicated by failure to obtain a correct 
value for the pH of the second standard buffer solution after the meter 
has been standardized with the first.
    S6.4.6 Procedure. To 50 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml. of the test 
brake fluid add 50 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml. of the ethanol-water 
(S6.4.3(c)) and mix thoroughly. Immerse the electrodes in the mixture. 
Allow the system to come to equilibrium, readjust the temperature 
compensation if necessary, and take the pH reading.
    S6.5 Fluid stability. Evaluate the heat and chemical stability of a 
brake fluid by the following procedure, running duplicate samples for 
each test and averaging the results.
    S6.5.1 Summary of the procedure. The degradation of the brake fluid 
at elevated temperature, alone or in a mixture with a reference fluid, 
is evaluated by determining the change in boiling point after a period 
of heating under reflux conditions.
    S6.5.2 Apparatus. Use the apparatus and preparation specified in 
S6.1.2 and S6.1.3.
    S6.5.3 High temperature stability.
    S6.5.3.1 Procedure. (a) Heat a new 60 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml. 
sample of the brake fluid to 185[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. 
(365[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F.). Hold at this temperature 
for 120 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 minutes. Bring to a reflux rate in 
excess of 1 drop per second within 5 minutes. The reflux rate should not 
exceed 5 drops per second at any time. Over the next 5 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 minutes adjust the heating rate to obtain an 
equilibrium reflux rate of 1 to 2 drops per second. Maintain this rate 
for an additional 2 minutes, taking four temperature readings at 30-
second intervals. Average these as the observed ERBP. If no reflux is 
evident when the fluid temperature reaches 260 [deg]C. (500 [deg]F), 
discontinue heating and report ERBP as in excess of 260 [deg]C. (500 
[deg]F.).
    S6.5.3.2 Calculation. Correct the observed ERBP for thermometer and 
barometric pressure factors according to S6.1.5 (a) and (b). Average the 
corrected ERBP's of the duplicate samples. The difference between this 
average and the original ERBP obtained in S6.1 is the change in ERBP of 
the fluid.
    S6.5.4 Chemical stability.
    S6.5.4.1 Materials. SAE RM-66-04 Compatibility Fluid as described in 
appendix B of SAE Standard J1703 JAN 1995, ``Motor Vehicle Brake 
Fluid.'' (SAE RM-66-03 Compatibility Fluid as described in appendix A of 
SAE Standard J1703 Nov83, ``Motor Vehicle Brake Fluid,'' November 1983, 
may be used in place of SAE RM-66-04 until January 1, 1995.)
    S6.5.4.2 Procedure. (a) Mix 30 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml. of the 
brake fluid with 30 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml. of SAE RM-66-04 
Compatibility Fluid in a boiling point flask (S6.1.2(a)). Determine the 
initial ERBP of the mixture by applying heat to the flask so that the 
fluid is refluxing in 10 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 minutes at a rate in 
excess of 1 drop per second, but not more than 5 drops per second. Note 
the maximum fluid temperature observed during the first minute after the 
fluid begins refluxing at a rate in excess of 1 drop per second. Over 
the next 15 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 minutes, adjust and maintain the 
reflux rate at 1 to 2 drops per second. Maintain this rate for an 
additional 2 minutes, recording the average value of four temperature 
readings taken at 30 second intervals as the final ERBP.
    (b) Thermometer and barometric corrections are not required.
    S6.5.4.3 Calculation. The difference between the initial ERBP and 
the final average temperature is the change in temperature of the 
refluxing mixture. Average the results of the duplicates to the nearest 
0.5 [deg]C (1.0 [deg]F).
    S6.6 Corrosion. Evaluate the corrosiveness of a brake fluid by 
running duplicate samples according to the following procedure.
    S6.6.1 Summary of the procedure. Six specified metal corrosion test 
strips are polished, cleaned, and weighed, then assembled as described. 
Assembly is placed on a standard wheel cylinder cup in a corrosion test 
jar, immersed in the water-wet brake fluid, capped and placed in an oven 
at 100 [deg]C. (212 [deg]F.) for 120 hours. Upon removal and cooling, 
the strips, fluid, and cups are examined and tested.
    S6.6.2 Equipment. (a) Balance. An analytical balance having a 
minimum capacity of 50 grams and capable of weighing to the nearest 0.1 
mg.

[[Page 583]]

    (b) Desiccators. Desiccators containing silica gel or other suitable 
desiccant.
    (c) Oven. Gravity convection oven capable of maintaining the desired 
set point within 2 [deg]C. (3.6 [deg]F.).
    (d) Micrometer. A machinist's micrometer 25 to 50 mm. (1 to 2 
inches) capacity, or an optical comparator, capable of measuring the 
diameter of the SBR wheel cylinder (WC) cups to the nearest 0.02 mm. 
(0.001 inch).
    S6.6.3 Materials. (a) Corrosion test strips. Two sets of strips from 
each of the metals listed in appendix C of SAE Standard J1703b. Each 
strip shall be approximately 8 cm. long, 1.3 cm. wide, not more than 0.6 
cm. thick, and have a surface area of 25 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 sq. cm. 
and a hole 4 to 5 mm. (0.16 to 0.20 inch) in diameter on the centerline 
about 6 mm. from one end. The hole shall be clean and free from burrs. 
Tinned iron strips shall be unused. Other strips, if used, shall not be 
employed if they cannot be polished to a high finish.
    (b) SBR cups. Two unused standard SAE SBR wheel cylinder (WC) cups, 
as specified in S7.6.
    (c) Corrosion test jars and lids. Two screw-top straight-sided round 
glass jars, each having a capacity of approximately 475 ml. and inner 
dimensions of approximately 100 mm. in height and 75 mm. in diameter, 
and a tinned steel lid (no insert or organic coating) vented with a hole 
0.8 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 mm. (0.031 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.004 
inch) in diameter (No. 68 drill).
    (d) Machine screws and nuts. Clean, rust and oil-free, uncoated mild 
steel round or fillister head machine screws, size 6 or 8-32 UNC-Class 
2A, five-eighths or three-fourths inch long (or equivalent metric 
sizes), and matching uncoated nuts.
    (e) Supplies for polishing strips. Waterproof silicon carbide paper, 
grit No. 320A and grit 1200; lint-free polishing cloth.
    (f) Distilled water as specified in S7.1.
    (g) Ethanol as specified in S7.3.
    (h) Isopropanol as specified in S7.7.
    S6.6.4 Preparation.
    (a) Corrosion test strips. Except for the tinned iron strips, abrade 
corrosion test strips on all surface areas with 320A silicon carbide 
paper wet with ethanol (isopropanol when testing DOT 5 SBBF fluids) 
until all surface scratches, cuts and pits visible to an observer having 
corrected visual acuity of 20/40 (Snellen ratio) at a distance of 300 mm 
(11.8 inches) are removed. Use a new piece of paper for each different 
type of metal. Except for the tinned iron strips, further abrade the 
test strips on all surface areas with 1200 silicon carbide paper wet 
with ethanol (isopropanol when testing DOT 5 SBBF fluids), again using a 
new piece of paper for each different type of metal. Handle the strips 
with forceps after polishing. Weigh and record the weight of each strip 
to the nearest 0.1 mg. Assemble the strips on a clean dry machine screw, 
with matching plain nut, in the order of tinned iron, steel, aluminum, 
cast iron, brass, and copper. Bend the strips, other than the cast iron, 
so that there is a separation of 3 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>\1/2\ mm. (\1/
8\ <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>\1/64\ inch) between adjacent strips for a 
distance of about 5 cm. (2 inches) from the free end of the strips. (See 
Figure 4.) Tighten the screw on each test strip assembly so that the 
strips are in electrolytic contact, and can be lifted by either of the 
outer strips (tinned iron or copper) without any of the strips moving 
relative to the others when held horizontally. Immerse the strip 
assemblies in 90 percent ethyl alcohol. Dry with dried filtered 
compressed air, then desiccate at least 1 hour before use.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.046

                    Fig. 4--Corrosion Strip Assembly
    (b) SBR WC cups. Measure the base diameters of the two standard SBR 
cups, using an optical comparator or micrometer, to the nearest 0.02 mm.

[[Page 584]]

(0.001 inch) along the centerline of the SAE and rubber-type 
identifications and at right angles to this centerline. Take the 
measurements at least 0.4 mm. (0.015 inch) above the bottom edge and 
parallel to the base of the cup. Discard any cup if the two measured 
diameters differ by more than 0.08 mm. (0.003 inch). Average the two 
readings on each cup. Determine the hardness of the cups according to 
S7.4.
    S6.6.5 Procedure. Rinse the cups in ethanol (isopropanol when 
testing DOT 5 SBBF fluids) for not more than 30 seconds and wipe dry 
with a clean lint-free cloth. Place one cup with lip edge facing up, in 
each jar. Insert a metal strip assembly inside each cup with the 
fastened end down and the free end extending upward. (See Figure 5.) 
When testing brake fluids, except DOT 5 SBBF, mix 760 ml. of brake fluid 
with 40 ml. of distilled water. When testing DOT 5 SBBF's, humidify 800 
ml. of brake fluid in accordance with S6.2, eliminating determination of 
the ERBP. Using this water-wet mixture, cover each strip assembly to a 
minimum depth of 10 mm. above the tops of the strips. Tighten the lids 
and place the jars for 120 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 hours in an oven 
maintained at 100[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. (212[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F.). Allow the jars to cool at 23[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. (73.4[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.) 
for 60 to 90 minutes. Immediately remove the strips from the jars using 
forceps, agitating the strip assembly in the fluid to remove loose 
adhering sediment. Examine the test strips and jars for adhering 
crystalline deposits. Disassemble the metal strips, and remove adhering 
fluid by flushing with water; clean each strip by wiping with a clean 
cloth wetted with ethanol (isopropanol when testing DOT 5 fluids). 
Examine the strips for evidence of corrosion and pitting. Disregard 
staining or discoloration. Place the strips in a desiccator containing 
silica gel or other suitable desiccant, maintained at 23[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. (73.4[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.), 
for at least 1 hour. Weigh each strip to the nearest 0.1 mg. Determine 
the change in weight of each metal strip. Average the results for the 
two strips of each type of metal. Immediately following the cooling 
period, remove the cups from the jars with forceps. Remove loose 
adhering sediment by agitation of the cups in the mixture. Rinse the 
cups in ethanol (isopropanol when testing DOT 5 fluids) and air-dry. 
Examine the cups for evidence of sloughing, blisters, and other forms of 
disintegration. Measure the base diameter and hardness of each cup 
within 15 minutes after removal from the mixture. Examine the mixture 
for gelling. Agitate the mixture to suspend and uniformly disperse 
sediment. From each jar, transfer a 100 ml. portion of the mixture to an 
ASTM cone-shaped centrifuge tube. Determine the percent sediment after 
centrifuging as described in S7.5. Measure the pH value of the corrosion 
text fluid according to S6.4.6. Measure the pH value of the test mixture 
according to S6.4.6.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.047

                    Fig. 5--Corrosion Test Apparatus
    S6.6.6 Calculation. (a) Measure the area of each type of test strip 
to the nearest square centimeter. Divide the average change in mass for 
each type by the area of that type.
    (b) Note other data and evaluations indicating compliance with 
S5.1.6. In the event of a marginal pass on inspection by attributes, or 
of a failure in one of the duplicates, run another set of duplicate 
samples. Both repeat samples shall meet all requirements of S5.1.6.
    S6.7 Fluidity and appearance at low temperatures. Determine the 
fluidity and appearance of a sample of brake fluid at each of two 
selected temperatures by the following procedure.
    S6.7.1 Summary of procedure. Brake fluid is chilled to expected 
minimum

[[Page 585]]

exposure temperatures and observed for clarity, gellation, sediment, 
separation of components, excessive viscosity or thixotropy.
    S6.7.2 Apparatus. (a) Oil sample bottle. Two clear flint glass 4-
ounce bottles made especially for sampling oil and other liquids, with a 
capacity of approximately 125 ml., an outside diameter of 37 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 mm. and an overall height of 165 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 mm.
    (b) Cold chamber. An air bath cold chamber capable of maintaining 
storage temperatures down to minus 55 [deg]C. (minus 67 [deg]F.) with an 
accuracy of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. (3.6 [deg]F.).
    (c) Timing device. A timing device in accordance with S6.3.2(e).
    S6.7.3 Procedure. (a) Place 100 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml. of brake 
fluid at room temperature in an oil sample bottle. Stopper the bottle 
with an unused cork and place in the cold chamber at the higher storage 
temperature specified in Table II (S5.1.7(c)). After 144 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>4 hours remove the bottle from the chamber, quickly wipe 
it with a clean, lint-free cloth, saturated with ethanol (isopropanol 
when testing DOT 5 fluids) or acetone. Examine the fluid for evidence of 
sludging, sedimentation, crystallization, or stratification. Invert the 
bottle and determine the number of seconds required for the air bubble 
to travel to the top of the fluid. Let sample warm to room temperature 
and examine.
    (b) Repeat S6.7.3(a), substituting the lower cold chamber 
temperature specified in Table II, and a storage period of 6 hours 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>12 minutes.

    Note: Test specimens from either storage temperature may be used for 
the other only after warming up to room temperature.

    S6.8 [Reserved]
    S6.9 Water tolerance. Evaluate the water tolerance characteristics 
of a brake fluid by running one test specimen according to the following 
procedure.
    S6.9.1 Summary of the procedure.
    Brake fluid, except DOT 5 SBBF, is diluted with 3.5 percent water 
(DOT 5 SBBF is humidified), then stored at minus 40 [deg]C. (minus 40 
[deg]F.) for 120 hours. The cold, water-wet fluid is first examined for 
clarity, stratification, and sedimentation, then placed in an oven at 60 
[deg]C. (140 [deg]F.) for 24 hours. On removal, it is again examined for 
stratification, and the volume percent of sediment determined by 
centrifuging.
    S6.9.2 Apparatus.
    (a) Centrifuge tube. See S7.5.1(a).
    (b) Centrifuge. See S7.5.1(b).
    (c) Cold chamber. See S6.7.2(b).
    (d) Oven. Gravity or forced convection oven.
    (e) Timing device. See S6.3.2(e).
    S6.9.3 Procedure.
    (a) At low temperature. Humidify 100 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml. of 
DOT 5 SBBF brake fluid in accordance with S6.2 eliminating determination 
of the ERBP. When testing brake fluids except DOT 5 SBBF, mix 3.5 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 ml. of distilled water with 100 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml. of the brake fluid; pour into a centrifuge tube. 
Stopper the tube with a clean cork and place in the cold chamber 
maintained at minus 40 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. (minus 40 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F.). After 120 hours <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 
hours remove the tube, quickly wipe with clean lint-free cloth saturated 
with ethanol or acetone and examine the fluid for evidence of sludging, 
sedimentation, crystallization, or stratification. Invert the tube and 
determine the number of seconds required for the air bubble to travel to 
the top of the fluid. (The air bubble is considered to have reached the 
top of the fluid when the top of the bubble reaches the 2 ml. graduation 
of the centrifuge tube.) If the wet fluid has become cloudy, warm to 23 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. (73.4 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.) 
and note appearance and fluidity.
    (b) At 60 [deg]C. (140 [deg]F.). Place tube and brake fluid from 
S6.9.3(a) in an oven maintained at 60[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 
[deg]C. (140[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F.) for 24 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 hours. Remove the tube and immediately examine the 
contents for evidence of stratification. Determine the percent sediment 
by centrifuging as described in S7.5.
    S6.10 Compatibility. The compatibility of a brake fluid with other 
brake fluids shall be evaluated by running one test sample according to 
the following procedure.
    S6.10.1 Summary of the procedure.
    Brake fluid is mixed with an equal volume of SAE RM-66-04 
Compatibility Fluid, then tested in the same way as for water tolerance 
(S6.9) except that the bubble flow time is not measured. This test is an 
indication of the compatibility of the test fluid with other motor 
vehicle brake fluids at both high and low temperatures.

[[Page 586]]

    S6.10.2 Apparatus and materials.
    (a) Centrifuge tube. See S7.5.1(a).
    (b) Centrifuge. See S7.5.1(b).
    (c) Cold Chamber. See S6.7.2(b)
    (d) Oven. See S6.9.2(d)
    (e) SAE RM-66-04 Compatibility Fluid. As described in appendix B of 
SAE Standard J1703 JAN 1995 ``Motor Vehicle Brake Fluid.'' (SAE RM-66-03 
Compatibility Fluid as described in appendix A of SAE Standard J1703 
NOV83, ``Motor Vehicle Brake Fluid,'' November 1983, may be used in 
place of SAE RM-66-04 until January 1, 1995.)
    S6.10.3 Procedure.
    (a) At low temperature.
    Mix 50 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 mL of brake fluid with 50 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 mL of SAE RM-66-04 Compatibility Fluid. Pour this 
mixture into a centrifuge tube and stopper with a clean dry cork. Place 
tube in the cold chamber maintained at minus 40[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. (minus 40[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>4 
[deg]F). After 24 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 hours, remove tube, quickly 
wipe with a clean lint-free cloth saturated with ethanol (isopropanol 
when testing DOT 5 fluids) or acetone. Examine the test specimen for 
evidence of slugging, sedimentation, or crystallization. Test fluids, 
except DOT 5 SBBF, shall be examined for stratification.
    S6.11 Resistance to oxidation. The stability of a brake fluid under 
oxidative conditions shall be evaluated by running duplicate samples 
according to the following procedure.
    S6.11.1 Summary of procedure.
    Brake fluids, except DOT 5 SBBF, are activated with a mixture of 
approximately 0.2 percent benzoyl peroxide and 5 percent water. DOT 5 
SBBF is humidified in accordance with S6.2 eliminating determination of 
the ERBP, and then approximately 0.2 percent benzoyl peroxide is added. 
A corrosion test strip assembly consisting of cast iron and an aluminum 
strip separated by tinfoil squares at each end is then rested on a piece 
of SBR WC cup positioned so that the test strip is half immersed in the 
fluid and oven aged at 70 [deg]C. (158 [deg]F.) for 168 hours. At the 
end of this period, the metal strips are examined for pitting, etching, 
and loss of mass.
    S6.11.2 Equipment.
    (a) Balance. See S6.6.2(a).
    (b) Desiccators. See S6.6.2(b).
    (c) Oven. See S6.6.2(c).
    (d) Three glass test tubes approximately 22 mm. outside diameter by 
175 mm. in length.
    S6.11.3 Reagents and materials.
    (a) Benzoyl peroxide, reagent grade, 96 percent. (Benzoyl peroxide 
that is brownish, or dusty, or has less than 90 percent purity, must be 
discarded.) Reagent strength may be evaluated by ASTM E298-68, 
``Standard Methods for Assay of Organic Peroxides.''
    (b) Corrosion test strips. Two sets of cast iron and aluminum metal 
test strips as described in appendix C of SAE Standard J1703b.
    (c) Tinfoil. Four unused pieces of tinfoil approximately 12 mm. (\1/
2\ inch) square and between 0.02 and 0.06 mm. (0.0008 and 0.0024 inch) 
in thickness. The foil shall be at least 99.9 percent tin and contain 
not more than 0.025 percent lead.
    (d) SBR cups. Two unused, approximately one-eighth sections of a 
standard SAE SBR WC cup (as described in S7.6).
    (e) Machine screw and nut. Two clean oil-free, No. 6 or 8-32x\3/8\- 
or \1/2\-inch long (or equivalent metric size), round or fillister head, 
uncoated mild steel machine screws, with matching plain nuts.
    S6.11.4 Preparation.
    (a) Corrosion test strips. Prepare two sets of aluminum and cast 
iron test strips according to S6.6.4(a) except for assembly. Weigh each 
strip to the nearest 0.1 mg. and assemble a strip of each metal on a 
machine screw, separating the strips at each end with a piece of 
tinfoil. Tighten the nut enough to hold both pieces of foil firmly in 
place.
    (b) Test mixture.Place 30 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 ml. of the brake 
fluid under test in a 22 by 175 mm. test tube. For all fluids except DOT 
5 SBBF, add 0.060 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>.002 grams of benzoyl peroxide, 
and 1.50 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 ml. of distilled water. For DOT 5 
SBBF, use test fluid humidified in accordance with S6.2, and add only 
the benzoyl peroxide. Stopper the tube loosely with a clean dry cork, 
shake, and place in an oven for 2 hours at 70[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. (158[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F.). 
Shake every 15 minutes to effect solution of the peroxide, but do not 
wet cork. Remove the tube from the oven and allow to cool to 23[deg] 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. (73.4[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9

[[Page 587]]

[deg]F.) Begin testing according to paragraph S6.11.5 not later than 24 
hours after removal of tube from oven.
    S6.11.5 Procedure. Place a one-eighth SBR cup section in the bottom 
of each tube. Add 10 ml. of prepared test mixture to each test tube. 
Place a metal-strip assembly in each, the end of the strip without the 
screw resting on the rubber, and the solution covering about one-half 
the length of the strips. Stopper the tubes with clean dry corks and 
store upright for 70 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 hours at 23[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. (73.4[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.). 
Loosen the corks and place the tubes for 168 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 
hours in an oven maintained at 70[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. 
(158[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F.). Afterwards remove and 
disassemble strips. Examine the strips and note any gum deposits. Wipe 
the strips with a clean cloth wet with ethanol (isopropanol when testing 
DOT 5 fluids) and note any pitting, etching or roughening of surface 
disregarding stain or discoloration. Place the strips in a desiccator 
over silica gel or other suitable desiccant, at 23[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. (73.4[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.) 
for at least 1 hour. Again weigh each strip to the nearest 0.1 mg.
    S6.11.6 Calculation. Determine corrosion loss by dividing the change 
in mass of each metal strip by the total surface area of each strip 
measured in square millimeters (mm\2\), to the nearest square millimeter 
(mm\2\). Average the results for the two strips of each type of metal, 
rounding to the nearest 0.05 mg. per 100 square millimeter (mm\2\). If 
only one of the duplicates fails for any reason, run a second set of 
duplicate samples. Both repeat samples shall meet all requirements of 
S5.1.11.
    S6.12 Effect on SBR cups. The effects of a brake fluid in swelling, 
softening, and otherwise affecting standard SBR WC cups shall be 
evaluated by the following procedure.
    S6.12.1 Summary of the procedure. Four standard SAE SBR WC cups are 
measured and their hardnesses determined. The cups, two to a jar, are 
immersed in the test brake fluid. One jar is heated for 70 hours at 70 
[deg]C. (158 [deg]F), and the other for 70 hours at 120 [deg]C (248 
[deg]F). Afterwards, the cups are washed, examined for disintegration, 
remeasured and their hardnesses redetermined.
    S6.12.2 Equipment and supplies.
    (a) Oven. See S6.6.2(c).
    (b) Glass jars and lids. Two screw-top, straight-sided round glass 
jars, each having a capacity of approximately 250 ml. and inner 
dimensions of approximately 125 mm. in height and 50 mm. in diameter, 
and a tinned steel lid (no insert or organic coating).
    (c) SBR cups. See S7.6.
    S6.12.3 Preparation. Measure the base diameters of the SBR cups as 
described in S6.6.4(b), and the hardness of each as described in S7.4.
    S6.12.4 Procedure. Wash the cups in 90 percent ethanol (isopropanol 
when testing DOT 5 fluids) (see S7.3), for not longer than 30 seconds 
and quickly dry with a clean, lint-free cloth. Using forceps, place two 
cups into each of the two jars; add 75 ml. of brake fluid to each jar 
and cap tightly. Place one jar in an oven held at 70[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. (158 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F.) for 70 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 hours. Place the other jar in an oven held at 
120[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. (248[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3.6 [deg]F.) for 70 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 hours. Allow 
each jar to cool for 60 to 90 minutes at 23[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 
[deg]C. (73.4[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.). Remove cups, wash 
with ethanol (isopropanol when testing DOT 5 fluids) for not longer than 
30 seconds, and quickly dry. Examine the cups for disintegration as 
evidenced by stickiness, blisters, or sloughing. Measure the base 
diameter and hardness of each cup within 15 minutes after removal from 
the fluid.
    S6.12.5 Calculation. (a) Calculate the change in base diameter for 
each cup. If the two values, at each temperature, do not differ by more 
than 0.10 mm. (0.004 inch) average them to the nearest 0.02 mm. (0.001 
inch). If the two values differ by more than 0.10 mm., repeat the test 
at the appropriate temperature and average the four values as the change 
in base diameter.
    (b) Calculate the change in hardness for each cup. The average of 
the two values for each pair is the change in hardness.
    (c) Note disintegration as evidenced by stickiness, blisters, or 
sloughing.
    S6.13 Stroking properties. Evaluate the lubricating properties, 
component compatibility, resistance to leakage, and related qualities of 
a brake fluid by running one sample according to the following 
procedures.
    S6.13.1 Summary of the procedure. Brake fluid is stroked under 
controlled conditions at an elevated temperature

[[Page 588]]

in a simulated motor vehicle hydraulic braking system consisting of 
three slave wheel cylinders and an actuating master cylinder connected 
by steel tubing. Referee standard parts are used. All parts are 
carefully cleaned, examined, and certain measurements made immediately 
prior to assembly for test. During the test, temperature, rate of 
pressure rise, maximum pressure, and rate of stroking are specified and 
controlled. The system is examined periodically during stroking to 
assure that excessive leakage of fluid is not occurring. Afterwards, the 
system is torn down. Metal parts and SBR cups are examined and 
remeasured. The brake fluid and any resultant sludge and debris are 
collected, examined, and tested.
    S6.13.2 Apparatus and equipment.
    Either the drum and shoe type of stroking apparatus (see Figure 1 of 
SAE Standard J1703b) except using only three sets of drum and shoe 
assemblies, or the stroking fixture type apparatus as shown in Figure 2 
of SAE J1703Nov83, with the components arranged as shown in Figure 1 of 
SAE J1703Nov83. The following components are required.
    (a) Brake assemblies. With the drum and shoe apparatus: three drum 
and shoe assembly units (SAE RM-29a) consisting of three forward brake 
shoes and three reverse brake shoes with linings and three front wheel 
brake drum assemblies with assembly component parts. With stroking 
fixture type apparatus: three fixture units including appropriate 
adapter mounting plates to hold brake wheel cylinder assemblies.
    (b) Braking pressure actuation mechanism. An actuating mechanism for 
applying a force to the master cylinder pushrod without side thrust. The 
amount of force applied by the actuating mechanism shall be adjustable 
and capable of applying sufficient thrust to the master cylinder to 
create a pressure of at least 6895 kPa (1,000 p.s.i.) in the simulated 
brake system. A hydraulic gage or pressure recorder, having a range of 
at least 0 to 6895 kPa (0 to 1,000 p.s.i), shall be installed between 
the master cylinder and the brake assemblies and shall be provided with 
a shutoff valve and with a bleeding valve for removing air from the 
connecting tubing. The actuating mechanism shall be designed to permit 
adjustable stroking rates of approximately 1,000 strokes per hour. Use a 
mechanical or electrical counter to record the total number of strokes.
    (c) Heated air bath cabinet. An insulated cabinet or oven having 
sufficient capacity to house the three mounted brake assemblies or 
stroking fixture assemblies, master cylinder, and necessary connections. 
A thermostatically controlled heating system is required to maintain a 
temperature of 70[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C (158[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F) or 120[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C 
(248[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F). Heaters shall be shielded to 
prevent direct radiation to wheel or master cylinder.
    (d) Master cylinder (MC) assembly (SAE RM-15a). One cast iron 
housing hydraulic brake system cylinder having a diameter of 
approximately 28 mm. (1\1/8\ inch) and fitted for a filler cap and 
standpipe (see S6.13.2(e)). The MC piston shall be made from SAE CA360 
copperbase alloy (half hard). A new MC assembly is required for each 
test.
    (e) Filler cap and standpipe. MC filler cap provided with a glass or 
uncoated steel standpipe. Standpipe must provide adequate volume for 
thermal expansion, yet permit measurement and adjustment of the fluid 
level in the system to <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 ml. Cap and standpipe may 
be cleaned and reused.
    (f) Wheel cylinder (WC) assemblies (SAE RM-14a). Three unused cast 
iron housing straight bore hydraulic brake WC assemblies having 
diameters of approximately 28 mm (1\1/8\ inch) for each test. Pistons 
shall be made from unanodized SAE AA 2024 aluminum alloy.
    (g) Micrometer. Same as S6.6.2(d).
    S6.13.3 Materials.
    (a) Standard SBR brake cups. Six standard SAE SBR wheel cylinder 
test cups, one primary MC test cup, and one secondary MC test cup, all 
as described in S7.6, for each test.
    (b) Steel tubing. Double wall steel tubing meeting SAE specification 
J527. A complete replacement of tubing is essential when visual 
inspection indicates any corrosion or deposits on inner surface of 
tubing. Tubing from master cylinder to one wheel cylinder

[[Page 589]]

shall be replaced for each test (minimum length .9 m.) Uniformity in 
tubing size is required between master cylinder and wheel cylinder. The 
standard master cylinder has two outlets for tubing, both of which must 
be used.
    S6.13.4 Preparation of test apparatus.
    (a) Wheel cylinder assemblies. Use unused wheel cylinder assemblies. 
Disassemble cylinders and discard cups. Clean all metal parts with 
ethanol (isopropanol when testing DOT 5 fluids). Inspect the working 
surfaces of all metal parts for scoring, galling, or pitting and 
cylinder bore roughness, and discard all defective parts. Remove any 
stains on cylinder walls with crocus cloth and ethanol (isopropanol when 
testing DOT 5 fluids). If stains cannot be removed, discard the 
cylinder. Measure the internal diameter of each cylinder at a location 
approximately 19 mm. (0.75 inch) from each end of the cylinder bore, 
taking measurements in line with the hydraulic inlet opening and at 
right angles to this centerline. Discard the cylinder if any of these 
four readings exceeds the maximum or minimum limits of 28.66 to 28.60 
mm. (1.128 to 1.126 inch). Measure the outside diameter of each piston 
at two points approximately 90[deg] apart. Discard any piston if either 
reading exceeds the maximum or minimum limits of 28.55 to 28.52 mm. 
(1.124 to 1.123 inch). Select parts to insure that the clearance between 
each piston and mating cylinder is within 0.08 to 0.13 mm. (0.003 to 
0.005 inch). Use unused SBR cups. To remove dirt and debris, rinse the 
cups in 90 percent ethyl alcohol for not more than 30 seconds and wipe 
dry with a clean lint-free cloth. Discard any cups showing defects such 
as cuts, molding flaws, or blisters. Measure the lip and base diameters 
of all cups with an optical comparator or micrometer to the nearest 0.02 
mm. (0.001 inch) along the centerline of the SAE and rubber-type 
identifications and at right angles to this centerline. Determine base 
diameter measurements at least 0.4 mm. (0.015 inch) above the bottom 
edge and parallel to the base of the cup. Discard any cup if the two 
measured lip or base diameters differ by more than 0.08 mm. (0.003 
inch). Average the lip and base diameters of each cup. Determine the 
hardness of all cups according to S7.4. Dip the rubber and metal parts 
of wheel cylinders, except housing and rubber boots, in the fluid to be 
tested and install them in accordance with the manufacturer's 
instructions. Manually stroke the cylinders to insure that they operate 
easily. Install cylinders in the simulated brake system.
    (b) Master cylinder assembly. Use an unused master cylinder and 
unused standard SBR primary and secondary MC cups which have been 
inspected, measured and cleaned in the manner specified in S6.13.4(a), 
omitting hardness of the secondary MC cup. However, prior to determining 
the lip and base diameters of the secondary cup, dip the cup in test 
brake fluid, assemble on the MC piston, and maintain the assembly in a 
vertical position at 23[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. (73.4[deg] 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.) for at least 12 hours. Inspect the 
relief and supply ports of the master cylinder; discard the cylinder if 
ports have burrs or wire edges. Measure the internal diameter of the 
cylinder at two locations (approximately midway between the relief and 
supply ports and approximately 19 mm. (0.75 inch) beyond the relief port 
toward the bottom or discharge end of the bore), taking measurements at 
each location on the vertical and horizontal centerline of the bore. 
Discard the cylinder if any reading exceeds the maximum or minimum 
limits of 28.65 to 28.57 mm. (1.128 to 1.125 inch). Measure the outside 
diameter of each end of the master cylinder piston at two points 
approximately 90[deg] apart. Discard the piston if any of these four 
readings exceed the maximum or minimum limits of 28.55 to 28.52 mm. 
(1.124 to 1.123 inch). Dip the rubber and metal parts of the master 
cylinder, except the housing and push rod-boot assembly, in the brake 
fluid and install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. 
Manually stroke the master cylinder to insure that it operates easily. 
Install the master cylinder in the simulated brake system.
    (c) Assembly and adjustment of test apparatus.
    (1) When using a shoe and drum type apparatus, adjust the brake shoe 
toe clearances to 1.0 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 mm (0.040 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.004 inch). Fill the system with brake fluid, bleeding 
all wheel cylinders and the pressure gage to remove entrapped air.

[[Page 590]]

Operate the actuator manually to apply a pressure greater than the 
required operating pressure and inspect the system for leaks. Adjust the 
actuator and/or pressure relief valve to obtain a pressure of 6895 kPa 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>345 kPa (1,000 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>50 p.s.i.). A 
smooth pressure stroke pattern is required when using a shoe and drum 
type apparatus. The pressure is relatively low during the first part of 
the stroke and then builds up smoothly to the maximum stroking pressure 
at the end of the stroke, to permit the primary cup to pass the 
compensating hole at a relatively low pressure. Using stroking fixtures, 
adjust the actuator and/or pressure relief valve to obtain a pressure of 
6895 kPa <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>345 kPa (1,000 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>50 
p.s.i.).
    (2) Adjust the stroking rate to 1,000 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>100 
strokes per hour. Record the fluid level in the master cylinder 
standpipe.
    S6.13.5 Procedure. Operate the system for 16,000 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1,000 cycles at 23[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. 
(73.4[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.). Repair any leakage, 
readjust the brake shoe clearances, and add fluid to the master cylinder 
standpipe to bring to the level originally recorded, if necessary. Start 
the test again and raise the temperature of the cabinet within 6 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 hours to 120[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. 
(248[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.). During the test observe 
operation of wheel cylinders for improper functioning and record the 
amount of fluid required to replenish any loss, at intervals of 24,000 
strokes. Stop the test at the end of 85,000 total recorded strokes. 
These totals shall include the number of strokes during operation at 
23[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C. (73.4[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>9 [deg]F.) and the number of strokes required to bring 
the system to the operating temperature. Allow equipment to cool to room 
temperature. Examine the wheel cylinders for leakage. Stroke the 
assembly an additional 100 strokes, examine wheel cylinders for leakage 
and record volume loss of fluid. Within 16 hours after stopping the 
test, remove the master and wheel cylinders from the system, retaining 
the fluid in the cylinders by immediately capping or plugging the ports. 
Disassemble the cylinders, collecting the fluid from the master cylinder 
and wheel cylinders in a glass jar. When collecting the stroked fluid, 
remove all residue which has deposited on rubber and metal internal 
parts by rinsing and agitating such parts in the stroked fluid and using 
a soft brush to assure that all loose adhering sediment is collected. 
Clean SBR cups in ethanol (isopropanol when testing DOT 5 fluids) and 
dry. Inspect the cups for stickiness, scuffing, blistering, cracking, 
chipping, and change in shape from original appearance. Within 1 hour 
after disassembly, measure the lip and base diameters of each cylinder 
cup by the procedures specified in S6.13.4 (a) and (b) with the 
exception that lip or base diameters of cups may now differ by more than 
0.08 mm. (0.003 inch). Determine the hardness of each cup according to 
S7.4. Note any sludge or gel present in the test fluid. Within 1 hour 
after draining the cylinders, agitate the fluid in a glass jar to 
suspend and uniformly disperse sediment and transfer a 100 ml. portion 
of this fluid to a centrifuge tube and determine percent sediment as 
described in S7.5. Allow the tube and fluid to stand for 24 hours, 
recentrifuge and record any additional sediment recovered. Inspect 
cylinder parts, note any gumming or any pitting on pistons and cylinder 
walls. Disregard staining or discoloration. Rub any deposits adhering to 
cylinder walls with a clean soft cloth wetted with ethanol (isopropanol 
when testing DOT 5 fluids) to determine abrasiveness and removability. 
Clean cylinder parts in ethanol (isopropanol when testing DOT 5 fluids) 
and dry. Measure and record diameters of pistons and cylinders according 
to S6.13.4(a) and (b). Repeat the test if mechanical failure occurs that 
may affect the evaluation of the brake fluid.
    S6.13.6 Calculation. (a) Calculate the changes in diameters of 
cylinders and pistons (see S5.1.13(b)).
    (b) Calculate the average decrease in hardness of the seven cups 
tested, as well as the individual values (see S5.1.13(c)).
    (c) Calculate the increases in base diameters of the eight cups (see 
S5.1.13(e)).
    (d) Calculate the lip diameter interference set for each of the 
eight cups by the following formula and average the eight values (see 
S5.1.13(f)).

[(D<INF>1</INF>-D<INF>2</INF>)/(D<INF>1</INF>-
    D<INF>3</INF>)]x100=percentage Lip Diameter Interference Set
where:


[[Page 591]]


D<INF>1</INF>=Original lip diameter.
D<INF>2</INF>=Final lip diameter.
D<INF>3</INF>=Original cylinder bore diameter.

    S6.14 Container information. Each container with information marked 
directly on the container surface or on a label (labels) affixed to the 
container pursuant to S5.2.2.2 or S5.2.2.3 is subjected to the following 
procedure:
    (a) If the container has a label affixed to it, make a single 
vertical cut all the way through the label with the container in the 
vertical position.
    (b) Immerse the container in the same brake fluid or hydraulic 
system mineral oil contained therein for 15 minutes at room temperature 
(23 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]C; 73.4 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 
[deg]F).
    (c) Within 5 minutes after removing the container from the fluid or 
oil, remove excess liquid from the surface of the container by wiping 
with a clean dry cloth.
    S7. Auxiliary test methods and reagent standards.
    S7.1 Distilled water. Nonreferee reagent water as specified in ASTM 
D1193-70, ``Standard Specifications for Reagent Water,'' or water of 
equal purity.
    S7.2 Water content of motor vehicle brake fluids. Use analytical 
methods based on ASTM D1123-59, ``Standard Method of Test for Water in 
Concentrated Engine Antifreezes by the Iodine Reagent Method,'' for 
determining the water content of brake fluids, or other methods of 
analysis yielding comparable results. To be acceptable for use, such 
other method must measure the weight of water added to samples of the 
SAE RM-66-04 and TEGME Compatibility Fluids within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>15 percent of the water added for additions up to 0.8 
percent by weight, and within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent of the 
water added for additions greater than 0.8 percent by weight. The SAE 
RM-66-04 Compatibility Fluid used to prepare the samples must have an 
original ERBP of not less than 205 [deg]C (401 [deg]F) when tested in 
accordance with S6.1. The SAE TEGME fluid used to prepare the samples 
must have an original ERBP of not less than 240 [deg]C (464 [deg]F) when 
tested in accordance with S6.1.
    S7.3 Ethanol. 95 percent (190 proof) ethyl alcohol, USP or ACS, or 
Formula 3-A Specially Denatured Alcohol of the same concentration (as 
specified at 27 CFR 21.35). For pretest washings of equipment, use 
approximately 90 percent ethyl alcohol, obtained by adding 5 parts of 
distilled water to 95 parts of ethanol.
    S7.4 Measuring the hardness of SBR brake cups. Hardness measurements 
on SBR wheel cylinder cups and master cylinder primary cups shall be 
made by using the following apparatus and the following procedure.
    S7.4.1 Apparatus.
    (a) Anvil. A rubber anvil having a flat circular top 20 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1 mm. (\13/16\ <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>\1/16\ inch) in 
diameter, a thickness of at least 9 mm. (\3/8\ inch) and a hardness 
within 5 IRHDs of the SBR test cup.
    (b) Hardness tester. A hardness tester meeting the requirements for 
the standard instrument as described in ASTM D1415-68, ``Standard Method 
of Test for International Hardness of Vulcanized Natural and Synthetic 
Rubbers,'' and graduated directly in IRHD units.
    S7.4.2 Procedure. Make hardness measurements at 23[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. (73.4[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>4 [deg]F.). 
Equilibrate the tester and anvils at this temperature prior to use. 
Center brake cups lip side down on an anvil of appropriate hardness. 
Following the manufacturer's operating instructions for the hardness 
tester, make one measurement at each of four points 6 mm from the center 
of the cup and spaced 90[deg] apart. Average the four values, and round 
off to the nearest IRHD.
    S7.5 Sediment by centrifuging. The amount of sediment in the test 
fluid shall be determined by the following procedure.
    S7.5.1 Apparatus.
    (a) Centrifuge tube. Cone-shaped centrifuge tubes conforming to the 
dimensions given in Figure 6, and made of thoroughly annealed glass. The 
graduations shall be numbered as shown in Figure 6, and shall be clear 
and distinct. Scale-error tolerances and smallest graduations between 
various calibration marks are given in Table V and apply to calibrations 
made with air-free water at 20 [deg]C. (68 [deg]F.).

[[Page 592]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.048

                   Fig. 6--ASTM 8-in. Centrifuge Tube

       Table V--Calibration Tolerances for 8-Inch Centrifuge Tube
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Volume
                   Range, ml                    Subdivision,  tolerance,
                                                     ml           ml
------------------------------------------------------------------------
0 to 0.1......................................         0.05       <plus-
                                                              minus<ls-t
                                                                   h0.02
Above 0.1 to 0.3..............................         0.05       <plus-
                                                              minus<ls-t
                                                                   h0.03
Above 0.3 to 0.5..............................         0.05       <plus-
                                                              minus<ls-t
                                                                   h0.05
Above 0.5 to 1................................         0.10       <plus-
                                                              minus<ls-t
                                                                   h0.05
Above 1 to 2..................................         0.10       <plus-
                                                              minus<ls-t
                                                                   h0.10
Above 2 to 3..................................         0.20       <plus-
                                                              minus<ls-t
                                                                   h0.10
Above 3 to 5..................................          0.5       <plus-
                                                              minus<ls-t
                                                                   h0.20
Above 5 to 10.................................           1.       <plus-
                                                              minus<ls-t
                                                                   h0.50
Above 10 to 25................................           5.       <plus-
                                                              minus<ls-t
                                                                   h1.00
Above 25 to 100...............................          25.       <plus-
                                                              minus<ls-t
                                                                   h1.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Centrifuge. A centrifuge capable of whirling two or more filled 
centrifuge tubes at a speed which can be controlled to give a relative 
centrifugal force (r.c.f.) between 600 and 700 at the tip of the tubes. 
The revolving head, trunnion rings, and trunnion cups, including the 
rubber cushion, shall withstand the maximum centrifugal force capable of 
being delivered by the power source. The trunnion cups and cushions 
shall firmly support the tubes when the centrifuge is in motion. 
Calculate the speed of the rotating head using this equation:

r.p.m. = 265[[radic]25.4xr.c.f./d]

Where:
r.c.f. = Relative centrifugal force, and
d = Diameter of swing, in millimeters, measured between tips of opposing 
tubes when in rotating position.

    Table VI shows the relationship between diameter, swing, relative 
centrifugal force (r.c.f.), and revolutions per minute.

     Table VI--Rotation Speeds for Centrifuges of Various Diameters
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               r.p.m. at
       Diameter of swing in millimeters \a\         r.p.m. at     700
                                                    600 r.c.f    r.c.f.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
483...............................................       1490       1610
508...............................................       1450       1570
533...............................................       1420       1530
559...............................................       1390       1500
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\a\ Measured in millimeters between tips of opposite tubes when in
  rotating position.

    S7.5.2 Procedure. Balance the corked centrifuge tubes with their 
respective trunnion cups in pairs by weight on a scale, according to the 
centrifuge manufacturer's instructions, and place them on opposite sides 
of the centrifuge head. Use a dummy assembly when one sample is tested. 
Then whirl them for 10 minutes, at a rate sufficient to produce a r.c.f. 
between 600 and 700 at the tips of the whirling tubes. Repeat until the 
volume of sediment in each tube remains constant for three consecutive 
readings.
    S7.5.3 Calculation. Read the volume of the solid sediment at the 
bottom of the centrifuge tube and report the percent sediment by volume. 
Where replicate determinations are specified, report the average value.
    S7.6 Standard styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR) brake cups. SBR brake 
cups for testing motor vehicle brake fluids shall be manufactured using 
the following formulation:

                     Formulation of Rubber Compound
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Parts by
                         Ingredient                             weight
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SBR type 1503 \a\...........................................         100
Oil furnace black (NBS 378).................................          40
Zinc oxide (NBS 370)........................................           5
Sulfur (NBS 371)............................................        0.25
Stearic Acid (NBS 372)......................................           1
n-tertiary butyl-2-benzothiazole sulfenamide (NBS 384)......           1
Symmetrical dibetanaphthyl-p-phenylenediamine...............         1.5
Dicumyl peroxide (40 percent on precipitated CaCO3) \b\.....         4.5
                                                             -----------

[[Page 593]]

 
 Total......................................................      153.25
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\a\ Philprene 1503 has been found suitable.
\b\ Use only within 90 days of manufacture and store at temperature
  below 27 [deg]C. (80 [deg]F.).
 
Note: The ingredients labeled (NBS) must have properties identical with
  those supplied by the National Bureau of Standards.


Compounding, vulcanization, physical properties, size of the finished 
cups, and other details shall be as specified in appendix B of SAE 
J1703b. The cups shall be used in testing brake fluids either within 6 
months from date of manufacture when stored at room temperature below 30 
[deg]C. (86 [deg]F.) or within 36 months from date of manufacture when 
stored at temperatures below minus 15 [deg]C. (+5 [deg]F.). After 
removal of cups from refrigeration they shall be conditioned base down 
on a flat surface for at least 12 hours at room temperature in order to 
allow cups to reach their true configuration before measurement.
    S7.7 Isopropanol. ACS or reagent grade.

[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.116, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.


<R05>
Sec. 571.117  Standard No. 117; Retreaded pneumatic tires.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies performance, labeling, and 
certification requirements for retreaded pneumatic passenger car tires.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to require retreaded 
pneumatic passenger car tires to meet safety criteria similar to those 
for new pneumatic passenger car tires.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to retreaded pneumatic tires 
for use on passenger cars manufactured after 1948.
    S4. Definitions.
    S4.1 Casing means a used tire to which additional tread may be 
attached for the purpose of retreading.
    Retreaded means manufactured by a process in which a tread is 
attached to a casing.
    S4.2 All terms defined in Sec. Sec. 571.109 and 571.110 are used as 
defined therein.
    S5. Requirements.
    S5.1 Retreaded tires.
    S5.1.1 Except as specified in S5.1.3, each retreaded tire, when 
mounted on a test rim of the width specified for the tire's size 
designation in appendix A of Sec. 571.109 shall comply with the 
following requirements of Sec. 571.109:
    (a) S4.1 (Size and construction).
    (b) S4.2.1 (General).
    (c) S4.2.2.3 (Tubeless tire resistance to bead unseating).
    (d) S4.2.2.4 (Tire strength).
    S5.1.2 Except as specified in S5.1.3, each retreaded tire, when 
mounted on a test rim of the width specified for the tire's size 
designation in appendix A of Sec. 571.109, shall comply with the 
requirements of S4.2.2.2 of Sec. 571.109, except that the tire's 
section width shall not be more than 110 percent of the section width 
specified, and the tire's size factor shall be at least 97 percent of 
the size factor specified, in appendix A of Sec. 571.109 for the tire's 
size designation.
    S5.1.3 Each retreaded tire shall be capable of meeting the 
requirements of S5.1.1 and S5.1.2 when mounted on any rim in accordance 
with those sections.
    S5.1.4 No retreaded tire shall have a size designation, recommended 
maximum load rating, or maximum permissible inflation pressure that is 
greater than that originally specified on the casing pursuant to S4.3 of 
Sec. 571.109, or specified for the casing in Table I.
    S5.2 Casings.
    S5.2.1 No retreaded tire shall be manufactured with a casing--
    (a) On which bead wire or cord fabric is exposed before processing.
    (b) On which any cord fabric is exposed during processing, except 
that cord fabric that is located at a splice, i.e., where two or more 
segments of the same ply overlap, or cord fabric that is part of the 
belt material, may be exposed but shall not be penetrated or removed to 
any extent whatsoever.
    S5.2.2 No retreaded tire shall be manufactured with a casing--
    (a) From which a belt or ply, or part thereof, is removed during 
processing; or
    (b) On which a belt or ply, or part thereof, is added or replaced 
during processing.

[[Page 594]]

    S5.2.3 Each retreaded tire shall be manufactured with a casing that 
bears, permanently molded at the time of its original manufacture into 
or onto the tire sidewall, each of the following:
    (a) The symbol DOT;
    (b) The size of the tire; and
    (c) The actual number of plies or ply rating.
    S5.2.4 [Reserved]
    S6. Certification and labeling.
    S6.1 Each manufacturer of a retreaded tire shall certify that its 
product complies with this standard pursuant to Section 30115 of Title 
49, United States Code, by labeling the tire with the symbol DOT in the 
location specified in section 574.5 of this chapter.
    S6.2 [Reserved]
    S6.3. Labeling. Each retreaded tire shall comply, according to the 
phase-in schedule specified in S7 of this standard, with the 
requirements of S5.5 and S5.5.1 of Sec. 571.139.
    S7. Phase-In Schedule for labeling
    S7.1. Tires retreaded on or after September 1, 2005 and before 
September 1, 2006. For tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 
and before September 1, 2006, the number of tires complying with S6.3 of 
this standard must be equal to not less than 40% of the retreader's 
production during that period.
    S7.2. Tires retreaded on or after September 1, 2006 and before 
September 1, 2007. For tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2006 
and before September 1, 2007, the number of tires complying with S6.3 of 
this standard must be equal to not less than 70% of the retreader's 
production during that period.
    S7.3. Tires retreaded on or after September 1, 2007. Each tire must 
comply with S6.3 of this standard.

[37 FR 5952, Mar. 23, 1972, as amended at 37 FR 11775, June 14, 1972; 38 
FR 2982, Jan. 31, 1973; 38 FR 6999, Mar. 15, 1973; 38 FR 9688, Apr. 19, 
1973; 39 FR 1443, Jan. 9, 1974; 39 FR 3553, Jan. 28, 1974; 39 FR 36016, 
Oct. 7, 1974; 39 FR 39884, Nov. 12, 1974; 61 FR 29494, June 11, 1996; 63 
FR 28920, May 27, 1998; 67 FR 69627, Nov. 18, 2002; 69 FR 31319, June 3, 
2004]

    Editorial Note: For an interpretation of Sec. 571.117, see 38 FR 
10940, May 3, 1973.


<R05>
Sec. 571.118  Standard No. 118; Power-operated window, partition, and roof 

panel systems.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard specifies requirements for 
power operated window, partition, and roof panel systems to minimize the 
likelihood of death or injury from their accidental operation.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, and trucks with a gross vehicle weight 
rating of 4,536 kilograms or less. This standard's inadvertent actuation 
performance requirements of S6(a) need not be met for vehicles 
manufactured before October 1, 2008. The standard's pull-to-close switch 
operability requirements of S6(c) need not be met for vehicles 
manufactured before October 1, 2010.
    S3. Definitions.
    Infrared reflectance means the ratio of the intensity of infrared 
light reflected and scattered by a flat sample of the test rod material 
to the intensity of infrared light reflected and scattered by a mirror 
that reflects 99.99 percent of the infrared radiation incident on its 
surface as measured by the apparatus show in Figure 2.
    Power operated roof panel systems mean moveable panels in the 
vehicle roof which close by vehicle supplied power either by a sliding 
or hinged motion, and do not include convertible top systems.
    S4. Operating requirements. Except as provided in S5, power operated 
window, partition, or roof panel systems may be closed only in the 
following circumstances:
    (a) When the key that controls activation of the vehicle's engine is 
in the ``ON'', ``START'', or ``ACCESSORY'' position;
    (b) By muscular force unassisted by vehicle supplied power;
    (c) Upon continuous activation by a locking system on the exterior 
of the vehicle;
    (d) Upon continuous activation of a remote actuation device, 
provided that the remote actuation device shall be incapable of closing 
the power window, partition or roof panel from a distance of more than 6 
meters from the vehicle;
    (e) During the interval between the time the locking device which 
controls

[[Page 595]]

the activation of the vehicle's engine is turned off and the opening of 
either of a two-door vehicle's doors or, in the case of a vehicle with 
more than two doors, the opening of either of its front doors;
    (f) If the window, partition, or roof panel is in a static position 
before starting to close and in that position creates an opening so 
small that a 4 mm diameter semi-rigid cylindrical rod cannot be placed 
through the opening at any location around its edge in the manner 
described in S5(b); or
    (g) Upon continuous activation of a remote actuation device, 
provided that the remote actuation device shall be incapable of closing 
the power window, partition or roof panel if the device and the vehicle 
are separated by an opaque surface and provided that the remote 
actuation device shall be incapable of closing the power window, 
partition or roof panel from a distance of more than 11 meters from the 
vehicle.
    S5. Automatic reversal systems. A power-operated window, partition, 
or roof panel system that is capable of closing or of being closed under 
any circumstances other than those specified in S4 shall meet the 
requirements of S5.1, S5.2, and, if applicable, S5.3.
    S5.1. While closing, the power-operated window, partition, or roof 
panel shall stop and reverse direction either before contacting a test 
rod with properties described in S8.2 or S8.3, or before exerting a 
squeezing force of 100 newtons (N) or more on a semi-rigid cylindrical 
test rod with the properties described in S8.1, when such test rod is 
placed through the window, partition, or roof panel opening at any 
location in the manner described in the applicable test under S7.
    S5.2. Upon reversal, the power-operated window, partition, or roof 
panel system must open to one of the following positions, at the 
manufacturer's option:
    (a) A position that is at least as open as the position at the time 
closing was initiated;
    (b) A position that is not less than 125 millimeters (mm) more open 
than the position at the time the window reversed direction; or
    (c) A position that permits a semi-rigid cylindrical rod that is 200 
mm in diameter to be placed through the opening at the same location as 
the rod described in S7.1 or S7.2(b).
    S5.3. If a vehicle uses proximity detection by infrared reflection 
to stop and reverse a power-operated window, partition, or roof panel, 
the infrared source shall project infrared light at a wavelength of not 
less than 850 nm and not more than 1050 nm. The system shall meet the 
requirements in S5.1 and S5.2 in all ambient light conditions from total 
darkness to 64,500 lux (6,000 foot candles) incandescent light 
intensity.
    S6 Actuation Devices. Except as provided in paragraph S6(b), 
actuation devices in the occupant compartments of vehicles used to close 
power-operated windows, partitions, and roof panels must meet the 
following requirements:
    (a) An actuation device must not cause a window, partition, or roof 
panel to begin to close from any open position when tested as follows:
    (1) Using a stainless steel sphere having a surface finish between 8 
and 4 micro inches and a radius of 20 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.2 mm, 
place the surface of the sphere against any portion of the actuation 
device.
    (2) Apply a force not to exceed 135 Newtons (30 pounds) through the 
geometric center of the sphere. This force may be applied at any angle 
with respect to the actuation device.
    (3) For actuation devices that cannot be contacted by the sphere 
specified in S6(a)(1) prior to the application of force, apply a force 
up to the level specified in S6(a)(2) at any angle in an attempt to make 
contact with the actuation device. The sphere is directionally applied 
in such a manner that, if unimpeded, it would make contact with the 
actuation device.
    (b) The requirement in S6(a) does not apply to either--
    (1) actuation devices that are mounted in a vehicle's roof, 
headliner, or overhead console that can close power-operated windows, 
partitions, or roof panels only by continuous rather than momentary 
switch actuation, or
    (2) actuation devices for closing power-operated windows, 
partitions, or roof panels which comply with paragraph S5.

[[Page 596]]

    (c) Any actuation device for closing a power-operated window must 
operate by pulling away from the surface in the vehicle on which the 
device is mounted. An actuation device for closing a power-operated 
window must operate only when pulled vertically up (if mounted on the 
top of a horizontal surface), or out (if mounted on a vertical surface), 
or down (if mounted on the underside of an overhead surface), or in a 
direction perpendicular to the surrounding surface if mounted in a 
sloped orientation, in order to cause the window to move in the closing 
direction.
    S7. Test procedures.
    S7.1. Test procedure for testing power-operated window, partition, 
or roof panel systems designed to detect obstructions by physical 
contact or by light beam interruption: Place the test rod of the type 
specified in S8.1 or S8.2, as appropriate, through the window, 
partition, or roof panel opening from the inside of the vehicle such 
that the cylindrical surface of the rod contacts any part of the 
structure with which the window, partition, or roof panel mates. Typical 
placements of test rods are illustrated in Figure 1. Attempt to close 
the power window, partition, or roof panel by operating the actuation 
device provided in the vehicle for that purpose.
    S7.2. Test procedure for testing power-operated window, partition, 
or roof panel systems designed to detect the proximity of obstructions 
using infrared reflectance:
    (a) Place the vehicle under incandescent lighting that projects 
64,500 lux (6,000 foot candles) onto the infrared sensor. The light is 
projected onto the infrared sensor by aiming the optical axis of a light 
source outside the vehicle as perpendicular as possible to the lens of 
the infrared sensor. The intensity of light is measured perpendicular to 
the plane of the lens of the infrared sensor, as close as possible to 
the center of the lens of the infrared sensor.
    (b) Place a test rod of the type specified in S8.3 in the window, 
partition, or roof panel opening, with the window, partition, or roof 
panel in any position. While keeping the rod stationary, attempt to 
close the window, partition, or roof panel by operating the actuation 
device provided in the vehicle for that purpose. Remove the test rod. 
Fully open the window, partition, or roof panel, and then begin to close 
it. While the window, partition, or roof panel is closing, move a test 
rod so that it approaches and ultimately extends through (if necessary) 
the window, partition, or roof panel opening, or its frame, in any 
orientation from the interior of the vehicle. For power partitions that 
have occupant compartment space on both sides of the partition, move the 
test rod into the partition opening from either side of the partition.
    (c) Repeat the steps in S7.2(a) and (b) with other ambient light 
conditions within the range specified in S5.3.
    S8. Test rods.
    S8.1. Rods for testing systems designed to detect obstructions by 
physical contact:
    (a) Each test rod is of cylindrical shape with any diameter in the 
range from 4 mm to 200 mm and is of sufficient length that it can be 
hand-held during the test specified in S7 with only the test rod making 
any contact with any part of the window, partition, or roof panel or 
mating surfaces of the window, partition, or roof panel.
    (b) Each test rod has a force-deflection ratio of not less than 65 
N/mm for rods 25 mm or smaller in diameter, and not less than 20 N/mm 
for rods larger than 25 mm in diameter.
    S8.2. Rods for testing systems designed to detect obstructions by 
light beam interruption: Each test rod has the shape and dimensions 
specified in S8.1 and is, in addition, opaque to infrared, visible, and 
ultraviolet light.
    S8.3. Rods for testing systems designed to detect the proximity of 
obstructions using infrared reflection:
    (a) Each rod is constructed so that its surface has an infrared 
reflectance of not more than 1.0 percent when measured by the apparatus 
in Figure 2, in accordance with the procedure in S9.
    (b) Each rod has the shape and dimensions specified in Figure 3.
    S9. Procedure for measuring infrared reflectance of test rod surface 
material.
    (a) The infrared reflectance of the rod surface material is measured 
using a flat sample and an infrared light source and sensor operating at 
a wavelength of 950 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>100 nm.
    (b) The intensity of incident infrared light is determined using a 
reference

[[Page 597]]

mirror of nominally 100 percent reflectance mounted in place of the 
sample in the test apparatus in Figure 2.
    (c) Infrared reflectance measurements of each sample of test rod 
surface material and of the reference mirror are corrected to remove the 
contribution of infrared light reflected and scattered by the sample 
holder and other parts of the apparatus before computation of the 
infrared reflectance ratio.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.050


[[Page 598]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15SE04.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15SE04.021


[[Page 599]]



[56 FR 15294, Apr. 16, 1991, as amended at 57 FR 23963, June 5, 1992; 57 
FR 28012, June 23, 1992; 58 FR 16785, Mar. 31, 1993; 60 FR 13644, Mar. 
14, 1995; 69 FR 55531, 55544, Sept. 15, 2004; 71 FR 18683, Apr. 12, 
2006; 71 FR 25285, Apr. 28, 2006; 73 FR 38339, July 7, 2008]


<R05>
Sec. 571.119  Standard No. 119; New pneumatic tires for motor vehicles with a 

GVWR of more than 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds) and motorcycles.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes performance and marking 
requirements for tires for use on motor vehicles with a GVWR of more 
than 10,000 pounds and motorcycles.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to provide safe 
operational performance levels for tires used on motor vehicles with a 
GVWR of more than 10,000 pounds, trailers, and motorcycles, and to place 
sufficient information on the tires to permit their proper selection and 
use.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to:
    (a) New pneumatic tires for use on motor vehicles with a GVWR of 
more than 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds) manufactured after 1948;
    (b) New pneumatic light truck tires with a tread depth of 18/32 inch 
or greater, for use on motor vehicles with a GVWR of 4,536 kilograms 
(10,000 pounds) or less manufactured after 1948;
    (c) Tires for use on special-use trailers (ST, FI and 8-12 rim or 
lower diameter code); and
    (d) Tires for use on motorcycles manufactured after 1948.
    S4. Definitions. All terms defined in the Act and the rules and 
standards issued under its authority are used as defined therein.
    Light truck tire means a tire designated by its manuafacturer as 
primarily intended for use on lightweight trucks or multipurpose 
passenger vehicles.
    Model rim assembly means a test device that (a) includes a rim which 
conforms to the published dimensions of a commercially available rim, 
(b) includes an air valve assembly when used for testing tubeless tires 
or an innertube and flap (as required) when used for testing tubetype 
tires, and (c) undergoes no permanent rim deformation and allows no loss 
of air through the portion that it comprises of the tire-rim pressure 
chamber when a tire is properly mounted on the assembly and subjected to 
the requirements of this standard.
    S5. Tire and rim matching information.
    S5.1 Each manufacturer of tires shall ensure that a listing of the 
rims that may be used with each tire that he produces is provided to the 
public. For purposes of this section each rim listing shall include 
dimensional specifications and a diagram of the rim. However a listing 
compiled in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section need not 
include dimensional specifications or a diagram of a rim if the rim's 
dimensional specifications and diagram are contained in each listing 
published in accordance with paragraph (b) of this standard. The listing 
shall be in one of the following forms:
    (a) Listed by manufacturer name or brand name in a document 
furnished to dealers of the manufacturer's tires, to any person upon 
request, and in duplicate to: Docket Section, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20590; or
    (b) Contained in publications, current at the date of manufacture of 
the tire or any later date, of at least one of the following 
organizations:

The Tire and Rim Association
The European Tyre and Rim Technical Organisation
Japan Automobile Tire Manufacturers' Association, Inc.
Deutsche Industrie Norm
British Standards Institution
Scandinavian Tire and Rim Organization
The Tyre and Rim Association of Australia

    S5.2 Information contained in a publication specified in S5.1(b) 
which lists general categories of tires and rims by size designation, 
type of construction, and/or intended use, shall be considered to be 
manufacturer's information pursuant to S5.1 for the listed tires, unless 
the publication itself or specific information provided according to 
S5.1(a) indicates otherwise.
    S6. Requirements. Each tire shall be capable of meeting any of the 
applicable requirements set forth below, when mounted on a model rim 
assembly corresponding to any rim designated by

[[Page 600]]

the tire manufacturer for use with the tire in accordance with S5. 
However, a particular tire need not meet further requirements after 
having been subjected to and met the endurance test (S6.1), strength 
test (S6.2), or high speed performance test (S6.3).
    S6.1 Endurance.
    S6.1.1 Prior to testing in accordance with the procedures of S7.2, a 
tire shall exhibit no visual evidence of tread, sidewall, ply, cord, 
innerliner, or bead separation, chunking, broken cords, cracking, or 
open splices.
    S6.1.2 When tested in accordance with the procedures of S7.2:
    (a) There shall be no visual evidence of tread, sidewall, ply, cord, 
innerliner, or bead separation, chunking, broken cords, cracking, or 
open splices.
    (b) The tire pressure at the end of the test shall be not less than 
the initial pressure specified in S7.2(a).
    S6.2 Strength. When tested in accordance with the procedures of S7.3 
a tire's average breaking energy value shall be not less than the value 
specified in Table II for that tire's size and load range.
    S6.3 High speed performance. When tested in accordance with the 
procedures of S7.3, a tire shall meet the requirements set forth in 
S6.1.1 and S6.1.2(a) and (b). However, this requirement applies only to 
motorcycle tires and to non-speed-restricted tires of nominal rim 
diameter code 14.5 or less marked load range A, B, C, or D.
    S6.4 Treadwear indicators. Except as specified in this paragraph, 
each tire shall have at least six treadwear indicators spaced 
approximately equally around the circumference of the tire that enable a 
person inspecting the tire to determine visually whether the tire has 
worn to a tread depth of 1.6 mm (one-sixteenth of an inch). Tires with a 
rim diameter code of 12 or smaller shall have at least three such 
treadwear indicators. Motorcycle tires shall have at least three such 
indicators which permit visual determination that the tire has worn to a 
tread depth of 0.8 mm (one-thirty-second of an inch).
    S6.5 Tire markings. Except as specified in this paragraph, each tire 
shall be marked on each sidewall with the information specified in 
paragraphs (a) through (j) of this section. The markings shall be placed 
between the maximum section width (exclusive of sidewall decorations or 
curb ribs) and the bead on at least one sidewall, unless the maximum 
section width of the tire is located in an area which is not more than 
one-fourth of the distance from the bead to the shoulder of the tire. If 
the maximum section width falls within that area, the markings shall 
appear between the bead and a point one-half the distance from the bead 
to the shoulder of the tire, on at least one sidewall. The markings 
shall be in letters and numerals not less than 2 mm (0.078 inch) high 
and raised above or sunk below the tire surface not less that 0.4 mm 
(0.015 inch), except that the marking depth shall be not less than 
0.25mm (0.010 inch) in the case of motorcycle tires. The tire 
identification and the DOT symbol labeling shall comply with part 574 of 
this chapter. Markings may appear on only one sidewall and the entire 
sidewall area may be used in the case of motorcycle tires and 
recreational, boat, baggage, and special trailer tires.
    (a) The symbol DOT, which shall constitute a certification that the 
tire conforms to applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards. This 
symbol may be marked on only one sidewall.
    (b) The tire identification number required by part 574 of this 
chapter. This number may be marked on only one sidewall.
    (c) The tire size designation as listed in the documents and 
publications designated in S5.1.
    (d) The maximum load rating and corresponding inflation pressure of 
the tire, shown as follows:

    (Mark on tires rated for single and dual load): Max load single ----
kg (----lb) at ----kPa (----psi) cold. Max load dual ----kg (----lb) at 
----kPa (----psi) cold.
    (Mark on tires rated only for single load): Max load ----kg (----lb) 
at ----kPa (----psi) cold.

    (e) The speed restriction of the tire, if 90 km/h (55 mph) or less, 
shown as follows:

Max speed ----km/h (----mph).
    (f) The actual number of plies and the composition of the ply cord 
material in the sidewall and, if different, in the tread area;

[[Page 601]]

    (g) The words ``tubeless'' or ``tube type'' as applicable.
    (h) The word ``regroovable'' if the tire is designed for regrooving.
    (i) The word ``radial'' if a radial tire.
    (j) The letter designating the tire load range.
    S6.6 Maximum load rating. If the maximum load rating for a 
particular tire size is shown in one or more of the publications 
described in S5.1(b), each tire of that size designation shall have a 
maximum load rating that is not less than the published maximum load 
rating, or if there are differing published ratings for the same tire 
size designation, not less than the lowest published maximum load rating 
for the size designation.
    S7. Test procedures.
    S7.1 General conditions.
    S7.1.1 The tests are performed using an appropriate new tube, tube 
valve and flap assembly (as required) that allows no loss of air for 
testing of tube-type tires under S7.2, S7.3, and S7.4, and tubeless 
tires under S7.3.
    S7.1.2 The tire must be capable of meeting the requirements of S7.2 
and S7.4 when conditioned to a temperature of 35 [deg]C (95 [deg]F) for 
3 hours before the test is conducted, and with an ambient temperature 
maintained at 35 [deg]C (95 [deg]F) during all phases of testing. The 
tire must be capable of meeting the requirements of S7.3 when 
conditioned at a temperature of 21 [deg]C (70 [deg]F) for 3 hours before 
the test is conducted.
    S7.2 Endurance. (a) Mount the tire on a model rim assembly and 
inflate it to the inflation pressure corresponding to the maximum load 
rating marked on the tire. Use a single maximum load value when the tire 
is marked with both single and dual maximum load.
    (b) After conditioning the tire-rim assembly in accordance with 
S7.1.2, adjust the tire pressure to that specified in (a) immediately 
before mounting the tire rim assembly.
    (c) Mount the tire-rim assembly on an axle and press it against a 
flat-faced steel test wheel that is 1708 mm (67.23 inches) in diameter 
and at least as wide as the tread of the tire.
    (d) Apply the test load and rotate the test wheel as indicated in 
Table III for the type of tire tested conducting each successive phase 
of the test without interruption.
    (e) Immediately after running the tire the required time, measure 
the tire inflation pressure. Remove the tire from the model rim 
assembly, and inspect the tire.
    S7.3 Strength. (a) Mount the tire on a model rim assembly and 
inflate it to the pressure corresponding to the maximum load, or maximum 
dual load where there is both a single and dual load marked on the tire. 
If the tire is tubeless, a tube may be inserted to prevent loss of air 
during the test in the event of puncture.
    (b) After conditioning the tire-rim assembly in accordance with 
S7.1.2, adjust the tire pressure to that specified in (a).
    (c) Force a cylindrical steel plunger, with a hemispherical end and 
of the diameter specified in Table I for the tire size, perpendicularly 
into a raised tread element as near as possible to the centerline of the 
tread, at a rate of 50 mm (2 inches) per minute, until the tire breaks 
or the plunger is stopped by the rim.
    (d) Record the force and the distance of penetration just before the 
tire breaks, or if it fails to break, just before the plunger is stopped 
by the rim.
    (e) Repeat the plunger application at 72[deg] intervals around the 
circumference of the tire, until five measurements are made. However, in 
the case of tires of 12 inch rim diameter code or smaller, repeat the 
plunger application at 120[deg] intervals around the circumference of 
the tire, until three measurements are made.
    (f) Compute the breaking energy for each test point by one of the 
two following formulas:
    (1) W = [(F x P)/2] x 10<SUP>-3</SUP> (joules)

Where:

W = Breaking energy (in joules) (kJ)
F = Force in newtons (N) and
P = Penetration in millimeters (mm), or;

    (2) W = (FP/2)

Where:

W = Breaking energy in inch-pounds,
F = Force in pounds,
P = Penetration in inches.

    (g) Determine the average breaking energy value for the tire by 
computing

[[Page 602]]

the average of the values obtained in accordance with paragraph (f).
    S7.4 High speed performance. (a) Perform steps (a) through (c) of 
S7.2.
    (b) Apply a force of 88 percent of the maximum load rating marked on 
the tire (use single maximum load value when the tire is marked with 
both single and dual maximum loads), and rotate the test wheel at 250 
rpm for 2 hours.
    (c) Remove the load, allow the tire to cool to 35 [deg]C (95 
[deg]F), and then adjust the pressure to that marked on the tire for 
single tire use.
    (d) Reapply the same load, and without interruption or readjustment 
of inflation pressure, rotate the test wheel at 375 rpm for 30 minutes, 
then at 400 rpm for 30 minutes, and then at 425 rpm for 30 minutes.
    (e) Immediately after running the tire the required time, measure 
the tire inflation pressure. Remove the tire from the model rim 
assembly, and inspect the tire.

                 Table I--Strength Test Plunger Diameter
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    Plunger diameter
                   Tire type                   -------------------------
                                                    (mm)       (inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Light truck...................................        19.05        \3/4\
Motorcycle....................................         7.94       \5/16\
<= 12 rim diameter code (except motorcycle)...        19.05        \3/4\
Tubeless:
    <= 17.5 rim diameter code.................        19.05        \3/4\
    <ls-thn-eq>17.5 rim diameter code, load           31.75       1\1/4\
     range F or less..........................
    <ls-thn-eq> 17.5 rim diameter code, load          38.10       1\1/2\
     range over F.............................
Tube-type:
    Load range F or less......................        31.75       1\1/4\
    Load range over F.........................        38.10       1\1/2\
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 603]]


                                                                                                Table II--Minimum Static Breaking Energy
                                                                                                 [Joules (J) and Inch-Pounds (inch-lbs)]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Tire characteristic                               Motorcycle        All 12 rim diameter    Light truck and 17.5             Tires other than Light Truck, Motorcycle, 12 rim diameter code or smaller
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------    code or smaller      rim diameter code or ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Plunger diameter (mm and inches)                    7.94  \5/16\<gr-thn-    except motorcycle       smaller Tubeless           Tube type         Tubeless greater than          Tube type         Tubeless greater than
-------------------------------------------------------------------   mm         eq>      ----------------------------------------------------------------------  17.5 rim diameter code ------------------------ 17.5 rim diameter code
                                                                   -----------------------  19.05  \3/4\<gr-thn-   19.05  \3/4\<gr-thn-   31.75   1\1/4\<gr-thn--------------------------  38.10   1\1/2\<gr-thn------------------------
                                                                                             mm         eq>         mm         eq>          mm         eq>       31.75 mm  1\1/4\<gr-thn-    mm         eq>        38.10   1\1/2\<gr-thn-
                          Breaking Energy                                                 --------------------------------------------------------------------------------      eq>      ------------------------    mm         eq>
                                                                      J        In-lbs                                                                                     ---------------                        -----------------------
                                                                                              J        In-lbs        J        In-lbs        J         In-lbs         J         In-lbs        J         In-lbs        J         In-lbs
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Load Range:
  A...............................................................     16         150          67         600        225       2,000
  B...............................................................     33         300         135       1,200        293       2,600
  C...............................................................     45         400         203       1,800        361       3,200         768       6,800          576       5,100
  D...............................................................  .....  ..............     271       2,400        514       4,550         892       7,900          734       6,500
  E...............................................................  .....  ..............     338       3,000        576       5,100       1,412      12,500          971       8,600
  F...............................................................  .....  ..............     406       3,600        644       5,700       1,785      15,800        1,412      12,500
  G...............................................................  .....  ..............  ......  .............     711       6,300       2,282      20,200        1,694      15,000
  H...............................................................  .....  ..............  ......  .............     768       6,800       2,598      23,000        2,090      18,500
  J...............................................................  .....  ..............  ......  .............  ......  .............  .......  .............  ........       2,824      25,000       2,203      19,500
  L...............................................................  .....  ..............  ......  .............  ......  .............  .......  .............  ........       3,050      27,000
  M...............................................................  .....  ..............  ......  .............  ......  .............  .......  .............  ........       3,220      28,500
  N...............................................................  .....  ..............  ......  .............  ......  .............  .......  .............  ........       3,389      30,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 604]]


                                                           Table III--Endurance Test Schedule
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                    Test wheel speed     Test load: Percent of maximum load
                                                                                ------------------------               rating                 Total test
                  Description                              Load range                                   ------------------------------------ revolutions
                                                                                    km/h         r/m                    II-16      III-24
                                                                                                          I-7 hours     hours       hours    (thousands)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Speed restricted service:
    90 km/h (55 mph)..........................  F, G, H, J, L, M, N............          40         125          66          84         101        352.0
    80 km/h (50 mph)..........................  F, G, H, J, L..................          32         100          66          84         101        282.5
    56 km/h (35 mph)..........................  All............................          24          75          66          84         101        211.0
Motorcycle....................................  All............................          80         250     \1\ 100     \2\ 108         117        510.0
All other.....................................  F..............................          64         200          66          84         101        564.0
                                                G..............................          56         175          66          84         101        493.5
                                                H, J, L, N.....................          48         150          66          84         101        423.5
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


(Secs. 113, 201, 80 Stat. 718 (15 U.S.C. 1402, 1421); secs. 103, 112, 
119, 201, 203, Pub. L. 89-563, 80 Stat. 718 (15 U.S.C. 1392, 1401, 1421, 
1423); delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50)

[38 FR 31301, Nov. 13, 1973]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.119 see the List of CFR Sections Affected which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.


<R05>
Sec. 571.120  Tire selection and rims and motor home/recreation vehicle 

trailer load carrying capacity information for motor vehicles with a GVWR of 

more than 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds).

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies tire and rim selection 
requirements, rim marking requirements and motor home/recreation vehicle 
trailer load carrying capacity information.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to provide safe 
operational performance by ensuring that vehicles to which it applies 
are equipped with tires of adequate size and load rating and with rims 
of appropriate size and type designation, and by ensuring that consumers 
are informed of motor home/recreation vehicle trailer load carrying 
capacity.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to motor vehicles with a 
gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of more than 4,536 kilograms (10,000 
pounds and motorcycles, to rims for use on those vehicles, and to non-
pneumatic spare tire assemblies for use on those vehicles.
    S4. Definitions. All terms defined in the Act and the rules and 
standards issued under its authority are used as defined therein.
    Rim base means the portion of a rim remaining after removal of all 
split or continuous rim flanges, side rings, and locking rings that can 
be detached from the rim.
    Rim size designation means rim diameter and width.
    Rim diameter means nominal diameter of the bead seat.
    Rim width means nominal distance between rim flanges.
    Rim type designation means the industry or manufacturer's 
designation for a rim by style or code.
    Weather side means the surface area of the rim not covered by the 
inflated tire.
    S5. Requirements.
    S5.1 Tire and rim selection.
    S5.1.1 Except as specified in S5.1.3, each vehicle equipped with 
pneumatic tires for highway service shall be equipped with tires that 
meet the requirements of Sec. 571.109, Sec. 571.119 or Sec. 571.139, 
and rims that are listed by the manufacturer of the tires as suitable 
for use with those tires, in accordance with S4.4 of Sec. 571.109 or 
S5.1 of Sec. 571.119, as applicable, except that vehicles may be 
equipped with a non-pneumatic spare tire assembly that meets the 
requirements of Sec. 571.129, New non-pneumatic tires for passenger 
cars, and S8 of this standard. Vehicles equipped with such an assembly 
shall meet the requirements of S5.3.3, S7, and S9 of this standard.
    S5.1.2 Except in the case of a vehicle which has a speed attainable 
in 3.2 kilometers of 80 kilometers per hour or less, the sum of the 
maximum load ratings of the tires fitted to an axle shall

[[Page 605]]

be not less than the gross axle weight rating (GAWR) of the axle system 
as specified on the vehicle's certification label required by 49 CFR 
part 567. Except in the case of a vehicle which has a speed attainable 
in 2 miles of 50 mph or less, the sum of the maximum load ratings of the 
tires fitted to an axle shall be not less than the gross axle weight 
rating (GAWR) of the axle system as specified on the vehicle's 
certification label required by 49 CFR part 567. If the certification 
label shows more than one GAWR for the axle system, the sum shall be not 
less than the GAWR corresponding to the size designation of the tires 
fitted to the axle. If the size designation of the tires fitted to the 
axle does not appear on the certification label, the sum shall be not 
less than the lowest GAWR appearing on the label. When a passenger car 
tire is installed on a multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, bus, or 
trailer, the tire's load rating shall be reduced by dividing by 1.10 
before calculating the sum (i.e., the sum of the load ratings of the 
tires on each axle, when the tires' load carrying capacity at the 
recommended tire cold inflation pressure is reduced by dividing by 1.10, 
must be appropriate for the GAWR).
    S5.1.3 In place of tires that meet the requirements of Standard No. 
119, a truck, bus, or trailer may at the request of a purchaser be 
equipped at the place of manufacture of the vehicle with retreaded or 
used tires owned or leased by the purchaser, if the sum of the maximum 
load ratings meets the requirements of S5.1.2. Used tires employed under 
this provision must have been originally manufactured to comply with 
Standard No. 119, as evidenced by the DOT symbol.
    S5.2 Rim marking. Each rim or, at the option of the manufacturer in 
the case of a single-piece wheel, wheel disc shall be marked with the 
information listed in paragraphs (a) through (e) of this paragraph, in 
lettering not less than 3 millimeters high, impressed to a depth or, at 
the option of the manufacturer, embossed to a height of not less than 
0.125 millimeters. The information listed in paragraphs (a) through (c) 
of this paragraph shall appear on the weather side. In the case of rims 
of multi piece construction, the information listed in paragraphs (a) 
through (e) of this paragraph shall appear on the rim base and the 
information listed in paragraphs (b) and (d) of this paragraph shall 
also appear on each other part of the rim.
    (a) A designation which indicates the source of the rim's published 
nominal dimensions, as follows:
    (1) ``T'' indicates The Tire and Rim Association.
    (2) ``E'' indicates The European Tyre and Rim Technical Organisation
    (3) ``J'' indicates Japan Automobile Tire Manufacturers' 
Association, Inc.
    (4) ``D'' indicates Deutsche Industrie Norm.
    (5) ``B'' indicates British Standards Institution.
    (6) ``S'' indicates Scandinavian Tire and Rim Organization.
    (7) ``A'' indicates The Tyre and Rim Association of Australia.
    (8) ``N'' indicates an independent listing pursuant to S4.4.1(a) of 
Standard No. 109 or S5.1(a) of Standard No. 119.
    (b) The rim size designation, and in case of multipiece rims, the 
rim type designation. For example: 20x5.50, or 20x5.5.
    (c) The symbol DOT, constituting a certification by the manufacturer 
of the rim that the rim complies with all applicable motor vehicle 
safety standards.
    (d) A designation that identifies the manufacturer of the rim by 
name, trademark, or symbol.
    (e) The month, day and year or the month and year of manufacture, 
expressed either numerically or by use of a symbol, at the option of the 
manufacturer. For example:

    ``September 4, 1976'' may be expressed numerically as:

90476, 904, or 76
 76 904

    ``September 1976'' may be expressed as:

976, 9, or 76
 76 9

    (1) Any manufacturer that elects to express the date of manufacture 
by means of a symbol shall notify NHTSA in writing of the full names and 
addresses of all manufacturers and brand name owners utilizing that 
symbol and the name and address of the trademark

[[Page 606]]

owner of that symbol, if any. The notification shall describe in 
narrative form and in detail how the month, day, and year or the month 
and year are depicted by the symbol. Such description shall include an 
actual size graphic depiction of the symbol, showing and/or explaining 
the interrelationship of the component parts of the symbol as they will 
appear on the rim or single piece wheel disc, including dimensional 
specifications, and where the symbol will be located on the rim or 
single piece wheel disc. The notification shall be received by NHTSA at 
least 60 calendar days prior to first use of the symbol. The 
notification shall be mailed to the Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance, 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street SW., 
Washington, DC 20590. All information provided to NHTSA under this 
paragraph will be placed in the public docket.
    (2) Each manufacturer of wheels shall provide an explanation of its 
date of manufacture symbol to any person upon request.
    S5.3 Each vehicle shall show the information specified in S5.3.1 and 
S5.3.2 and, in the case of a vehicle equipped with a non-pneumatic spare 
tire, the information specified in S5.3.3, in the English language, 
lettered in block capitals and numerals not less than 2.4 millimeters 
high and in the format set forth following this paragraph. This 
information shall appear either--
    (a) After each GAWR listed on the certification label required by 
Sec. 567.4 or Sec. 567.5 of this chapter; or at the option of the 
manufacturer,
    (b) On the tire information label affixed to the vehicle in the 
manner, location, and form described in Sec. 567.4 (b) through (f) of 
this chapter as appropriate of each GVWR-GAWR combination listed on the 
certification label.
    S5.3.1 Tires. The size designation (not necessarily for the tires on 
the vehicle) and the recommended cold inflation pressure for those tires 
such that the sum of the load ratings of the tires on each axle (when 
the tires' load carrying capacity at the specified pressure is reduced 
by dividing by 1.10, in the case of a tire subject to FMVSS No. 109) is 
appropriate for the GAWR as calculated in accordance with S5.1.2.
    S5.3.2. Rims. The size designation and, if applicable, the type 
designation of Rims (not necessarily those on the vehicle) appropriate 
for those tires.

                 TRUCK EXAMPLE--SUITABLE TIRE-RIM CHOICE

GVWR: 7,840 KG (17,289 LB)
GAWR: FRONT--2,850 KG (6,280 LB) WITH 7.50-20(D) TIRES, 20x6.00 RIMS AT 
520 KPA (75 PSI) COLD SINGLE
GAWR: REAR--4,990 KG (11,000 LB) WITH 7.50-20(D) TIRES, 20x6.00 RIMS, AT 
450 KPA (65 PSI) COLD DUAL
GVWR: 13,280 KG (29,279 LB)
GAWR: FRONT--4,826 KG (10,640 LB) WITH 10.00-20(F) TIRES, 20x7.50 RIMS, 
AT 620 KPA (90 PSI) COLD SINGLE
GAWR: REAR--8,454 KG (18,639 LB) WITH 10.00-20(F) TIRES, 20x2.70 RIMS, 
AT 550 KPA (80 PSI) COLD DUAL

    S5.3.3 The non-pneumatic tire identification code, with which that 
assembly is labeled pursuant to S4.3(a) of Sec. 571.129.
    S6. Load Limits for Non-Pneumatic Spare Tires. The highest vehicle 
maximum load on the tire for the vehicle shall not be greater than the 
load rating for the non-pneumatic spare tire.
    S7 Labeling Requirements for Non-Pneumatic Spare Tires or Tire 
Assemblies. Each non-pneumatic tire or, in the case of a non-pneumatic 
tire assembly in which the non-pneumatic tire is an integral part of the 
assembly, each non-pneumatic tire assembly shall include, in letters or 
numerals not less than 4 millimeters high, the information specified in 
paragraphs S7 (a) and (b). The information shall be permanently molded, 
stamped, or otherwise permanently marked into or onto the non-pneumatic 
tire or non-pneumatic tire assembly, or shall appear on a label that is 
permanently attached to the tire or tire assembly. If a label is used, 
it shall be subsurface printed, made of material that is resistant to 
fade, heat, moisture and abrasion, and attached in such a manner that it 
cannot be removed without destroying or defacing the label on the non-
pneumatic tire or tire assembly. The information specified in paragraphs 
S7 (a) and (b) shall appear on both sides of the non-pneumatic tire or 
tire assembly, except, in the case of a non-pneumatic tire assembly 
which has a particular side that must always face outward when

[[Page 607]]

mounted on a vehicle, in which case the information specified in 
paragraphs S7 (a) and (b) shall only be required on the outward facing 
side. The information shall be positioned on the tire or tire assembly 
such that it is not placed on the tread or the outermost edge of the 
tire and is not obstructed by any portion of any non-pneumatic rim or 
wheel center member designated for use with that tire in this standard 
or in Standard No. 129.
    (a) FOR TEMPORARY USE ONLY; and
    (b) MAXIMUM 80 KM/H (50 M.P.H.).
    S8. Requirements for Vehicles Equipped with Non-Pneumatic Spare Tire 
Assemblies
    S8.1 Vehicle Placarding Requirements. A placard, permanently affixed 
to the inside of the spare tire stowage area or equally accessible 
location adjacent to the non-pneumatic spare tire assembly, shall 
display the information set forth in S7 in block capitals and numerals 
not less than 6 millimeters high preceded by the words ``IMPORTANT--USE 
OF SPARE TIRE'' in letters not less than 9 millimeters high.
    S8.2 Supplementary Information. The owner's manual of the vehicle 
shall contain, in writing in the English language and in not less than 
10 point type, the following information under the heading ``IMPORTANT--
USE OF SPARE TIRE'':
    (a) A statement indicating the information related to appropriate 
use for the non-pneumatic spare tire including at a minimum the 
information set forth in S8 (a) and (b) and either the information set 
forth in S5.3.6 or a statement that the information set forth in S5.3.6 
is located on the vehicle placard and on the non-pneumatic tire;
    (b) An instruction to drive carefully when the non-pneumatic spare 
tire is in use, and to install the proper pneumatic tire and rim at the 
first reasonable opportunity; and
    (c) A statement that operation of the vehicle is not recommended 
with more than one non-pneumatic spare tire in use at the same time.
    S9 Non-Pneumatic Rims and Wheel Center Members
    S9.1 Non-Pneumatic Rim Requirements. Each non-pneumatic rim that is 
part of a separable non-pneumatic spare tire assembly shall be 
constructed to the dimensions of a non-pneumatic rim that is listed 
pursuant to S4.4 of Sec. 571.129 for use with the non-pneumatic tire, 
designated by its non-pneumatic tire identification code, with which the 
vehicle is equipped.
    S9.2 Wheel Center Member Requirements. Each wheel center member that 
is part of a separable non-pneumatic spare tire assembly shall be 
constructed to the dimensions of a wheel center member that is listed 
pursuant to S4.4 of Sec. 571.129 for use with the non-pneumatic tire, 
designated by its non-pneumatic tire identification code, with which the 
vehicle is equipped.
    S10. Each motor home and recreation vehicle (RV) trailer must meet 
the applicable requirements in S10.
    S10.1 On motor homes, the sum of the gross axle weight ratings 
(GAWR) of all axles on the vehicle must not be less than the gross 
vehicle weight rating (GVWR).
    S10.2 On RV trailers, the sum of the GAWRs of all axles on the 
vehicle plus the vehicle manufacturer's recommended tongue weight must 
not be less than the GVWR. If tongue weight is specified as a range, the 
minimum value must be used.
    S10.3 The tires on each motor home and RV trailer at first retail 
sale must be the same size as the tire size on the labeling required by 
S5.3.
    S10.4 Each motor home and RV trailer single stage or final stage 
manufacturer must affix either a motor home occupant and cargo carrying 
capacity (OCCC) label (Figure 1) or a RV trailer cargo carrying capacity 
(CCC) label (Figure 2) to its vehicles that meets the following 
criteria:
    S10.4.1 The RV load carrying capacity labels (Figures 1 and 2) must 
be legible, visible, moisture resistant, presented in the English 
language, have a minimum print size of 2.4 millimeters (\3/32\ inches) 
high and be printed in black print on a yellow background.
    S10.4.2 The weight value for load carrying capacity on the RV load 
carrying capacity labels (Figures 1 and 2) must be displayed to the 
nearest kilogram with conversion to the nearest pound and must be such 
that the vehicle's weight does not exceed its GVWR

[[Page 608]]

when loaded with the stated load carrying capacity. The UVW and the GVWR 
used to determine the RV's load carrying capacity must reflect the 
weights and design of the motor home or RV trailer as configured for 
delivery to the dealer/service facility. If applicable, the weight of 
full propane tanks must be included in the RV's UVW and the weight of 
on-board potable water must be treated as cargo.
    S10.4.3 The RV load carrying capacity labels (Figures 1 and 2) must 
be:
    (a) Permanently affixed and must be visibly located on the interior 
of the forward-most exterior passenger door on the right side of the 
vehicle; or
    (b) If a permanent RV load carrying capacity label (Figure 1 or 2) 
is affixed in the location specified at S5.3(b), a temporary version of 
the RV load carrying capacity label (Figure 1 or 2) may be visibly 
located on the interior of the forward-most exterior passenger door on 
the right side of the vehicle.
    S10.4.4 Permanent and temporary motor home OCCC labels must contain 
the following information in accordance with Figure 1:
    (a) The statement: ``MOTOR HOME OCCUPANT AND CARGO CARRYING 
CAPACITY'' in block letters.
    (b) The Vehicle Identification Number (VIN).
    (c) The statement ``THE COMBINED WEIGHT OF OCCUPANTS AND CARGO 
SHOULD NEVER EXCEED: XXX kg or XXX lbs'' in block letters with 
appropriate values included.
    (d) The statement ``Safety belt equipped seating capacity: XXX'' 
with the appropriate value included. This is the total number of safety 
belt equipped seating positions.
    (e) The statement: ``CAUTION: A full load of water equals XXX kg or 
XXX lbs of cargo @ 1 kg/L (8.3 lb/gal) and the tongue weight of a towed 
trailer counts as cargo'' with appropriate values included.
    S10.4.5 Permanent and temporary RV trailer CCC labels must contain 
the following information in accordance with Figure 2:
    (a) The statement: ``RECREATION VEHICLE TRAILER CARGO CARRYING 
CAPACITY'' in block letters.
    (b) The Vehicle Identification Number (VIN).
    (c) The statement: ``THE WEIGHT OF CARGO SHOULD NEVER EXCEED: XXX kg 
or XXX lbs'' in block letters with appropriate values included.
    (d) The statement: ``CAUTION: A full load of water equals XXX kg or 
XXX lbs of cargo @ 1 kg/L (8.3 lb/gal)'' with appropriate values 
included.
    S10.5 Weight added to motor homes and RV trailers between final 
vehicle certification and first retail sale of the vehicle.
    S10.5.1 If weight exceeding 45.4 kg (100 pounds) is added to a motor 
home or RV trailer between final vehicle certification and first retail 
sale of the vehicle, the load carrying capacity values on the RV load 
carrying capacity labels (Figures 1 and 2) required by S10.4 must be 
corrected using one or a combination of the following methods:
    (a) Permanently affix the load carrying capacity modification label 
(Figure 3) which displays the amount the load carrying capacity is 
reduced to the nearest kilogram with conversion to the nearest pound, 
within 25 millimeters of the original, permanent RV load carrying 
capacity label (Figure 1 or 2). The load carrying capacity modification 
label must be legible, visible, permanent, moisture resistant, presented 
in the English language, have a minimum print size of 2.4 millimeters 
(3/32 inches) high and be printed in black print on a yellow background. 
If the manufacturer selects S10.4.3(b), apply a temporary version of the 
load carrying capacity modification label (Figure 3) within 25 
millimeters of the original, temporary RV load carrying capacity label 
(Figure 1 or 2) on the interior of the forward-most exterior passenger 
door on the right side of the vehicle. Both temporary and permanent 
versions of the load carrying capacity modification label (Figure 3) may 
be printed without values and values may be legibly applied to the label 
with a black, fine point, indelible marker. The label must contain the 
statements ``CAUTION--LOAD CARRYING CAPACITY REDUCED'' in block letters 
and ``Modifications to this vehicle have reduced the original load 
carrying capacity by XXX kg or XXX lbs'' in accordance with Figure 3 
with appropriate values in place of XXX. If two

[[Page 609]]

load carrying capacity modification labels are required (one permanent 
and one temporary), the weight values on each must agree, or
    (b) Modify the original permanent RV load carrying capacity label 
(Figure 1 or 2) with correct load carrying capacity weight values. If 
the manufacturer selects S10.4.3(b), the temporary RV load carrying 
capacity label (Figure 1 or 2) must also be modified with correct load 
carrying capacity weight values. Modification of labels requires a 
machine printed overlay with printed corrected values or blanks for 
corrected values that may be entered with a black, fine-point, indelible 
marker. Crossing out old values and entering corrected values on the 
original label is not permissible, or
    (c) Replace the original, permanent RV load carrying capacity label 
(Figure 1 or 2) with the same label containing correct load carrying 
capacity weight values. If the manufacturer selects S10.4.3(b), the 
temporary RV load carrying capacity label (Figure 1 or 2) must also be 
replaced with the same label containing correct load carrying capacity 
weight values.
    S10.5.2 Corrected load carrying capacity weight values or the weight 
amount the load carrying capacity is reduced, must reflect the total 
weight added between final vehicle certification and first retail sale 
and must be accurate within one percent of the actual added weight. No 
re-labeling is required if the weight of the vehicle is reduced between 
final vehicle certification and the first retail sale.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE07.044


[[Page 610]]



(Authority: Secs. 102, 119, and 202, Pub. L. 89-563, 80 Stat. 718 (15 
U.S.C. 1392, 1407, and 1422); delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50)

[42 FR 7144, Feb. 7, 1977]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.120 see the List of CFR Sections Affected which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.


<R05>
Sec. 571.121  Standard No. 121; Air brake systems.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes performance and equipment 
requirements for braking systems on vehicles equipped with air brake 
systems.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to insure safe braking 
performance under normal and emergency conditions.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to trucks, buses, and 
trailers equipped with air brake systems. However, it does not apply to:
    (a) Any trailer that has a width of more than 102.36 inches with 
extendable equipment in the fully retracted position and is equipped 
with two short track axles in a line across the width of the trailer.
    (b) Any vehicle equipped with an axle that has a gross axle weight 
rating (GAWR) of 29,000 pounds or more;
    (c) Any truck or bus that has a speed attainable in 2 miles of not 
more than 33 mph;
    (d) Any truck that has a speed attainable in 2 miles of not more 
than 45 mph, an unloaded vehicle weight that is not less than 95 percent 
of its gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR), and no capacity to carry 
occupants other than the driver and operating crew;
    (e) Any trailer that has a GVWR of more than 120,000 pounds and 
whose body conforms to that described in the definition of heavy hauler 
trailer set forth in S4;
    (f) Any trailer that has an unloaded vehicle weight which is not 
less than 95 percent of its GVWR; and
    (g) Any load divider dolly.
    S4. Definitions.
    Agricultural commodity trailer means a trailer that is designed to 
transport bulk agricultural commodities in off-road harvesting sites and 
to a processing plant or storage location, as evidenced by skeletal 
construction that accommodates harvest containers, a maximum length of 
28 feet, and an arrangement of air control lines and reservoirs that 
minimizes damage in field operations.
    Air brake system means a system that uses air as a medium for 
transmitting pressure or force from the driver control to the service 
brake, including an air-over-hydraulic brake subsystem, but does not 
include a system that uses compressed air or vacuum only to assist the 
driver in applying muscular force to hydraulic or mechanical components.
    Air-over-hydraulic brake subsystem means a subsystem of the air 
brake system that uses compressed air to transmit a force from the 
driver control to a hydraulic brake system to actuate the service 
brakes.
    Antilock brake system or ABS means a portion of a service brake 
system that automatically controls the degree of rotational wheel slip 
during braking by:
    (1) Sensing the rate of angular rotation of the wheels;
    (2) Transmitting signals regarding the rate of wheel angular 
rotation to one or more controlling devices which interpret those 
signals and generate responsive controlling output signals; and
    (3) Transmitting those controlling signals to one or more modulators 
which adjust brake actuating forces in response to those signals.
    Auto transporter means a truck and a trailer designed for use in 
combination to transport motor vehicles, in that the towing vehicle is 
designed to carry cargo at a location other than the fifth wheel and to 
load this cargo only by means of the towed vehicle.
    Common diaphragm means a single brake chamber diaphragm which is a 
component of the parking, emergency, and service brake systems.
    Container chassis trailer means a semitrailer of skeleton 
construction limited to a bottom frame, one or more axles, specially 
built and fitted with locking devices for the transport of intermodal 
shipping containers, so that when the chassis and container are 
assembled, the units serve the same function as an over the road 
trailer.

[[Page 611]]

    Directly controlled wheel means a wheel for which the degree of 
rotational wheel slip is sensed, either at that wheel or on the axle 
shaft for that wheel and corresponding signals are transmitted to one or 
more modulators that adjust the brake actuating forces at that wheel. 
Each modulator may also adjust the brake actuating forces at other 
wheels that are on the same axle or in the same axle set in response to 
the same signal or signals.
    Effective projected luminous lens area means that area of the 
projection on a plane perpendicular to the lamp axis of that portion of 
the light-emitting surface that directs light to the photometric test 
pattern, and does not include mounting hole bosses, reflex reflector 
area, beads or rims that may glow or produce small areas of increased 
intensity as a result of uncontrolled light from small areas (\1/2\ 
degree radius around the test point).
    Full-treadle brake application means a brake application in which 
the treadle valve pressure in any of the valve's output circuits reaches 
85 pounds per square inch (psi) within 0.2 seconds after the application 
is initiated, or in which maximum treadle travel is achieved within 0.2 
seconds after the application is initiated.
    Heavy hauler trailer means a trailer which has one or more of the 
following characteristics, but which is not a container chassis trailer:
    (1) Its brake lines are designed to adapt to separation or extension 
of the vehicle frame; or
    (2) Its body consists only of a platform whose primary cargo-
carrying surface is not more than 40 inches above the ground in an 
unloaded condition, except that it may include sides that are designed 
to be easily removable and a permanent ``front end structure'' as that 
term is used in Sec. 393.106 of this title.
    Independently controlled wheel means a directly controlled wheel for 
which the modulator does not adjust the brake actuating forces at any 
other wheel on the same axle.
    Indirectly controlled wheel means a wheel at which the degree of 
rotational wheel slip is not sensed, but at which the modulator of an 
antilock braking system adjusts its brake actuating forces in response 
to signals from one or more sensed wheel(s).
    Initial brake temperature means the average temperature of the 
service brakes on the hottest axle of the vehicle 0.2 mile before any 
brake application in the case of road tests, or 18 seconds before any 
brake application in the case of dynamometer testing.
    Intermodal shipping container means a reusable, transportable 
enclosure that is especially designed with integral locking devices for 
securing the container to the trailer to facilitate the efficient and 
bulk shipping and transfer of goods by, or between various modes of 
transport, such as highway, rail, sea and air.
    Load divider dolly means a trailer composed of a trailer chassis and 
one or more axles, with no solid bed, body, or container attached, and 
which is designed exclusively to support a portion of the load on a 
trailer or truck excluded from all the requirements of this standard.
    Maximum drive-through speed means the highest possible constant 
speed at which the vehicle can be driven through 200 feet of a 500-foot 
radius curve arc without leaving the 12-foot lane.
    Maximum treadle travel means the distance that the treadle moves 
from its position when no force is applied to its position when the 
treadle reaches a full stop.
    Peak friction coefficient or PFC means the ratio of the maximum 
value of braking test wheel longitudinal force to the simultaneous 
vertical force occurring prior to wheel lockup, as the braking torque is 
progressively increased.
    Pulpwood trailer means a trailer that is designed exclusively for 
harvesting logs or pulpwood and constructed with a skeletal frame with 
no means for attachment of a solid bed, body, or container, and with an 
arrangement of air control lines and reservoirs designed to minimize 
damage in off-road operations.
    Tandem axle means a group or set of two or more axles placed in a 
close arrangement, one behind the other, with the centerlines of 
adjacent axles not more than 72 inches apart.

[[Page 612]]

    Straddle trailer means a trailer that is designed to transport bulk 
agricultural commodities from the harvesting location as evidenced by a 
framework that is driven over the cargo and lifting arms that suspend 
the cargo for transit.
    Wheel lockup means 100 percent wheel slip.
    S5. Requirements. Each vehicle shall meet the following requirements 
under the conditions specified in S6. However, at the option of the 
manufacturer, the following vehicles may meet the stopping distance 
requirements specified in Table IIa instead of Table II: Three-axle 
tractors with a front axle that has a GAWR of 14,600 pounds or less, and 
with two rear drive axles that have a combined GAWR of 45,000 pounds or 
less, that are manufactured before August 1, 2011; and all other 
tractors that are manufactured before August 1, 2013.
    S5.1 Required equipment for trucks and buses. Each truck and bus 
shall have the following equipment:
    S5.1.1 Air compressor. An air compressor of sufficient capacity to 
increase air pressure in the supply and service reservoirs from 85 psi 
to 100 psi when the engine is operating at the vehicle manufacturer's 
maximum recommended r.p.m. within a time, in seconds, determined by the 
quotient (Actual reservoir capacityx25)/Required reservoir capacity.
    S5.1.1.1 Air compressor cut-in pressure. The air compressor governor 
cut-in pressure for each bus shall be 85 p.s.i. or greater. The air 
compressor governor cut-in pressure for each truck shall be 100 p.s.i. 
or greater.
    S5.1.2 Reservoirs. One or more service reservoir systems, from which 
air is delivered to the brake chambers, and either an automatic 
condensate drain valve for each service reservoir or a supply reservoir 
between the service reservoir system and the source of air pressure.
    S5.1.2.1 The combined volume of all service reservoirs and supply 
reservoirs shall be at least 12 times the combined volume of all service 
brake chambers. For each brake chamber type having a full stroke at 
least as great as the first number in Column 1 of Table V, but no more 
than the second number in Column 1 of Table V, the volume of each brake 
chamber for purposes of calculating the required combined service and 
supply reservoir volume shall be either that specified in Column 2 of 
Table V or the actual volume of the brake chamber at maximum travel of 
the brake piston or pushrod, whichever is lower. The volume of a brake 
chamber not listed in Table V is the volume of the brake chamber at 
maximum travel of the brake piston or pushrod. The reservoirs of the 
truck portion of an auto transporter need not meet this requirement for 
reservoir volume.
    S5.1.2.2 Each reservoir shall be capable of withstanding an internal 
hydrostatic pressure of five times the compressor cutout pressure or 500 
psi, whichever is greater, for 10 minutes.
    S5.1.2.3 Each service reservoir system shall be protected against 
loss of air pressure due to failure or leakage in the system between the 
service reservoir and the source of air pressure, by check valves or 
equivalent devices whose proper functioning can be checked without 
disconnecting any air line or fitting.
    S5.1.2.4 Each reservoir shall have a condensate drain valve that can 
be manually operated.
    S5.1.3 Towing vehicle protection system. If the vehicle is intended 
to tow another vehicle equipped with air brakes, a system to protect the 
air pressure in the towing vehicle from the effects of a loss of air 
pressure in the towed vehicle.
    S5.1.4 Pressure gauge. A pressure gauge in each service brake 
system, readily visible to a person seated in the normal driving 
position, that indicates the service reservoir system air pressure. The 
accuracy of the gauge shall be within plus or minus 7 percent of the 
compressor cut-out pressure.
    S5.1.5 Warning signal. A signal, other than a pressure gauge, that 
gives a continuous warning to a person in the normal driving position 
when the ignition is in the ``on'' (``run'') position and the air 
pressure in the service reservoir system is below 60 psi. The signal 
shall be either visible within the driver's forward field of view, or 
both audible and visible.
    S5.1.6 Antilock brake system.
    S5.1.6.1(a) Each single-unit vehicle manufactured on or after March 
1, 1998,

[[Page 613]]

shall be equipped with an antilock brake system that directly controls 
the wheels of at least one front axle and the wheels of at least one 
rear axle of the vehicle. Wheels on other axles of the vehicle may be 
indirectly controlled by the antilock brake system.
    (b) Each truck tractor manufactured on or after March 1, 1997, shall 
be equipped with an antilock brake system that directly controls the 
wheels of at least one front axle and the wheels of at least one rear 
axle of the vehicle, with the wheels of at least one axle being 
independently controlled. Wheels on other axles of the vehicle may be 
indirectly controlled by the antilock brake system. A truck tractor 
shall have no more than three wheels controlled by one modulator.
    S5.1.6.2 Antilock malfunction signal and circuit.
    (a) Each truck tractor manufactured on or after March 1, 1997, and 
each single unit vehicle manufactured on or after March 1, 1998, shall 
be equipped with an indicator lamp, mounted in front of and in clear 
view of the driver, which is activated whenever there is a malfunction 
that affects the generation or transmission of response or control 
signals in the vehicle's antilock brake system. The indicator lamp shall 
remain activated as long as such a malfunction exists, whenever the 
ignition (start) switch is in the ``on'' (``run'') position, whether or 
not the engine is running. Each message about the existence of such a 
malfunction shall be stored in the antilock brake system after the 
ignition switch is turned to the ``off'' position and automatically 
reactivated when the ignition switch is again turned to the ``on'' 
(``run'') position. The indicator lamp shall also be activated as a 
check of lamp function whenever the ignition is turned to the ``on'' 
(``run'') position. The indicator lamp shall be deactivated at the end 
of the check of lamp function unless there is a malfunction or a message 
about a malfunction that existed when the key switch was last turned to 
the ``off'' position.
    (b) Each truck tractor manufactured on or after March 1, 2001, and 
each single unit vehicle manufactured on or after March 1, 2001, that is 
equipped to tow another air-braked vehicle, shall be equipped with an 
electrical circuit that is capable of transmitting a malfunction signal 
from the antilock brake system(s) on one or more towed vehicle(s) (e.g., 
trailer(s) and dolly(ies)) to the trailer ABS malfunction lamp in the 
cab of the towing vehicle, and shall have the means for connection of 
this electrical circuit to the towed vehicle. Each such truck tractor 
and single unit vehicle shall also be equipped with an indicator lamp, 
separate from the lamp required in S5.1.6.2(a), mounted in front of and 
in clear view of the driver, which is activated whenever the malfunction 
signal circuit described above receives a signal indicating an ABS 
malfunction on one or more towed vehicle(s). The indicator lamp shall 
remain activated as long as an ABS malfunction signal from one or more 
towed vehicle(s) is present, whenever the ignition (start) switch is in 
the ``on'' (``run'') position, whether or not the engine is running. The 
indicator lamp shall also be activated as a check of lamp function 
whenever the ignition is turned to the ``on'' (``run'') position. The 
indicator lamp shall be deactivated at the end of the check of lamp 
function unless a trailer ABS malfunction signal is present.
    (c) [Reserved]
    S5.1.6.3 Antilock power circuit for towed vehicles. Each truck 
tractor manufactured on or after March 1, 1997, and each single unit 
vehicle manufactured on or after March 1, 1998, that is equipped to tow 
another air-braked vehicle shall be equipped with one or more electrical 
circuits that provide continuous power to the antilock system on the 
towed vehicle or vehicles whenever the ignition (start) switch is in the 
``on'' (``run'') position. Such a circuit shall be adequate to enable 
the antilock system on each towed vehicle to be fully operable.
    S5.1.7 Service brake stop lamp switch. A switch that lights the stop 
lamps when the service brake control is statically depressed to a point 
that produces a pressure of 6 psi or less in the service brake chambers.
    S5.1.8 Brake distribution and automatic adjustment. Each vehicle 
shall be equipped with a service brake system acting on all wheels.

[[Page 614]]

    (a) Brake adjuster. Wear of the service brakes shall be compensated 
for by means of a system of automatic adjustment. When inspected 
pursuant to S5.9, the adjustment of the service brakes shall be within 
the limits recommended by the vehicle manufacturer.
    (b) Brake indicator. For each brake equipped with an external 
automatic adjustment mechanism and having an exposed pushrod, the 
condition of service brake under-adjustment shall be displayed by a 
brake adjustment indicator that is discernible when viewed with 20/40 
vision from a location adjacent to or underneath the vehicle, when 
inspected pursuant to S5.9.
    S5.2 Required equipment for trailers. Each trailer shall have the 
following equipment:
    S5.2.1 Reservoirs. One or more reservoirs to which the air is 
delivered from the towing vehicle.
    S5.2.1.1 The total volume of each service reservoir shall be at 
least eight times the combined volume of all service brake chambers 
serviced by that reservoir. For each brake chamber type having a full 
stroke at least as great as the first number in Column 1 of Table V, but 
no more than the second number in column 1, the volume of each brake 
chamber for purposes of calculating the required total service reservoir 
volume shall be either the number specified in Column 2 of Table V or 
the actual volume of the brake chamber at maximum travel of the brake 
piston or pushrod, whichever is lower. The volume of a brake chamber not 
listed in Table V is the volume of the brake chamber at maximum travel 
of the brake piston or pushrod. The reservoirs on a heavy hauler trailer 
and the trailer portion of an auto transporter need not meet this 
requirement for reservoir volume.
    S5.2.1.2 Each reservoir shall be capable of withstanding an internal 
hydrostatic pressure of 500 psi for 10 minutes.
    S5.2.1.3 Each reservoir shall have a condensate drain valve that can 
be manually operated.
    S5.2.1.4 Each service reservoir shall be protected against loss of 
air pressure due to failure or leakage in the system between the service 
reservoir and its source of air pressure by check valves or equivalent 
devices.
    S5.2.2 Brake distribution and automatic adjustment. Each vehicle 
shall be equipped with a service brake system acting on all wheels.
    (a) Brake adjuster. Wear of the service brakes shall be compensated 
for by means of a system of automatic adjustment. When inspected 
pursuant to S5.9, the adjustment of the service brakes shall be within 
the limits recommended by the vehicle manufacturer.
    (b) Brake indicator. For each brake equipped with an external 
automatic adjustment mechanism and having an exposed pushrod, the 
condition of service brake under-adjustment shall be displayed by a 
brake adjustment indicator in a manner that is discernible when viewed 
with 20/40 vision from a location adjacent to or underneath the vehicle, 
when inspected pursuant to S5.9.
    S5.2.3 Antilock brake system.
    S5.2.3.1(a) Each semitrailer (including a trailer converter dolly) 
manufactured on or after March 1, 1998, shall be equipped with an 
antilock brake system that directly controls the wheels of at least one 
axle of the vehicle. Wheels on other axles of the vehicle may be 
indirectly controlled by the antilock brake system.
    (b) Each full trailer manufactured on or after March 1, 1998, shall 
be equipped with an antilock brake system that directly controls the 
wheels of at least one front axle of the vehicle and at least one rear 
axle of the vehicle. Wheels on other axles of the vehicle may be 
indirectly controlled by the antilock brake system.
    S5.2.3.2 Antilock malfunction signal. Each trailer (including a 
trailer converter dolly) manufactured on or after March 1, 2001, that is 
equipped with an antilock brake system shall be equipped with an 
electrical circuit that is capable of signaling a malfunction in the 
trailer's antilock brake system, and shall have the means for connection 
of this antilock brake system malfunction signal circuit to the towing 
vehicle. The electrical circuit need not be separate or dedicated 
exclusively to this malfunction signaling function. The signal shall be 
present whenever there is a malfunction that affects the generation or 
transmission of response

[[Page 615]]

or control signals in the trailer's antilock brake system. The signal 
shall remain present as long as the malfunction exists, whenever power 
is supplied to the antilock brake system. Each message about the 
existence of such a malfunction shall be stored in the antilock brake 
system whenever power is no longer supplied to the system, and the 
malfunction signal shall be automatically reactivated whenever power is 
again supplied to the trailer's antilock brake system. In addition, each 
trailer manufactured on or after March 1, 2001, that is designed to tow 
other air-brake equipped trailers shall be capable of transmitting a 
malfunction signal from the antilock brake systems of additional 
trailers it tows to the vehicle towing it.
    S5.2.3.3 Antilock malfunction indicator.
    (a) In addition to the requirements of S5.2.3.2, each trailer and 
trailer converter dolly shall be equipped with an external antilock 
malfunction indicator lamp that meets the requirements of S5.2.3.3 (b) 
through (d).
    (b)(1) The lamp shall be designed to conform to the performance 
requirements of Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Recommended 
Practice J592 JUN92, or J592e, July 1972, Clearance, Side Marker, and 
Identification Lamps, for combination, clearance, and side marker lamps, 
which are marked with a ``PC'' or ``P2'' on the lens or housing, in 
accordance with SAE J759 Jan 95, Lighting Identification Code. SAE J592 
June 92, SAE J592e July 1972, and SAE J759 January 1995, are 
incorporated by reference and thereby are made part of this standard. 
The Director of the Federal Register approved the material incorporated 
by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. 
Copies of the material may be inspected at NHTSA's Docket Section, 400 
Seventh Street, SW., room 5109, Washington, DC, or at the National 
Archives and Records Administration (NARA). For information on the 
availability of this material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: 
http://www.archives.gov/federal--register/code--of--federal--
regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    (2) The color of the lamp shall be yellow.
    (3) The letters ``ABS'' shall be permanently molded, stamped, or 
otherwise marked or labeled in letters not less than 10 mm (0.4 inches) 
high on the lamp lens or its housing to identify the function of the 
lamp. Alternatively, the letters ``ABS'' may be painted on the trailer 
body or dolly or a plaque with the letters ``ABS'' may be affixed to the 
trailer body or converter dolly; the letters ``ABS'' shall be not less 
than 25 mm (1 inch) high. A portion of one of the letters in the 
alternative identification shall be not more than 150 mm (5.9 inches) 
from the edge of the lamp lens.
    (c) Location requirements. (1) Each trailer that is not a trailer 
converter dolly shall be equipped with a lamp mounted on a permanent 
structure on the left side of the trailer as viewed from the rear, no 
closer than 150 mm (5.9 inches), and no farther than 600 mm (23.6 
inches) from the red rear side marker lamp, when measured between the 
closest edge of the effective projected luminous lens area of each lamp.
    (2) Each trailer converter dolly shall be equipped with a lamp 
mounted on a permanent structure of the dolly so that the lamp is not 
less than 375 mm (14.8 inches) above the road surface when measured from 
the center of the lamp with the dolly at curb weight. When a person, 
standing 3 meters (9.8 feet) from the lamp, views the lamp from a 
perspective perpendicular to the vehicle's centerline, no portion of the 
lamp shall be obscured by any structure on the dolly.
    (3) Each trailer that is not a trailer converter dolly and on which 
the malfunction indicator lamp cannot be placed within the location 
specified in S5.2.3.3(c)(1) shall be equipped with a lamp mounted on a 
permanent structure on the left side of the trailer as viewed from the 
rear, near the red rear side marker lamp or on the front face of the 
left rear fender of a trailer equipped with fenders.
    (d) The lamp shall be illuminated whenever power is supplied to the 
antilock brake system and there is a malfunction that affects the 
generation or transmission of response or control signals in the 
trailer's antilock brake system. The lamp shall remain

[[Page 616]]

illuminated as long as such a malfunction exists and power is supplied 
to the antilock brake system. Each message about the existence of such a 
malfunction shall be stored in the antilock brake system whenever power 
is no longer supplied to the system. The lamp shall be automatically 
reactivated when power is again supplied to the trailer's antilock brake 
system. The lamp shall also be activated as a check of lamp function 
whenever power is first supplied to the antilock brake system and the 
vehicle is stationary. The lamp shall be deactivated at the end of the 
check of lamp function, unless there is a malfunction or a message about 
a malfunction that existed when power was last supplied to the antilock 
brake system.
    S5.3 Service brakes--road tests. The service brake system on each 
truck tractor shall, under the conditions of S6, meet the requirements 
of S5.3.1, S5.3.3, S5.3.4, and S5.3.6, when tested without adjustments 
other than those specified in this standard. The service brake system on 
each bus and truck (other than a truck tractor shall) manufactured 
before July 1, 2005 and each bus and truck (other than a truck tractor) 
manufactured in two or more stages shall, under the conditions of S6, 
meet the requirements of S5.3.1, S5.3.3, and S5.3.4 when tested without 
adjustments other than those specified in this standard. The service 
brake system on each bus and truck (other than a truck tractor) 
manufactured on or after July 1, 2005 and each bus and truck (other than 
a truck tractor) manufactured in two or more stages on or after July 1, 
2006 shall, under the conditions of S6, meet the requirements of S5.3.1, 
S5.3.3, S5.3.4, and S5.3.6, when tested without adjustments other than 
those specified in this standard. The service brake system on each 
trailer shall, under the conditions of S6, meet the requirements of 
S5.3.3, S5.3.4, and S5.3.5 when tested without adjustments other than 
those specified in this standard. However, a heavy hauler trailer and 
the truck and trailer portions of an auto transporter need not met the 
requirements of S5.3.
    S5.3.1 Stopping distance--trucks and buses. When stopped six times 
for each combination of vehicle type, weight, and speed specified in 
S5.3.1.1, in the sequence specified in Table I, each truck tractor 
manufactured on or after March 1, 1997, and each single unit vehicle 
manufactured on or after March 1, 1998, shall stop at least once in not 
more than the distance specified in Table II, measured from the point at 
which movement of the service brake control begins, without any part of 
the vehicle leaving the roadway, and with wheel lockup permitted only as 
follows:
    (a) At vehicle speeds above 20 mph, any wheel on a nonsteerable axle 
other than the two rearmost nonliftable, nonsteerable axles may lock up, 
for any duration. The wheels on the two rearmost nonliftable, 
nonsteerable axles may lock up according to S5.3.1(b).
    (b) At vehicle speeds above 20 mph, one wheel on any axle or two 
wheels on any tandem may lock up for any duration.
    (c) At vehicle speeds above 20 mph, any wheel not permitted to lock 
in S5.3.1 (a) or (b) may lock up repeatedly, with each lockup occurring 
for a duration of one second or less.
    (d) At vehicle speeds of 20 mph or less, any wheel may lock up for 
any duration.
    S5.3.1.1 Stop the vehicle from 60 mph on a surface with a peak 
friction coefficient of 0.9 with the vehicle loaded as follows:
    (a) Loaded to its GVWR so that the load on each axle, measured at 
the tire-ground interface, is most nearly proportional to the axles' 
respective GAWRs, without exceeding the GAWR of any axle.
    (b) In the truck tractor only configuration plus up to 500 lbs. or, 
at the manufacturer's option, at its unloaded weight plus up to 500 lbs. 
(including driver and instrumentation) and plus not more than an 
additional 1,000 lbs. for a roll bar structure on the vehicle, and
    (c) At its unloaded vehicle weight (except for truck tractors) plus 
up to 500 lbs. (including driver and instrumentation) or, at the 
manufacturer's option, at its unloaded weight plus up

[[Page 617]]

to 500 lbs. (including driver and instrumentation) plus not more than an 
additional 1,000 lbs. for a roll bar structure on the vehicle. If the 
speed attainable in two miles is less than 60 mph, the vehicle shall 
stop from a speed in Table II that is four to eight mph less than the 
speed attainable in two miles.
    S5.3.2 [Reserved]
    S5.3.3 Brake actuation time. Each service brake system shall meet 
the requirements of S5.3.3.1 (a) and (b).
    S5.3.3.1(a) With an initial service reservoir system air pressure of 
100 psi, the air pressure in each brake chamber shall, when measured 
from the first movement of the service brake control, reach 60 psi in 
not more than 0.45 second in the case of trucks and buses, 0.50 second 
in the case of trailers, other than trailer converter dollies, designed 
to tow another vehicle equipped with air brakes, 0.55 second in the case 
of trailer converter dollies, and 0.60 second in the case of trailers 
other than trailers designed to tow another vehicle equipped with air 
brakes. A vehicle designed to tow another vehicle equipped with air 
brakes shall meet the above actuation time requirement with a 50-cubic-
inch test reservoir connected to the control line output coupling. A 
trailer, including a trailer converter dolly, shall meet the above 
actuation time requirement with its control line input coupling 
connected to the test rig shown in Figure 1.
    (b) For a vehicle that is designed to tow another vehicle equipped 
with air brakes, the pressure in the 50-cubic-inch test reservoir 
referred to in S5.3.3.1(a) shall, when measured from the first movement 
of the service brake control, reach 60 psi not later than the time the 
fastest brake chamber on the vehicle reaches 60 psi or, at the option of 
the manufacturer, in not more than 0.35 second in the case of trucks and 
buses, 0.55 second in the case of trailer converter dollies, and 0.50 
second in the case of trailers other than trailer converter dollies.
    S5.3.4 Brake release time. Each service brake system shall meet the 
requirements of S5.3.4.1 (a) and (b).
    S5.3.4.1(a) With an initial service brake chamber air pressure of 95 
psi, the air pressure in each brake chamber shall, when measured from 
the first movement of the service brake control, fall to 5 psi in not 
more than 0.55 second in the case of trucks and buses; 1.00 second in 
the case of trailers, other than trailer converter dollies, designed to 
tow another vehicle equipped with air brakes; 1.10 seconds in the case 
of trailer converter dollies; and 1.20 seconds in the case of trailers 
other than trailers designed to tow another vehicle equipped with air 
brakes. A vehicle designated to tow another vehicle equipped with air 
brakes shall meet the above release time requirement with a 50-cubic-
inch test reservoir connected to the control line output coupling. A 
trailer, including a trailer converter dolly, shall meet the above 
release time requirement with its control line input coupling connected 
to the test rig shown in Figure 1.
    (b) For vehicles designed to tow another vehicle equipped with air 
brakes, the pressure in the 50-cubic-inch test reservoir referred to in 
S5.3.4.1(a) shall, when measured from the first movement of the service 
brake control, fall to 5 psi in not more than 0.75 seconds in the case 
of trucks and buses, 1.10 seconds in the case of trailer converter 
dollies, and 1.00 seconds in the case of trailers other than trailer 
converter dollies.
    S5.3.5 Control signal pressure differential--converter dollies and 
trailers designed to tow another vehicle equipped with air brakes.
    (a) For a trailer designed to tow another vehicle equipped with air 
brakes, the pressure differential between the control line input 
coupling and a 50-cubic-inch test reservoir attached to the control line 
output coupling shall not exceed the values specified in S5.3.5(a) (1), 
(2), and (3) under the conditions specified in S5.3.5(b) (1) through 
(4):
    (1) 1 psi at all input pressures equal to or greater than 5 psi, but 
not greater than 20 psi;
    (2) 2 psi at all input pressures equal to or greater than 20 psi but 
not greater than 40 psi; and
    (3) Not more than a 5-percent differential at any input pressure 
equal to or greater than 40 psi.
    (b) The requirements in S5.3.5(a) shall be met--

[[Page 618]]

    (1) When the pressure at the input coupling is steady, increasing or 
decreasing;
    (2) When air is applied to or released from the control line input 
coupling using the trailer test rig shown in Figure 1;
    (3) With a fixed orifice consisting of a 0.0180 inch diameter hole 
(no. 77 drill bit) in a 0.032 inch thick disc installed in the control 
line between the trailer test rig coupling and the vehicle's control 
line input coupling; and
    (4) Operating the trailer test rig in the same manner and under the 
same conditions as it is operated during testing to measure brake 
actuation and release times, as specified in S5.3.3 and S5.3.4, except 
for the installation of the orifice in the control line to restrict 
airflow rate.
    S5.3.6 Stability and control during braking--trucks and buses. When 
stopped four consecutive times for each combination of weight, speed, 
and road conditions specified in S5.3.6.1 and S5.3.6.2, each truck 
tractor shall stop at least three times within the 12-foot lane, without 
any part of the vehicle leaving the roadway. When stopped four 
consecutive times for each combination of weight, speed, and road 
conditions specified in S5.3.6.1 and S5.3.6.2, each bus and truck (other 
than a truck tractor) manufactured on or after July 1, 2005, and each 
bus and truck (other than a truck tractor) manufactured in two or more 
stages on or after July 1, 2006, shall stop at least three times within 
the 12-foot lane, without any part of the vehicle leaving the roadway.
    S5.3.6.1 Using a full-treadle brake application for the duration of 
the stop, stop the vehicle from 30 mph or 75 percent of the maximum 
drive-through speed, whichever is less, on a 500-foot radius curved 
roadway with a wet level surface having a peak friction coefficient of 
0.5 when measured on a straight or curved section of the curved roadway 
using an American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) E1136 
standard reference tire, in accordance with ASTM Method E1337-90, at a 
speed of 40 mph, with water delivery.
    S5.3.6.2 Stop the vehicle, with the vehicle:
    (a) Loaded to its GVWR, for a truck tractor, and
    (b) At its unloaded weight plus up to 500 pounds (including driver 
and instrumentation), or at the manufacturer's option, at its unloaded 
weight plus up to 500 pounds (including driver and instrumentation) and 
plus not more than an additional 1000 pounds for a roll bar structure on 
the vehicle, for a truck, bus, or truck tractor.
    S5.4 Service brake system--dynamometer tests. When tested without 
prior road testing, under the conditions of S6.2, each brake assembly 
shall meet the requirements of S5.4.1, S5.4.2, and S5.4.3 when tested in 
sequence and without adjustments other than those specified in the 
standard. For purposes of the requirements of S5.4.2 and S5.4.3, an 
average deceleration rate is the change in velocity divided by the 
deceleration time measured from the onset of deceleration.
    S5.4.1 Brake retardation force. The sum of the retardation forces 
exerted by the brakes on each vehicle designed to be towed by another 
vehicle equipped with air brakes shall be such that the quotient sum of 
the brake retardation forces / sum of GAWR's relative to brake chamber 
air pressure, and shall have values not less than those shown in Column 
1 of Table III. Retardation force shall be determined as follows:
    S5.4.1.1 After burnishing the brake pursuant to S6.2.6, retain the 
brake assembly on the inertia dynamometer. With an initial brake 
temperature between 125 [deg]F. and 200 [deg]F., conduct a stop from 50 
m.p.h., maintaining brake chamber air pressure at a constant 20 psi. 
Measure the average torque exerted by the brake from the time the 
specified air pressure is reached until the brake stops and divide by 
the static loaded tire radius specified by the tire manufacturer to 
determine the retardation force. Repeat the procedure six times, 
increasing the brake chamber air pressure by 10 psi each time. After 
each stop, rotate the brake drum or disc until the temperature of the 
brake falls to between 125 [deg]F. and 200 [deg]F.
    S5.4.2 Brake power. When mounted on an inertia dynamometer, each 
brake shall be capable of making 10 consecutive decelerations at an 
average rate of

[[Page 619]]

9 f.p.s.p.s. from 50 m.p.h. to 15 m.p.h., at equal intervals of 72 
seconds, and shall be capable of decelerating to a stop from 20 m.p.h. 
at an average deceleration rate of 14 f.p.s.p.s. 1 minute after the 10th 
deceleration. The series of decelerations shall be conducted as follows:
    S5.4.2.1 With an initial brake temperature between 150 [deg]F. and 
200 [deg]F. for the first brake application, and the drum or disc 
rotating at a speed equivalent to 50 m.p.h., apply the brake and 
decelerate at an average deceleration rate of 9 f.p.s.p.s. to 15 m.p.h. 
Upon reaching 15 m.p.h., accelerate to 50 m.p.h. and apply the brake for 
a second time 72 seconds after the start of the first application. 
Repeat the cycle until 10 decelerations have been made. The service line 
air pressure shall not exceed 100 psi during any deceleration.
    S5.4.2.2 One minute after the end of the last deceleration required 
by S5.4.2.1 and with the drum or disc rotating at a speed of 20 m.p.h., 
decelerate to a stop at an average deceleration rate of 14 f.p.s.p.s.
    S5.4.3 Brake recovery. Except as provided in S5.4.3(a) and (b), 
starting two minutes after completing the tests required by S5.4.2, a 
vehicle's brake shall be capable of making 20 consecutive stops from 30 
mph at an average deceleration rate of 12 f.p.s.p.s., at equal intervals 
of one minute measured from the start of each brake application. The 
service line air pressure needed to attain a rate of 12 f.p.s.p.s. shall 
be not more than 85 lb/in\2\, and not less than 20lb/in\2\ for a brake 
not subject to the control of an antilock system, or 12 lb/in\2\ for a 
brake subject to the control of an antilock system.
    (a) Notwithstanding S5.4.3, neither front axle brake of a truck-
tractor is subject to the requirements set forth in S5.4.3.
    (b) Notwithstanding S5.4.3, neither front axle brake of a bus or a 
truck other than a truck-tractor is subject to the requirement set forth 
in S5.4.3 prohibiting the service line air pressure from being less than 
20 lb/in\2\ for a brake not subject to the control of an antilock system 
or 12 lb/in\2\ for a brake subject to the control of an antilock system.
    S5.5 Antilock system.
    S5.5.1 Antilock system malfunction. On a truck tractor manufactured 
on or after March 1, 1997, that is equipped with an antilock brake 
system and a single unit vehicle manufactured on or after March 1, 1998, 
that is equipped with an antilock brake system, a malfunction that 
affects the generation or transmission of response or control signals of 
any part of the antilock system shall not increase the actuation and 
release times of the service brakes.
    S5.5.2 Antilock system power--trailers. On a trailer (including a 
trailer converter dolly) manufactured on or after March 1, 1998, that is 
equipped with an antilock system that requires electrical power for 
operation, the power shall be obtained from the towing vehicle through 
one or more electrical circuits which provide continuous power whenever 
the powered vehicle's ignition (start) switch is in the ``on'' (``run'') 
position. The antilock system shall automatically receive power from the 
stoplamp circuit, if the primary circuit or circuits are not 
functioning. Each trailer (including a trailer converter dolly) 
manufactured on or after March 1, 1998, that is equipped to tow another 
air-braked vehicle shall be equipped with one or more circuits which 
provide continuous power to the antilock system on the vehicle(s) it 
tows. Such circuits shall be adequate to enable the antilock system on 
each towed vehicle to be fully operable.
    S5.6 Parking brakes.
    (a) Except as provided in S5.6(b) and S5.6(c), each vehicle other 
than a trailer converter dolly shall have a parking brake system that 
under the conditions of S6.1 meets the requirements of:
    (1) S5.6.1 or S5.6.2, at the manufacturer's option, and
    (2) S5.6.3, S5.6.4, S5.6.5, and S5.6.6.
    (b) At the option of the manufacturer, for vehicles equipped with 
brake systems which incorporate a common diaphragm, the performance 
requirements specified in S5.6(a) which must be met with any single 
leakage-type failure in a common diaphragm may instead be met with the 
level of leakage-type failure determined in S5.6.7. The election of this 
option does not affect the performance requirements specified in S5.6(a) 
which apply with

[[Page 620]]

single leakage-type failures other than failures in a common diaphragm.
    (c) At the option of the manufacturer, the trailer portion of any 
agricultural commodity trailer, heavy hauler trailer, or pulpwood 
trailer may meet the requirements of Sec. 393.43 of this title instead 
of the requirements of S5.6(a).
    S5.6.1 Static retardation force. With all other brakes made 
inoperative, during a static drawbar pull in a forward or rearward 
direction, the static retardation force produced by the application of 
the parking brakes shall be:
    (a) In the case of a vehicle other than a truck-tractor that is 
equipped with more than two axles, such that the quotient static 
retardation force/GAWR is not less than 0.28 for any axle other than a 
steerable front axle; and
    (b) In the case of a truck-tractor that is equipped with more than 
two axles, such that the quotient static retardation force/GVWR is not 
less than 0.14.
    S5.6.2 Grade holding. With all parking brakes applied, the vehicle 
shall remain stationary facing uphill and facing downhill on a smooth, 
dry portland cement concrete roadway with a 20-percent grade, both
    (a) When loaded to its GVWR, and
    (b) At its unloaded vehicle weight plus 1500 pounds (including 
driver and instrumentation and roll bar).
    S5.6.3 Application and holding. Each parking brake system shall meet 
the requirements of S5.6.3.1 through S5.6.3.4.
    S5.6.3.1 The parking brake system shall be capable of achieving the 
minimum performance specified either in S5.6.1 or S5.6.2 with any single 
leakage-type failure, in any other brake system, of a part designed to 
contain compressed air or brake fluid (excluding failure of a component 
of a brake chamber housing but including failure of any brake chamber 
diaphragm that is part of any other brake system including a diaphragm 
which is common to the parking brake system and any other brake system), 
when the pressures in the vehicle's parking brake chambers are at the 
levels determined in S5.6.3.4.
    S5.6.3.2 A mechanical means shall be provided that, after a parking 
brake application is made with the pressures in the vehicle's parking 
brake chambers at the levels determined in S5.6.3.4, and all air and 
fluid pressures in the vehicle's braking systems are then bled down to 
zero, and without using electrical power, holds the parking brake 
application with sufficient parking retardation force to meet the 
minimum performance specified in S5.6.3.1 and in either S5.6.1 or 
S5.6.2.
    S5.6.3.3 For trucks and buses, with an initial reservoir system 
pressure of 100 psi and, if designed to tow a vehicle equipped with air 
brakes, with a 50 cubic inch test reservoir connected to the supply line 
coupling, no later than three seconds from the time of actuation of the 
parking brake control, the mechanical means referred to in S5.6.3.2 
shall be actuated. For trailers, with the supply line initially 
pressurized to 100 psi using the supply line portion of the trailer test 
rig (Figure 1) and, if designed to tow a vehicle equipped with air 
brakes, with a 50 cubic inch test reservoir connected to the rear supply 
line coupling, no later than three seconds from the time venting to the 
atmosphere of the front supply line coupling is initiated, the 
mechanical means referred to in S5.6.3.2 shall be actuated. This 
requirement shall be met for trucks, buses and trailers both with and 
without any single leakage-type failure, in any other brake system, of a 
part designed to contain compressed air or brake fluid (consistent with 
the parenthetical phrase specified in S5.6.3.1).
    S5.6.3.4 The parking brake chamber pressures for S5.6.3.1 and 
S5.6.3.2 are determined as follows. For trucks and buses, with an 
initial reservoir system pressure of 100 psi and, if designed to tow a 
vehicle equipped with air brakes, with a 50 cubic inch test reservoir 
connected to the supply line coupling, any single leakage type failure, 
in any other brake system, of a part designed to contain compressed air 
or brake fluid (consistent with the parenthetical phrase specified in 
S5.6.3.1), is introduced in the brake system. The parking brake control 
is actuated and the pressures in the vehicle's parking brake chambers 
are measured three seconds after that actuation is initiated. For 
trailers, with the supply line initially pressurized to 100 psi using

[[Page 621]]

the supply line portion of the trailer test rig (Figure 1) and, if 
designed to tow a vehicle equipped with air brakes, with a 50 cubic inch 
test reservoir connected to the rear supply line coupling, any single 
leakage type failure, in any other brake system, of a part designed to 
contain compressed air or brake fluid (consistent with the parenthetical 
phrase specified in S5.6.3.1), is introduced in the brake system. The 
front supply line coupling is vented to the atmosphere and the pressures 
in the vehicle's parking brake chambers are measured three seconds after 
that venting is initiated.
    S5.6.4 Parking brake control--trucks and buses. The parking brake 
control shall be separate from the service brake control. It shall be 
operable by a person seated in the normal driving position. The control 
shall be identified in a manner that specifies the method of control 
operation. The parking brake control shall control the parking brakes of 
the vehicle and of any air braked vehicle that it is designed to tow.
    S5.6.5 Release Performance. Each parking brake system shall meet the 
requirements specified in S5.6.5.1 through S5.6.5.4.
    S5.6.5.1 For trucks and buses, with initial conditions as specified 
in S5.6.5.2, at all times after an application actuation of the parking 
brake control, and with any subsequent level of pressure, or combination 
of levels of pressure, in the reservoirs of any of the vehicle's brake 
systems, no reduction in parking brake retardation force shall result 
from a release actuation of the parking brake control unless the parking 
brakes are capable, after such release, of being reapplied at a level 
meeting the minimum performance specified either in S5.6.1 or S5.6.2. 
This requirement shall be met both with and without the engine on, and 
with and without single leakage-type failure, in any other brake system, 
of a part designed to contain compressed air or brake fluid (consistent 
with the parenthetical phrase specified in S5.6.3.1).
    S5.6.5.2 The initial conditions for S5.6.5.1 are as follows: The 
reservoir system pressure is 100 psi. If the vehicle is designed to tow 
a vehicle equipped with air brakes, a 50 cubic inch test reservoir is 
connected to the supply line coupling.
    S5.6.5.3 For trailers, with initial conditions as specified in 
S5.6.5.4, at all times after actuation of the parking brakes by venting 
the front supply line coupling to the atmosphere, and with any 
subsequent level of pressure, or combination of levels of pressure, in 
the reservoirs of any of the vehicle's brake systems, the parking brakes 
shall not be releasable by repressurizing the supply line using the 
supply line portion of the trailer test rig (Figure 1) to any pressure 
above 70 psi, unless the parking brakes are capable, after such release, 
of reapplication by subsequent venting of the front supply line coupling 
to the atmosphere, at a level meeting the minimum performance specified 
either in S5.6.1 or S5.6.2. This requirement shall be met both with and 
without any single leakage-type failure, in any other brake system, of a 
part designed to contain compressed air or brake fluid (consistent with 
the parenthetical phrase specified in S5.6.3.1).
    S5.6.5.4 The initial conditions for S5.6.5.3 are as follows: The 
reservoir system and supply line are pressurized to 100 psi, using the 
supply line portion of the trailer test rig (Figure 1). If the vehicle 
is designed to tow a vehicle equipped with air brakes, a 50 cubic inch 
test reservoir is connected to the rear supply line coupling.
    S5.6.6 Accumulation of actuation energy. Each parking brake system 
shall meet the requirements specified in S5.6.6.1 through S5.6.6.6.
    S5.6.6.1 For trucks and buses, with initial conditions as specified 
in S5.6.6.2, the parking brake system shall be capable of meeting the 
minimum performance specified either in S5.6.1 or S5.6.2, with any 
single leakage-type failure, in any other brake system, of a part 
designed to contain compressed air or brake fluid (consistent with the 
parenthetical phrase specified in S5.6.3.1) at the conclusion of the 
test sequence specified in S5.6.6.3.
    S5.6.6.2 The initial conditions for S5.6.6.1 are as follows: The 
engine is on. The reservoir system pressure is 100 psi. If the vehicle 
is designed to tow a vehicle equipped with air brakes, a 50

[[Page 622]]

cubic inch test reservoir is connected to the supply line coupling.
    S5.6.6.3 The test sequence for S5.6.6.1 is as follows: The engine is 
turned off. Any single leakage type failure, in any other brake system, 
of a part designed to contain compressed air or brake fluid (consistent 
with the parenthetical phrase specified in S5.6.3.1), is then introduced 
in the brake system. An application actuation of the parking brake 
control is then made. Thirty seconds after such actuation, a release 
actuation of the parking brake control is made. Thirty seconds after the 
release actuation, a final application actuation of the parking brake 
control is made.
    S5.6.6.4 For trailers, with initial conditions as specified in 
S5.6.6.5, the parking brake system shall be capable of meeting the 
minimum performance specified either in S5.6.1 or S5.6.2, with any 
single leakage-type failure, in any other brake system, of a part 
designed to contain compressed air or brake fluid (consistent with the 
parenthetical phrase specified in S5.6.3.1), at the conclusion of the 
test sequence specified in S5.6.6.6.
    S5.6.6.5 The initial conditions for S5.6.6.4 are as follows: The 
reservoir system and supply line are pressurized to 100 psi, using the 
supply line portion of the trailer test rig (Figure 1). If the vehicle 
is designed to tow a vehicle equipped with air brakes, a 50 cubic inch 
test reservoir is connected to the rear supply line coupling.
    S5.6.6.6 The test sequence for S5.6.6.4 is as follows. Any single 
leakage type failure, in any other brake system, of a part designed to 
contain compressed air or brake fluid (consistent with the parenthetical 
phrase specified in S5.6.3.1), is introduced in the brake system. The 
front supply line coupling is vented to the atmosphere. Thirty seconds 
after the initiation of such venting, the supply line is repressurized 
with the trailer test rig (Figure 1). Thirty seconds after the 
initiation of such repressurizing of the supply line, the front supply 
line is vented to the atmosphere. This procedure is conducted either by 
connection and disconnection of the supply line coupling or by use of a 
valve installed in the supply line portion of the trailer test rig near 
the supply line coupling.
    S5.6.7 Maximum level of common diaphragm leakage-type failure/ 
Equivalent level of leakage from the air chamber containing that 
diaphragm. In the case of vehicles for which the option in S5.6(b) has 
been elected, determine the maximum level of common diaphragm leakage-
type failure (or equivalent level of leakage from the air chamber 
containing that diaphragm) according to the procedures set forth in 
S5.6.7.1 through S5.6.7.2.3.
    S5.6.7.1 Trucks and buses.
    S5.6.7.1.1 According to the following procedure, determine the 
threshold level of common diaphragm leakage-type failure (or equivalent 
level of leakage from the air chamber containing that diaphragm) at 
which the vehicle's parking brakes become unreleasable. With an initial 
reservoir system pressure of 100 psi, the engine turned off, no 
application of any of the vehicle's brakes, and, if the vehicle is 
designed to tow a vehicle equipped with air brakes, a 50 cubic inch test 
reservoir connected to the supply line coupling, introduce a leakage-
type failure of the common diaphragm (or equivalent leakage from the air 
chamber containing that diaphragm). Apply the parking brakes by making 
an application actuation of the parking brake control. Reduce the 
pressures in all of the vehicle's reservoirs to zero, turn on the engine 
and allow it to idle, and allow the pressures in the vehicle's 
reservoirs to rise until they stabilize or until the compressor shut-off 
point is reached. At that time, make a release actuation of the parking 
brake control, and determine whether all of the mechanical means 
referred to in S5.6.3.2 continue to be actuated and hold the parking 
brake applications with sufficient parking retardation force to meet the 
minimum performance specified in either S5.6.1 or S5.6.2. Repeat this 
procedure with progressively decreasing or increasing levels (whichever 
is applicable) of leakage-type diaphragm failures or equivalent 
leakages, to determine the minimum level of common diaphragm leakage-
type failure (or equivalent level of leakage from the air chamber 
containing that diaphragm) at

[[Page 623]]

which all of the mechanical means referred to in S5.6.3.2 continue to be 
actuated and hold the parking brake applications with sufficient parking 
retardation forces to meet the minimum performance specified in either 
S5.6.1 or S5.6.2.
    S5.6.7.1.2 At the level of common diaphragm leakage-type failure (or 
equivalent level of leakage from the air chamber containing that 
diaphragm) determined in S5.6.7.1.1, and using the following procedure, 
determine the threshold maximum reservoir rate (in psi per minute). With 
an initial reservoir system pressure of 100 psi, the engine turned off, 
no application of any of the vehicle's brakes and, if the vehicle is 
designed to tow a vehicle equipped with air brakes, a 50 cubic inch test 
reservoir connected to the supply line coupling, make an application 
actuation of the parking brake control. Determine the maximum reservoir 
leakage rate (in psi per minute), which is the maximum rate of decrease 
in air pressure of any of the vehicle's reservoirs that results after 
that parking brake application.
    S5.6.7.1.3 Using the following procedure, introduce a leakage-type 
failure of the common diaphragm (or equivalent leakage from the air 
chamber containing that diaphragm) that results in a maximum reservoir 
leakage rate that is three times the threshold maximum reservoir leakage 
rate determined in S5.6.7.1.2. With an initial reservoir system pressure 
of 100 psi, the engine turned off, no application of any of the 
vehicle's brakes and, if the vehicle is designed to tow a vehicle 
equipped with air brakes, a 50 cubic inch test reservoir connected to 
the supply line coupling, make an application actuation of the parking 
brake control. Determine the maximum reservoir leakage rate (in psi per 
minute), which is the maximum rate of decrease in air pressure of any of 
the vehicle's reservoirs that results after that parking brake 
application. The level of common diaphragm leakage-type failure (or 
equivalent level of leakage from the air chamber containing that 
diaphragm) associated with this reservoir leakage rate is the level that 
is to be used under the option set forth in S5.6(b).
    S5.6.7.2 Trailers.
    S5.6.7.2.1 According to the following procedure, determine the 
threshold level of common diaphragm leakage-type failure (or equivalent 
level of leakage from the air chamber containing that diaphragm) at 
which the vehicle's parking brakes become unreleasable. With an initial 
reservoir system and supply line pressure of 100 psi, no application of 
any of the vehicle's brakes, and, if the vehicle is designed to tow a 
vehicle equipped with air brakes, a 50 cubic inch test reservoir 
connected to the supply line coupling, introduce a leakage-type failure 
of the common diaphragm (or equivalent leakage from the air chamber 
containing that diaphragm). Make a parking brake application by venting 
the front supply line coupling to the atmosphere, and reduce the 
pressures in all of the vehicle's reservoirs to zero. Pressurize the 
supply line by connecting the trailer's front supply line coupling to 
the supply line portion of the trailer test rig (Figure 1) with the 
regulator of the trailer test rig set at 100 psi, and determine whether 
all of the mechanical means referred to in S5.6.3.2 continue to be 
actuated and hold the parking brake applications with sufficient parking 
retardation forces to meet the minimum performance specified in either 
S5.6.1 or S5.6.2. Repeat this procedure with progressively decreasing or 
increasing levels (whichever is applicable) of leakage-type diaphragm 
failures or equivalent leakages, to determine the minimum level of 
common diaphragm leakage-type failure (or equivalent level of leakage 
from the air chamber containing that diaphragm) at which all of the 
mechanical means referred to in S5.6.3.2 continue to be actuated and 
hold the parking brake applications with sufficient parking retardation 
forces to meet the minimum performance specified in either S5.6.1 or 
S5.6.2.
    S5.6.7.2.2 At the level of common diaphragm leakage-type failure (or 
equivalent level of leakage from the air chamber containing that 
diaphragm) determined in S5.6.7.2.1, and using the following procedure, 
determine the threshold maximum reservoir leakage rate (in psi per 
minute). With an initial

[[Page 624]]

reservoir system and supply line pressure of 100 psi, no application of 
any of the vehicle's brakes and, if the vehicle is designed to tow a 
vehicle equipped with air brakes, a 50 cubic inch test reservoir 
connected to the rear supply line coupling, make a parking brake 
application by venting the front supply line coupling to the atmosphere. 
Determine the maximum reservoir leakage rate (in psi per minute), which 
is the maximum rate of decrease in air pressure of any of the vehicle's 
reservoirs that results after that parking brake application.
    S5.6.7.2.3 Using the following procedure, a leakage-type failure of 
the common diaphragm (or equivalent leakage from the air chamber 
containing that diaphragm) that results in a maximum reservoir leakage 
rate that is three times the threshold maximum reservoir leakage rate 
determined in S5.6.7.2.2. With an initial reservoir system and supply 
line pressure of 100 psi, no application of any of the vehicle's brakes 
and, if the vehicle is designed to tow a vehicle equipped with air 
brakes, a 50 cubic inch test reservoir connected to the rear supply line 
coupling, make a parking brake application by venting the front supply 
line coupling to the atmosphere. Determine the maximum reservoir leakage 
rate (in psi per minute), which is the maximum rate of decrease in air 
pressure of any of the vehicle's reservoirs that results after that 
parking brake application. The level of common diaphragm leakage-type 
failure (or equivalent level of leakage from the air chamber containing 
that diaphragm) associated with this reservoir leakage rate is the level 
that is to be used under the option set forth in S5.6(b).
    S5.7 Emergency brake system for trucks and buses. Each vehicle shall 
be equipped with an emergency brake system which, under the conditions 
of S6.1, conforms to the requirements of S5.7.1 through S5.7.3. However, 
the truck portion of an auto transporter need not meet the road test 
requirements of S5.7.1 and S5.7.3.
    S5.7.1 Emergency brake system performance. When stopped six times 
for each combination of weight and speed specified in S5.3.1.1, except 
for a loaded truck tractor with an unbraked control trailer, on a road 
surface having a PFC of 0.9, with a single failure in the service brake 
system of a part designed to contain compressed air or brake fluid 
(except failure of a common valve, manifold, brake fluid housing, or 
brake chamber housing), the vehicle shall stop at least once in not more 
than the distance specified in Column 5 of Table II, measured from the 
point at which movement of the service brake control begins, except that 
a truck-tractor tested at its unloaded vehicle weight plus up to 1500 
pounds shall stop at least once in not more than the distance specified 
in Column 6 of Table II. The stop shall be made without any part of the 
vehicle leaving the roadway, and with unlimited wheel lockup permitted 
at any speed.
    S5.7.2 Emergency brake system operation. The emergency brake system 
shall be applied and released, and be capable of modulation, by means of 
the service brake control.
    S5.7.3 Towing vehicle emergency brake requirements. In addition to 
meeting the other requirements of S5.7, a vehicle designed to tow 
another vehicle equipped with air brakes shall--
    (a) In the case of a truck-tractor in the unloaded condition and a 
single unit truck which is capable of towing an airbrake equipped 
vehicle and is loaded to GVWR, be capable of meeting the requirements of 
S5.7.1 by operation of the service brake control only, with the trailer 
air supply line and air control line from the towing vehicle vented to 
the atmosphere in accordance with S6.1.14;
    (b) Be capable of modulating the air in the supply or control line 
to the trailer by means of the service brake control with a single 
failure in the towing vehicle service brake system as specified in 
S5.7.1.
    (c) [Reserved]
    S5.8 Emergency brakes for trailers. Each trailer shall meet the 
requirements of S5.8.1 through S5.8.3.
    S5.8.1 Emergency braking capability. Each trailer other than a 
trailer converter dolly shall have a parking brake system that conforms 
to S5.6 and that applies with the force specified in S5.6.1 or S5.6.2 
when the air pressure in the supply line is at atmospheric pressure.

[[Page 625]]

A trailer converter dolly shall have, at the manufacturer's option--
    (a) A parking brake system that conforms to S5.6 and that applies 
with the force specified in S5.6.1 or S5.6.2 when the air pressure in 
the supply line is at atmospheric pressure, or
    (b) An emergency system that automatically applies the service 
brakes when the service reservoir is at any pressure above 20 lb/in\2\ 
and the supply line is at atmospheric pressure. However, any 
agricultural commodity trailer, heavy hauler trailer, or pulpwood 
trailer shall meet the requirements of S5.8.1 or, at the option of the 
manufacturer, the requirements of Sec. 393.43 of this title.
    S5.8.2 Supply line pressure retention. Any single leakage type 
failure in the service brake system (except for a failure of the supply 
line, a valve directly connected to the supply line or a component of a 
brake chamber housing) shall not result in the pressure in the supply 
line falling below 70 psi, measured at the forward trailer supply 
coupling. A trailer shall meet the above supply line pressure retention 
requirement with its brake system connected to the trailer test rig 
shown in Figure 1, with the reservoirs of the trailer and test rig 
initially pressurized to 100 psi and the regulator of the trailer test 
rig set at 100 psi; except that a trailer equipped with an air-applied, 
mechanically-held parking brake system and not designed to tow a vehicle 
equipped with air brakes, at the manufacturer's option, may meet the 
requirements of S5.8.4 rather than those of S5.8.2 and S5.8.3.
    S5.8.3 Automatic application of parking brakes. With an initial 
reservoir system pressure of 100 psi and initial supply line pressure of 
100 psi, and if designed to tow a vehicle equipped with air brakes, with 
a 50 cubic inch test reservoir connected to the rear supply line 
coupling, and with any subsequent single leakage type failure in any 
other brake system, of a part designed to contain compressed air or 
brake fluid (consistent with the parenthetical phrase specified in 
S5.6.3.1), whenever the air pressure in the supply line is 70 psi or 
higher, the parking brakes shall not provide any brake retardation as a 
result of complete or partial automatic application of the parking 
brakes.
    S5.8.4 Automatic application of air-applied, mechanically held 
parking brakes. With its brake system connected to the supply line 
portion of the trailer test rig (Figure 1) and the regulator of the 
trailer test rig set at 100 psi, and with any single leakage type 
failure in the service brake system (except for a failure of the supply 
line, a valve directly connected to the supply line or a component of a 
brake chamber, but including failure of any common diaphragm), the 
parking brakes shall not provide any brake retardation as a result of 
complete or partial automatic application of the parking brakes.
    S5.9 Final inspection. Inspect the service brake system for the 
condition of adjustment and for the brake indicator display in 
accordance with S5.1.8 and S5.2.2.
    S6. Conditions. The requirements of S5 shall be met by a vehicle 
when it is tested according to the conditions set in this S6, without 
replacing any brake system part or making any adjustments to the brake 
system except as specified. Unless otherwise specified, where a range of 
conditions is specified, the vehicle must be capable of meeting the 
requirements at all points within the range. On vehicles equipped with 
automatic brake adjusters, the automatic brake adjusters must remain 
activated at all times. Compliance of vehicles manufactured in two or 
more stages may, at the option of the final-stage manufacturer, be 
demonstrated to comply with this standard by adherence to the 
instructions of the incomplete vehicle manufacturer provided with the 
vehicle in accordance with Sec. 568.4(a)(7)(ii) and Sec. 568.5 of 
title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
    S6.1 Road test conditions.
    S6.1.1 Except as otherwise specified, the vehicle is loaded to its 
GVWR, distributed proportionally to its GAWRs. During the burnish 
procedure specified in S6.1.8, truck tractors shall be loaded to their 
GVWR, by coupling them to an unbraked flatbed semitrailer, which 
semitrailer shall be loaded so that the weight of the tractor-trailer 
combination equals the GVWR of the truck tractor. The load on the 
unbraked flatbed semitrailer shall be located so that

[[Page 626]]

the truck tractor's wheels do not lock during burnish.
    S6.1.2 The inflation pressure is as specified by the vehicle 
manufacturer for the GVWR.
    S6.1.3 Unless otherwise specified, the transmission selector control 
is in neutral or the clutch is disengaged during all decelerations and 
during static parking brake tests.
    S6.1.4 All vehicle openings (doors, windows, hood, trunk, cargo 
doors, etc.) are in a closed position except as required for 
instrumentation purposes.
    S6.1.5 The ambient temperature is between 32 [deg]F. and 100 [deg]F.
    S6.1.6 The wind velocity is zero.
    S6.1.7 Unless otherwise specified, stopping tests are conducted on a 
12-foot wide level, straight roadway having a peak friction coefficient 
of 0.9. For road tests in S5.3, the vehicle is aligned in the center of 
the roadway at the beginning of a stop. Peak friction coefficient is 
measured using an ASTM E1136 standard reference test tire in accordance 
with ASTM method E1337-90, at a speed of 40 mph, without water delivery 
for the surface with PFC of 0.9, and with water delivery for the surface 
with PFC of 0.5.
    S6.1.8 For vehicles with parking brake systems not utilizing the 
service brake friction elements, burnish the friction elements of such 
systems prior to the parking brake test according to the manufacturer's 
recommendations. For vehicles with parking brake systems utilizing the 
service brake friction elements, burnish the brakes as follows: With the 
transmission in the highest gear appropriate for a speed of 40 mph, make 
500 snubs between 40 mph and 20 mph at a deceleration rate of 10 
f.p.s.p.s., or at the vehicle's maximum deceleration rate if less than 
10 f.p.s.p.s. Except where an adjustment is specified, after each brake 
application accelerate to 40 mph and maintain that speed until making 
the next brake application at a point 1 mile from the initial point of 
the previous brake application. If the vehicle cannot attain a speed of 
40 mph in 1 mile, continue to accelerate until the vehicle reaches 40 
mph or until the vehicle has traveled 1.5 miles from the initial point 
of the previous brake application, whichever occurs first. Any automatic 
pressure limiting valve is in use to limit pressure as designed. The 
brakes may be adjusted up to three times during the burnish procedure, 
at intervals specified by the vehicle manufacturer, and may be adjusted 
at the conclusion of the burnishing, in accordance with the vehicle 
manufacturer's recommendation.
    S6.1.9 Static parking brake tests for a semitrailer are conducted 
with the front-end supported by an unbraked dolly. The weight of the 
dolly is included as part of the trailer load.
    S6.1.10 In a test other than a static parking test, a truck tractor 
is tested at its GVWR by coupling it to an unbraked flatbed semi-trailer 
(hereafter, control trailer) as specified in S6.1.10.2 to S6.1.10.4.
    S6.1.10.1 [Reserved]
    S6.1.10.2 The center of gravity height of the ballast on the loaded 
control trailer shall be less than 24 inches above the top of the 
tractor's fifth wheel.
    S6.1.10.3 The control trailer has a single axle with a GAWR of 
18,000 pounds and a length, measured from the transverse centerline of 
the axle to the centerline of the kingpin, of 258 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>6 inches.
    S6.1.10.4 The control trailer is loaded so that its axle is loaded 
at 4,500 pounds and the tractor is loaded to its GVWR, loaded above the 
kingpin only, with the tractor's fifth wheel adjusted so that the load 
on each axle measured at the tire-ground interface is most nearly 
proportional to the axles' respective GAWRs, without exceeding the GAWR 
of the tractor's axle or axles or control trailer's axle.
    S6.1.11 Special drive conditions. A vehicle equipped with an 
interlocking axle system or a front wheel drive system that is engaged 
and disengaged by the driver is tested with the system disengaged.
    S6.1.12 Liftable axles. A vehicle with a liftable axle is tested at 
GVWR with the liftable axle down and at unloaded vehicle weight with the 
liftable axle up.
    S6.1.13 Trailer test rig.
    The trailer test rig shown in Figure 1 is calibrated in accordance 
with the calibration curves shown in Figure 3. For the requirements of 
S5.3.3.1 and

[[Page 627]]

S5.3.4.1, the pressure in the trailer test rig reservoir is initially 
set at 100 psi for actuation tests and 95 psi for release tests.
    S6.1.14 In testing the emergency braking system of towing vehicles 
under S5.7.3(a), the hose(s) is vented to the atmosphere at any time not 
less than 1 second and not more than 1 minute before the emergency stop 
begins, while the vehicle is moving at the speed from which the stop is 
to be made and any manual control for the towing vehicle protection 
system is in the position to supply air and brake control signals to the 
vehicle being towed. No brake application is made from the time the 
line(s) is vented until the emergency stop begins and no manual 
operation of the parking brake system or towing vehicle protection 
system occurs from the time the line(s) is vented until the stop is 
completed.
    S6.1.15 Initial brake temperature. Unless otherwise specified, the 
initial brake temperature is not less than 150[deg] F and not more than 
200[deg] F.
    S6.1.16 Thermocouples.
    The brake temperature is measured by plug-type thermocouples 
installed in the approximate center of the facing length and width of 
the most heavily loaded shoe or disc pad, one per brake, as shown in 
Figure 2. A second thermocouple may be installed at the beginning of the 
test sequence if the lining wear is expected to reach a point causing 
the first thermocouple to contact the rubbing surface of a drum or 
rotor. The second thermocouple shall be installed at a depth of .080 
inch and located within 1 inch circumferentially of the thermocouple 
installed at .040 inch depth. For centergrooved shoes or pads, 
thermocouples are installed within one-eighth of an inch to one-quarter 
of an inch of the groove and as close to the center as possible.
    S6.1.17 Selection of compliance options. Where manufacturer options 
are specified, the manufacturer shall select the option by the time it 
certifies the vehicle and may not thereafter select a different option 
for the vehicle. Each manufacturer shall, upon request from the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, provide information regarding 
which of the compliance options it has selected for a particular vehicle 
or make/model.
    S6.2 Dynamometer test conditions.
    S6.2.1 The dynamometer inertia for each wheel is equivalent to the 
load on the wheel with the axle loaded to its GAWR. For a vehicle having 
additional GAWRs specified for operation at reduced speeds, the GAWR 
used is that specified for a speed of 50 mph, or, at the option of the 
manufacturer, any speed greater than 50 mph.
    S6.2.2 The ambient temperature is between 75[deg] F. and 100[deg] F.
    S6.2.3 Air at ambient temperature is directed uniformly and 
continuously over the brake drum or disc at a velocity of 2,200 feet per 
minute.
    S6.2.4 The temperature of each brake is measured by a single plug-
type thermocouple installed in the center of the lining surface of the 
most heavily loaded shoe or pad as shown in Figure 2. The thermocouple 
is outside any center groove.
    S6.2.5 The rate of brake drum or disc rotation on a dynamometer 
corresponding to the rate of rotation on a vehicle at a given speed is 
calculated by assuming a tire radius equal to the static loaded radius 
specified by the tire manufacturer.
    S6.2.6 Brakes are burnished before testing as follows: place the 
brake assembly on an inertia dynamometer and adjust the brake as 
recommended by the vehicle manufacturer. Make 200 stops from 40 mph at a 
deceleration of 10 f.p.s.p.s., with an initial brake temperature on each 
stop of not less than 315[deg] F and not more than 385[deg] F. Make 200 
additional stops from 40 mph at a deceleration of 10 f.p.s.p.s. with an 
initial brake temperature on each stop of not less than 450[deg] F and 
not more than 550[deg] F. The brakes may be adjusted up to three times 
during the burnish procedure, at intervals specified by the vehicle 
manufacturer, and may be adjusted at the conclusion of the burnishing, 
in accordance with the vehicle manufacturer's recommendation.
    S6.2.7 The brake temperature is increased to a specified level by 
conducting one or more stops from 40 m.p.h. at a deceleration of 10 
f.p.s.p.s. The brake temperature is decreased to a specified level by 
rotating the drum or disc at a constant 30 m.p.h.

[[Page 628]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.051


[[Page 629]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.053


[[Page 630]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.054


[[Page 631]]



                       Table I--Stopping Sequence
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Single
                                                      Truck       unit
                                                     tractors    trucks
                                                               and buses
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Burnish...........................................          1          1
Stability and Control at GVWR (PFC 0.5)...........          2        N/A
Stability and Control at LLVW (PFC 0.5)...........          3          5
Manual Adjustment of Brakes.......................          4        N/A
60 mph Service Brake Stops at GVWR (PFC 0.9)......          5          2
60 mph Emergency Service Brake Stops at GVWR (PFC         N/A          3
 0.9).............................................
Parking Brake Test at GVWR........................          6          4
Manual Adjustment of Brakes.......................          7          6
60 mph Service Brake Stops at LLVW (PFC 0.9)......          8          7
60 mph Emergency Service Brake Stops at LLVW (PFC           9          8
 0.9).............................................
Parking Brake Test at LLVW........................         10          9
Final Inspection..................................         11         10
------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                                           Table II--Stopping Distance in Feet
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                  Service brake                                      Emergency brake
         Vehicle speed in miles per hour         -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    PFC 0.9      PFC 0.9      PFC 0.9      PFC 0.9      PFC 0.9      PFC 0.9      PFC 0.9      PFC 0.9
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                          (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
                                                 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
20..............................................           32           35           32           35           38           30           83           85
25..............................................           49           54           45           54           59           43          123          131
30..............................................           70           78           65           78           84           61          170          186
35..............................................           96          106           89          106          114           84          225          250
40..............................................          125          138          114          138          149          108          288          325
45..............................................          158          175          144          175          189          136          358          409
50..............................................          195          216          176          216          233          166          435          504
55..............................................          236          261          212          261          281          199          520          608
60..............................................          280          310          250          310          335          235          613          720
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Loaded and Unloaded Buses.
(2) Loaded Single-Unit Trucks.
(3) Loaded Tractors with Two Axles; or with Three Axles and a GVWR of 70,000 lbs. or less; or with Four or More Axles and a GVWR of 85,000 lbs. or less.
  Tested with an Unbraked Control Trailer.
(4) Loaded Tractors with Three Axles and a GVWR greater than 70,000 lbs.; or with Four or More Axles and a GVWR greater than 85,000 lbs. Tested with an
  Unbraked Control Trailer.
(5) Unloaded Single-Unit Trucks.
(6) Unloaded Tractors (Bobtail).
(7) All Vehicles except Tractors, Loaded and Unloaded.
(8) Unloaded Tractors (Bobtail).


 Table IIa--Stopping Distance in Feet: Optional Requirements for: (1) Three-Axle Tractors With a Front Axle That
Has a GAWR of 14,600 Pounds or Less, and With Two Rear Drive Axles That Have a Combined GAWR of 45,000 Pounds or
     Less, Manufactured Before August 1, 2011; and (2) All Other Tractors Manufactured Before August 1, 2013
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                           Service brake                     Emergency brake
                                           ---------------------------------------------------------------------
      Vehicle speed in miles per hour          PFC        PFC        PFC        PFC         PFC          PFC
                                           ---------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             0.9  (1)   0.9  (2)   0.9  (3)   0.9  (4)    0.9  (5)     0.9  (6)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
20........................................         32         35         38         40           83           85
25........................................         49         54         59         62          123          131
30........................................         70         78         84         89          170          186
35........................................         96        106        114        121          225          250
40........................................        125        138        149        158          288          325
45........................................        158        175        189        200          358          409
50........................................        195        216        233        247          435          504
55........................................        236        261        281        299          520          608
60........................................        280        310        335        355          613          720
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: (1) Loaded and unloaded buses; (2) Loaded single unit trucks; (3) Unloaded truck tractors and single unit
  trucks; (4) Loaded truck tractors tested with an unbraked control trailer; (5) All vehicles except truck
  tractors; (6) Unloaded truck tractors.


[[Page 632]]


                   Table III--Brake Retardation Force
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Column 2
                                                                brake
           Column 1 brake retardation force/GAWR               chamber
                                                              pressure,
                                                                 PSI
------------------------------------------------------------------------
0.05.......................................................           20
0.12.......................................................           30
0.18.......................................................           40
0.25.......................................................           50
0.31.......................................................           60
0.37.......................................................           70
0.41.......................................................           80
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           Table IV [Reserved]

                  Table V--Brake Chamber Rated Volumes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Column 2
                                                    Column 1     rated
 Brake Chamber type  (nominal area of piston or   full stroke    volume
           diaphragm in square inches)              (inches)     (cubic
                                                                inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Type 9..........................................    1.75/2.10         25
Type 12.........................................    1.75/2.10         30
Type 14.........................................    2.25/2.70         40
Type 16.........................................    2.25/2.70         46
Type 18.........................................    2.25/2.70         50
Type 20.........................................    2.25/2.70         54
Type 24.........................................    2.50/3.20         67
Type 30.........................................    2.50/3.20         89
Type 36.........................................    3.00/3.60        135
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[61 FR 27290, May 31, 1996, as amended at 61 FR 49695, Sept. 23, 1996; 
61 FR 60636, Nov. 29, 1996; 63 FR 7727, Feb. 17, 1998; 66 FR 64158, Dec. 
12, 2001; 67 FR 36820, May 28, 2002; 68 FR 47497, Aug. 11, 2003; 74 FR 
9176, Mar. 3, 2009; 74 FR 42785, Aug. 25, 2009; 75 FR 15620, Mar. 30, 
2010; 76 FR 44833, July 27, 2011]


<R05>
Sec. 571.122  Standard No. 122; Motorcycle brake systems.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies performance requirements for 
motorcycle brake systems.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of the standard is to insure safe 
motorcycle braking performance under normal and emergency conditions.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to motorcycles.
    S4. Definitions.
    Braking interval means the distance measured from the start of one 
brake application to the start of the next brake application.
    Initial brake temperature means the temperature of the hottest 
service brake of the vehicle 0.2 mile before any brake application.
    Skid number means the frictional resistance of a pavement measured 
in accordance with American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) 
Method E-274-70 (as revised July, 1974) at 40 mph, omitting water 
delivery as specified in paragraphs 7.1 and 7.2 of that method.
    Stopping distance means the distance traveled by a vehicle from the 
start of the brake application to the point where the vehicle stops.
    Split service brake system means a brake system consisting of two or 
more subsystems actuated by a single control designed so that a leakage-
type failure of a pressure component in a single subsystem (except 
structural failure of a housing that is common to all subsystems) shall 
not impair the operation of the other subsystem(s).
    S5. Requirements. Each motorcycle shall meet the following 
requirements under the conditions specified in S6, when tested according 
to the procedures and in the sequence specified in S7. Corresponding 
test procedures of S7 are indicated in parentheses. If a motorcycle is 
incapable of attaining a specified speed, its service brakes shall be 
capable of stopping the vehicle from the multiple of 5 m.p.h. that is 4 
m.p.h. to 8 m.p.h. less than the speed attainable in 1 mile, within 
stopping distances that do not exceed the stopping distances specified 
in Table 1.
    S5.1 Required equipment--split service brake system. Each motorcycle 
shall have either a split service brake system or two independently 
actuated service brake systems.
    S5.1.1 Mechanical service brake system. Failure of any component in 
a mechanical service brake system shall not result in a loss of braking 
ability in the other service brake system on the vehicle.
    S5.1.2 Hydraulic service brake system. A leakage failure in a 
hydraulic service brake system shall not result in a loss of braking 
ability in the other service brake system on the vehicle. Each 
motorcycle equipped with a hydraulic brake system shall have the 
equipment specified in S5.1.2.1 and S5.1.2.2.
    S5.1.2.1 Master cylinder reservoirs. Each master cylinder shall have 
a separate reservoir for each brake circuit, with each reservoir filler 
opening having its own cover, seal, and cover retention device. Each 
reservoir shall have a minimum capacity equivalent to one and one-half 
times the total

[[Page 633]]

fluid displacement resulting when all the wheel cylinders or caliper 
pistons serviced by the reservoir move from a new lining, fully 
retracted position to a fully worn, fully applied position. Where 
adjustment is a factor, the worst condition of adjustment shall be used 
for this measurement.
    S5.1.2.2 Reservoir labeling. Each motorcycle shall have a brake 
fluid warning statement that reads as follows, in letters at least three 
thirty-seconds of an inch high:
    Warning: Clean filler cap before removing. Use only ------ fluid 
from a sealed container. (Inserting the recommended type of brake fluid 
as specified in 49 CFR 571.116, e.g., DOT 3.)
    The lettering shall be:
    (a) Permanently affixed, engraved, or embossed;
    (b) Located so as to be visible by direct view, either on or within 
4 inches of the brake-fluid reservoir filler plug or cap; and
    (c) Of a color that contrasts with its background, if it is not 
engraved or embossed.
    S5.1.3 Split service brake system. In addition to the equipment 
required by S5.1.2 each motorcycle equipped with a split service brake 
system shall have a failure indicator lamp as specified in S5.1.3.1.
    S5.1.3.1 Failure indicator lamp.
    (a) One or more electrically operated service brake system failure 
indicator lamps that is mounted in front of and in clear view of the 
driver, and that is activated--
    (1) In the event of pressure failure in any part of the service 
brake system, other than a structural failure of either a brake master 
cylinder body in a split integral body type master cylinder system or a 
service brake system failure indicator body, before or upon application 
of not more than 20 pounds of pedal force upon the service brake.
    (2) Without the application of pedal force, when the level of brake 
fluid in a master cylinder reservoir drops to less than the recommended 
safe level specified by the manufacturer or to less than one-half the 
fluid reservoir capacity, whichever is the greater.
    (b) All failure indicator lamps shall be activated when the ignition 
switch is turned from the ``off'' to the ``on'' or to the ``start'' 
position.
    (c) Except for the momentary activation required by S5.1.3.1(b), 
each indicator lamp, once activated, shall remain activated as long as 
the condition exists, whenever the ignition switch is in the ``on'' 
position. An indicator lamp activated when the ignition is turned to the 
``start'' position shall be deactivated upon return of the switch to the 
``on'' position unless a failure exists in the service brake system.
    (d) Each indicator lamp shall have a red lens with the legend 
``Brake Failure'' on or adjacent to it in letters not less than three 
thirty-seconds of an inch high that shall be legible to the driver in 
daylight when lighted.
    S5.1.4 Parking brake. Each three-wheeled motorcycle shall be 
equipped with a parking brake of a friction type with a solely 
mechanical means to retain engagement.
    S5.1.5 Other requirements. The brake system shall be installed so 
that the lining thickness of drum brake shoes may be visually inspected, 
either directly or by use of a mirror without removing the drums, and so 
that disc brake friction lining thickness may be visually inspected 
without removing the pads.
    S5.2 Service brake system--first (preburnish) effectiveness.
    S5.2.1 Service brake system. The service brakes shall be capable of 
stopping the motorcycle from 30 m.p.h. and 60 m.p.h. within stopping 
distances which do not exceed the stopping distances specified in Column 
I of Table I (S7.3.1).
    S5.2.2 Partial service brake system. Each independently actuated 
service brake system on each motorcycle shall be capable of stopping the 
motorcycle from 30 m.p.h. and 60 m.p.h. within stopping distances which 
do not exceed the stopping distances specified in Column II of Table I 
(S7.3.2).
    S5.3 Service brake system--second effectiveness. The service brakes 
shall be capable of stopping the motorcycle from 30 m.p.h., 60 m.p.h., 
80 m.p.h., and the multiple of 5 m.p.h. that is 4 m.p.h. to 8 m.p.h. 
less than the speed attainable in 1 mile if this speed is 95 m.p.h. or 
greater, within stopping distances

[[Page 634]]

that do not exceed the stopping distances specified in Column III of 
Table I (S7.5).
    S5.4 Service brake system--fade and recovery. These requirements do 
not apply to a motor-driven cycle whose speed attainable in 1 mile is 30 
m.p.h. or less.
    S5.4.1 Baseline check--minimum and maximum pedal forces. The pedal 
and lever forces used in establishing the fade baseline check average 
shall be within the limits specified in S6.10 (S7.6.1).
    S5.4.2 Fade. Each motorcycle shall be capable of making 10 fade 
stops from 60 m.p.h. at not less than 15 f.p.s.p.s. for each stop 
(S7.6.2).
    S5.4.3 Fade recovery. Each motorcycle shall be capable of making 
five recovery stops with a pedal force that does not exceed 400 Newtons 
(90 pounds), and a hand lever force that does not exceed 245 Newtons (55 
pounds) for any of the first four recovery stops and that for the fifth 
recovery stop, is within, plus 89 Newtons (20 pounds) and minus 44 
Newtons (10 pounds) of the fade test baseline check average force 
(S7.6.3), but not less than 0 Newtons (0 pounds).
    S5.5 Service brake system--final effectiveness. These requirements 
do not apply to a motor-driven cycle whose speed attainable in 1 mile is 
30 mph or less.
    S5.5.1 Service brake system. The service brakes shall be capable of 
stopping the motorcycle in a manner that complies with S5.3 (S7.8.1).
    S5.5.2 Hydraulic service brake system--partial failure. In the event 
of a pressure component leakage failure, other than a structural failure 
of either a brake master cylinder body in a split integral body type 
master cylinder system or a service brake system failure indicator body, 
the remaining portion of the service brake system shall continue to 
operate and shall be capable of stopping the motorcycle from 30 m.p.h. 
and 60 m.p.h. within stopping distances that do not exceed the stopping 
distances specified in Column IV of Table I (S7.8.2).
    S5.6 Parking brake system. The parking brake system shall be capable 
of holding the motorcycle stationary (to the limits of traction of the 
braked wheels), for 5 minutes, in both forward and reverse directions, 
on a 30 percent grade, with an applied force of not more than 90 pounds 
for a foot-operated system and 55 pounds for a hand-operated system 
(S7.9).
    S5.7 Service brake system--water recovery.
    S5.7.1 Baseline check. The pedal and lever forces used in 
establishing the water recovery baseline check average shall be within 
the limits specified in S6.10 (S7.10.1).
    S5.7.2 Water recovery test. Each motorcycle shall be capable of 
making five recovery stops with a pedal force that does not exceed 400 
Newtons (90 pounds), and hand lever force that does not exceed 245 
Newtons (55 pounds), for any of the first four recovery stops, and that 
for the fifth recovery stop, is within, plus 89 Newtons (20 pounds) and 
minus 44 Newtons (10 pounds) of the water recovery baseline check 
average force (S7.10.2), but not less than 0 Newtons (0 pounds).
    S5.8 Service brake system design durability. Each motorcycle shall 
be capable of completing all braking requirements of S5 without 
detachment of brake linings from the shoes or pad, detachment or 
fracture of any brake system components, or leakage of fluid or 
lubricant at the wheel cylinder, and master cylinder reservoir cover, 
seal, or retention device (S7.11).
    S6 Test conditions. The requirements of S5 shall be met under the 
following conditions. Where a range of conditions is specified, the 
motorcycle shall be capable of meeting the requirements at all points 
within the range.
    S6.1 Vehicle weight. Motorcycle weight is unloaded vehicle weight 
plus 200 pounds (including driver and instrumentation), with the added 
weight distributed in the saddle or carrier if so equipped.
    S6.2 Tire inflation pressure. Tire inflation pressure is the 
pressure recommended by the manufacturer for the vehicle weight 
specified in paragraph S6.1.
    S6.3 Transmission. Unless otherwise specified, all stops are made 
with the clutch disengaged.
    S6.4 Engine. Engine idle speed and ignition timing settings are 
according

[[Page 635]]

to the manufacturer's recommendations. If the vehicle is equipped with 
an adjustable engine speed governor, it is adjusted according to the 
manufacturer's recommendation.
    S6.5 Ambient temperature. The ambient temperature is between 32 
[deg]F. and 100 [deg]F.
    S6.6 Wind velocity. The wind velocity is zero.
    S6.7 Road surface. Road tests are conducted on level roadway having 
a skid number of 81. The roadway is 8 feet wide for two-wheeled 
motorcycles, and overall vehicle width plus 5 feet for three-wheeled 
motorcycles. The parking brake test surface is clean, dry, smooth 
portland cement concrete.
    S6.8 Vehicle position. The motorcycle is aligned in the center of 
the roadway at the start of each brake application. Stops are made 
without any part of the motorcycle leaving the roadway and without 
lockup of any wheel.
    S6.9 Thermocouples. The brake temperature is measured by plug-type 
thermocouples installed in the approximate center of the facing length 
and width of the most heavily loaded shoe or disc pad, one per brake, as 
shown in Figure 1.
    S6.10 Brake actuation forces. Except for the requirements of the 
fifth recovery stop in S5.4.3 and S5.7.2 (S7.6.3 and S7.10.2), the hand 
lever force is not less than 10 Newtons (2.3 pounds) and not more than 
245 Newtons (55 pounds) and the foot pedal force is not less than 25 
Newtons (5.6 pounds) and not more than 400 Newtons (90 pounds). The 
point of initial application of the lever forces is 1.2 inches from the 
end of the brake lever grip. The direction of the force is perpendicular 
to the handle grip on the plane along which the brake lever rotates, and 
the point of application of the pedal force is the center of the foot 
contact pad of the brake pedal. The direction of the force is 
perpendicular to the foot contact pad on the plane along which the brake 
pedal rotates, as shown in Figure 2.
    S7. Test procedures and sequence. Each motorcycle shall be capable 
of meeting all the requirements of this standard when tested according 
to the procedures and in the sequence set forth below without replacing 
any brake system part, or making any adjustments to the brake system 
other than as permitted in S7.4. A motorcycle shall be deemed to comply 
with S5.2, S5.3 and S5.5 if at least one of the stops specified in S7.3, 
S7.5 and S7.8 is made within the stopping distances specified in Table 
I.
    S7.1 Braking warming. If the initial brake temperature for the first 
stop in a test procedure (other than S7.10) has not been reached, heat 
the brakes to the initial brake temperature by making up to 10 stops 
from 30 m.p.h. at a deceleration of not more than 10 f.p.s.p.s. On 
independently operated brake systems, the coldest brake shall be within 
10 [deg]F. of the hottest brake.
    S7.2 Pretest instrumentation check. Conduct a general check of test 
instrumentation by making not more than 10 stops from a speed of not 
more than 30 m.p.h. at a deceleration of not more than 10 f.p.s.p.s. If 
test instrument repair, replacement, or adjustment is necessary, make 
not more than 10 additional stops after such repair, replacement or 
adjustment.
    S7.3 Service brake system--first (preburnished) effectiveness test.
    S7.3.1 Service brake system. Make six stops from 30 m.p.h. and then 
six stops from 60 m.p.h. with an initial brake temperature between 130 
[deg]F. and 150 [deg]F.
    S7.3.2 Partial service brake system. For a motorcycle with two 
independently actuated service brake systems, repeat S7.3.1 using each 
service brake system individually.
    S7.4 Service brake system--burnish procedure. Burnish the brakes by 
making 200 stops from 30 m.p.h. at 12 f.p.s.p.s. The braking interval 
shall be either the distance necessary to reduce the initial brake 
temperature to between 130 [deg]F. and 150 [deg]F. or 1 mile, whichever 
occurs first. Accelerate at maximum rate to 30 m.p.h. immediately after 
each stop and maintain that speed until making the next stop. After 
burnishing adjust the brakes in accordance with the manufacturer's 
recommendation.
    S7.5 Service brake system--second effectiveness test. Repeat S7.3.1. 
Then, make four stops from 80 m.p.h. and four stops from the multiple of 
5 m.p.h. that is 4 m.p.h. to 8 m.p.h. less than the speed attainable in 
1 mile if that speed is 95 m.p.h. or greater.

[[Page 636]]

    S7.6 Service brake system--fade and recovery test. These 
requirements do not apply to a motor-driven cycle whose speed attainable 
in 1 mile is 30 m.p.h. or less.
    S7.6.1 Baseline check stops. Make three stops from 30 m.p.h. at 10 
to 11 f.p.s.p.s. for each stop. Compute the average of the maximum brake 
pedal forces and the maximum brake lever forces required for the three 
stops.
    S7.6.2 Fade stops. Make 10 stops from 60 m.p.h. at not less than 15 
f.p.s.p.s. for each stop. The initial brake temperature before the first 
brake application shall be between 130 [deg]F. and 150 [deg]F. Initial 
brake temperatures before brake applications for subsequent stops shall 
be those occurring at the distance intervals. Attain the required 
deceleration as quickly as possible and maintain at least this rate for 
not less than three-fourths of the total stopping distance for each 
stop. The interval between the starts of service brake applications 
shall be 0.4 mile. Drive 1 mile at 30 m.p.h. after the last fade stop 
and immediately conduct the recovery test specified in S7.6.3.
    S7.6.3 Recovery test. Make five stops from 30 m.p.h. at 10 to 11 
f.p.s.p.s. for each stop. The braking interval shall not be more than 1 
mile. Immediately after each stop accelerate at maximum rate to 30 
m.p.h. and maintain that speed until making the next stop.
    S7.7 Service brake system--reburnish. Repeat S7.4 except make 35 
burnish stops instead of 200 stops. Brakes may be adjusted after 
reburnish if no tools are used. These requirements do not apply to a 
motor-driven cycle whose speed attainable in 1 mile is 30 m.p.h. or 
less.
    S7.8 Service brake system--final effectiveness test. These 
requirements do not apply to a motor-driven cycle whose speed attainable 
in 1 mile is 30 m.p.h. or less.
    S7.8.1 Service brake system. Repeat S7.5 including S7.3.1.
    S7.8.2 Partial service brake system test. Alter the service brake 
system on three-wheeled motorcycles to induce a complete loss of braking 
in any one subsystem. Determine the line pressure or pedal force 
necessary to cause the brake system failure indicator to operate. Make 
six stops from 30 m.p.h. and then six stops from 60 m.p.h. with an 
initial brake temperature between 130 [deg]F. and 150 [deg]F. Repeat for 
each subsystem. Determine that the brake failure indicator is operating 
when the master cylinder fluid level is less than the level specified in 
S5.1.3.1(a)(2), and that it complies with S5.1.3.1(c). Check for proper 
operation with each reservoir in turn at a low level. Restore the 
service brake system to normal at completion of this test.
    S7.9 Parking brake test. Starting with an initial brake temperature 
of not more than 150 [deg]F., drive the motorcycle downhill on the 30 
percent grade with the longitudinal axis of the motorcycle in the 
direction of the grade. Apply the service brakes with a force not 
exceeding 90 pounds to stop the motorcycle and place the transmission in 
neutral. Apply the parking brake by exerting a force not exceeding those 
specified in S5.6. Release the service brake and allow the motorcycle to 
remain at rest (to the limit of traction of the braked wheels) for 5 
minutes. Repeat the test with the motorcycle parked in the reversed 
(uphill) position on the grade.
    S7.10 Service brake system--water recovery test.
    S7.10.1 Baseline check stops. Make three stops from 30 m.p.h. at 10 
to 11 f.p.s.p.s. for each stop. Compute the average of the maximum brake 
pedal forces and of the maximum brake lever forces required for the 
three stops.
    S7.10.2 Wet brake recovery stops. Completely immerse the rear brake 
assembly of the motorcycle in water for 2 minutes with the brake fully 
released. Next completely immerse the front brake assembly of the 
motorcycle in water for 2 minutes with the brake fully released. Perform 
the entire wetting procedure in not more than 7 minutes. Immediately 
after removal of the front brake from water, accelerate at a maximum 
rate to 30 mi/h without a brake application. Immediately upon reaching 
that speed make five stops, each from 30 mi/h at 10 to 11 ft/s\2\ for 
each stop. After each stop (except the last) accelerate the motorcycle 
immediately at a maximum rate to 30 mi/h and begin the next stop.
    S7.11 Final inspection. Upon completion of all the tests inspect the 
brake

[[Page 637]]

system in an assembled condition, for compliance with the brake lining 
inspection requirements. Disassemble all brakes and inspect:
    (a) The entire brake system for detachment or fracture of any 
component.
    (b) Brake linings for detachment from the shoe or pad.
    (c) Wheel cylinder, master cylinder, and axle seals for fluid or 
lubricant leakage.
    (d) Master cylinder for reservoir capacity and retention device.
    (e) Master cylinder label for compliance with S5.1.2.2.

                  Table I--Stopping Distances for Effectiveness, Fade and Partial System Tests
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                     Stopping distance, feet--Effectiveness tests
                                     ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Preburnish
                                          Preburnish       effectiveness      Effectiveness      Effectiveness
     Vehicle test speed, m.p.h.         effectiveness         partial          total system    partial hydraulic
                                         total system        mechanical     (S5.4) (SS5.7.1)-- systems (S5.7.2)--
                                         (S5.2.1)--I     systems (S5.2.2)--        III                 IV
                                                                 II
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..................................                 13                 30                 11                 25
20..................................                 24                 54                 19                 44
25..................................                 37                 84                 30                 68
30..................................                 54                121                 43                 97
35..................................                 74                165                 58                132
40..................................                 96                216                 75                173
45..................................                121                273                 95                218
50..................................                150                337                128                264
55..................................                181                407                155                326
60..................................                216                484                185                388
65..................................  .................  .................                217                455
70..................................  .................  .................                264                527
75..................................  .................  .................                303                606
80..................................  .................  .................                345                689
85..................................  .................  .................                389                778
90..................................  .................  .................                484                872
95..................................  .................  .................                540                971
100.................................  .................  .................                598               1076
105.................................  .................  .................                659               1188
110.................................  .................  .................                723               1302
115.................................  .................  .................                791               1423
120.................................  .................  .................                861               1549
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


             Table II--Brake Test Sequence and Requirements
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Sequence L.C.              Test procedure      Requirements
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Instrumentation check..........               S7.2  .................
2. First (Preburnish)
 effectiveness test:
  (a) Service brake system........             S7.3.1             S5.2.1
  (b) Partial service brake system             S7.3.2             S5.2.2
3. Burnish procedure..............               S7.4  .................
4. Second effectiveness test......               S7.5               S5.3
5. First fade and recovery test...               S7.6               S5.4
6. Reburnish......................               S7.7  .................
7. Final effectiveness test:
  (a) Service brake system........             S7.8.1             S5.5.1
  (b) Partial service brake system             S7.8.2             S5.5.2
8. Parking brake test (three-                    S7.9               S5.6
 wheeled motorcycles only)........
9. Water recovery test............              S7.10               S5.7
10. Design durability.............              S7.11               S5.8
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 638]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.059


(Authority: Delegation of authority at 38 FR 12147; secs. 102, 103, 119, 
Pub. L. 89-563, 80 Stat. 718 (15 U.S.C. 1391, 1392, 1407); delegations 
of authority at 49 CFR 1.50 and 49 CFR 501.8)

[37 FR 5034, Mar. 9, 1972, as amended at 37 FR 11974, June 16, 1972; 38 
FR 14753, June 5, 1973; 39 FR 32914, Sept. 12, 1974; 39 FR 43075, Dec. 
10, 1974; 41 FR 24593, June 17, 1976; 43 FR 9606, Mar. 9, 1978; 43 FR 
46548, Oct. 10, 1978; 66 FR 42617, Aug. 14, 2001]

[[Page 639]]


<R05>
Sec. 571.123  Standard No. 123; Motorcycle controls and displays.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for the location, 
operation, identification, and illumination of motorcycle controls and 
displays, and requirements for motorcycle stands and footrests.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to minimize accidents 
caused by operator error in responding to the motoring environment, by 
standardizing certain motorcycle controls and displays.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to motorcycles equipped with 
handlebars, except for motorcycles that are designed, and sold 
exclusively for use by law enforcement agencies.
    S4. Definitions. Clockwise and counterclockwise mean opposing 
directions of rotation around the following axes, as applicable.
    (a) The operational axis of the ignition control, viewed from in 
front of the ignition lock opening;
    (b) The axis of the right handlebar on which the twist-grip throttle 
is located, viewed from the end of that handlebar;
    (c) The axis perpendicular to the center of the speedometer, viewed 
from the operator's normal eye position.
    Scooter means a motorcycle that:
    (1) Has a platform for the operator's feet or has integrated 
footrests, and
    (2) Has a step-through architecture, meaning that the part of the 
vehicle forward of the operator's seat and between the legs of an 
operator seated in the riding position, is lower in height than the 
operator's seat.
    S5. Requirements.
    S5.1. Each motorcycle shall be equipped with a supplemental engine 
stop control, located and operable as specified in Table 1.
    S5.2 Each motorcycle to which this standard applies shall meet the 
following requirements:
    S5.2.1 Control location and operation. If any item of equipment 
listed in Table 1, Column 1, is provided, the control for such item 
shall be located as specified in Column 2, and operable as specified in 
Column 3. Each control located on a right handlebar shall be operable by 
the operator's right hand throughout its full range without removal of 
the operator's right hand from the throttle. Each control located on a 
left handlebar shall be operable by the operator's left hand throughout 
its full range without removal of the operator's left hand from the 
handgrip. If a motorcycle with an automatic clutch other than a scooter 
is equipped with a supplemental rear brake control, the control shall be 
located on the left handlebar. If a scooter with an automatic clutch is 
equipped with a supplemental rear brake control, the control shall be on 
the right side and operable by the operator's right foot. A supplemental 
control shall provide brake actuation identical to that provided by the 
required control of Table 1, Item 11, of this Standard. If a motorcycle 
is equipped with self-proportioning or antilock braking devices 
utilizing a single control for front and rear brakes, the control shall 
be located and operable in the same manner as a rear brake control, as 
specified in Table 1, Item 11, and in this paragraph.
    S5.2.2 Display illumination and operation. If an item of equipment 
listed in Table 2, Column 1, is provided, the display for such item 
shall be visible to a seated operator under daylight conditions, shall 
illuminate as specified in Column 2, and shall operate as specified in 
Column 3.
    S5.2.3 Control and display identification. If an item of equipment 
in Table 3, Column 1, is provided, the item and its operational function 
shall be identified by:
    (a) A symbol substantially in the form shown in Column 3; or
    (b) Wording shown in both Column 2 and Column 4; or
    (c) A symbol substantially in the form shown in Column 3 and wording 
shown in both Column 2 and Column 4.
    (d) The abbreviations ``M.P.H.'', ``km/h'', ``r/min'', ``Hi'', 
``Lo'', ``L'', ``R'', and ``Res'' appearing in Column 2 and Column 4 may 
be spelled in full. Symbols and words may be provided for equipment 
items where none are shown in Column 2, Column 3, and Column 4. Any 
identification provided shall be placed on or adjacent to the control or 
display position, and shall appear upright to the operator.
    S5.2.4 Stands. A stand shall fold rearward and upward if it contacts 
the

[[Page 640]]

ground when the motorcycle is moving forward.
    S5.2.5 Footrests. Footrests shall be provided for each designated 
seating position. Each footrests for a passenger other than an operator 
shall fold rearward and upward when not in use.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30AU05.000


[[Page 641]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30AU05.001


                       Table 2--Motorcycle Display Illumination and Operation Requirements
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Display--Column 1                  Illumination--Column 2                Operation--Column 3
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Speedometer.........................  Yes............................  The display is illuminated whenever
                                                                           the headlamp is activated.
2. Neutral indication..................  Green display lamp.............  The display lamp illuminates when the
                                                                           gear selector is in neutral position.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 642]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30AU05.002


[37 FR 7207, Apr. 12, 1972, as amended at 37 FR 17475, Aug. 29, 1972; 39 
FR 32915, Sept. 12, 1974; 48 FR 42819, Sept. 20, 1983; 49 FR 35381, 
Sept. 7, 1984; 49 FR 35504, Sept. 10, 1984; 56 FR 61387, Dec. 3, 1991; 
63 FR 28933, May 27, 1998; 63 FR 51001, Sept. 24, 1998; 70 FR 51295, 
Aug. 30, 2005]

[[Page 643]]


<R05>
Sec. 571.124  Standard No. 124; Accelerator control systems.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes requirements for the return of 
a vehicle's throttle to the idle position when the driver removes the 
actuating force from the accelerator control, or in the event of a 
severance or disconnection in the accelerator control system.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries resulting from engine overspeed caused by malfunctions in the 
accelerator control system.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, multi-
purpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses.
    S4. Definitions.
    S4.1 Driver-operated accelerator control system means all vehicle 
components, except the fuel metering device, that regulate engine speed 
in direct response to movement of the driver-operated control and that 
return the throttle to the idle position upon release of the actuating 
force.
    Fuel metering device means the carburetor, or in the case of certain 
engines the fuel injector, fuel distributor or fuel injection pump.
    Throttle means the component of the fuel metering device that 
connects to the driver-operated accelerator control system and that by 
input from the driver-operated accelerator control system controls the 
engine speed.
    Idle position means the position of the throttle at which it first 
comes in contact with an engine idle speed control appropriate for 
existing conditions according to the manufacturers' recommendations. 
These conditions include, but are not limited to, engine speed 
adjustments for cold engine, air conditioning, and emission control, and 
the use of throttle setting devices.
    Ambient temperature means the surrounding air temperature, at a 
distance such that it is not significantly affected by heat from the 
vehicle under test.
    S4.2 In the case of vehicles powered by electric motors, the words 
throttle and idle refer to the motor speed controller and motor 
shutdown, respectively.
    S5. Requirements. The vehicle shall meet the following requirements 
when the engine is running under any load condition, and at any ambient 
temperature between -40 degrees Celsius and +52 degrees Celsius after 12 
hours of conditioning at any temperature within that range.
    S5.1 There shall be at least two sources of energy capable of 
returning the throttle to the idle position within the time limit 
specified by S5.3 from any accelerator position or speed whenever the 
driver removes the opposing actuating force. In the event of failure of 
one source of energy by a single severance or disconnection, the 
throttle shall return to the idle position within the time limits 
specified by S5.3, from any accelerator position or speed whenever the 
driver removes the opposing actuating force.
    S5.2 The throttle shall return to the idle position from any 
accelerator position or any speed of which the engine is capable 
whenever any one component of the accelerator control system is 
disconnected or severed at a single point. The return to idle shall 
occur within the time limit specified by S5.3, measured either from the 
time of severance or disconnection or from the first removal of the 
opposing actuating force by the driver.
    S5.3 Except as provided below, maximum time to return to idle 
position shall be 1 second for vehicles of 4536 kilograms or less GVWR, 
and 2 seconds for vehicles of more than 4536 kilograms GVWR. Maximum 
time to return to idle position shall be 3 seconds for any vehicle that 
is exposed to ambient air at -18 degrees Celsius to -40 degrees Celsius 
during the test or for any portion of the 12-hour conditioning period.

[38 FR 2980, Jan. 31, 1973; as amended at 60 FR 13645, Mar. 14, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 571.125  Standard No. 125; Warning devices.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes requirements for devices, 
without self-contained energy sources, that are designed to be carried 
in motor vehicles and used to warn approaching traffic of the presence 
of a stopped vehicle, except for devices designed to be permanently 
affixed to the vehicle.

[[Page 644]]

    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries due to rear end collisions between moving traffic and disabled 
vehicles.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to devices, without self-
contained energy sources, that are designed to be carried in buses and 
trucks that have a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) greater than 
10,000 pounds. These devices are used to warn approaching traffic of the 
presence of a stopped vehicle, except for devices designed to be 
permanently affixed to the vehicle.
    S4. Definitions. Entrance angle means the angle having as its sides 
the line through the center, and normal to the face, of the object to be 
tested, and the line from the center of the object to the center of the 
source of illumination (Figure 2).
    Fluorescent means the property of emitting visible light due to the 
absorption of radiation of a shorter wavelength which may be outside the 
visible spectrum.
    Observation angle means the angle having as its sides the line from 
the observation point to the center of the object to be tested and the 
line from the center of that object to the center of the source of 
illumination (Figure 2).
    Reflex reflective means reflective of light in directions close to 
the direction of incident light, over a wide range of variations in the 
direction of incident light.
    S5. Requirements.
    S5.1 Equipment.
    S5.1.1 Reflex reflective material and fluorescent material that meet 
the requirements of this standard shall be affixed to both faces of the 
warning device. Alternatively, a dual purpose orange fluorescent and red 
reflective material that meets the requirements of this standard 
(hereafter referred to as ``dual purpose material'') may be affixed to 
both faces in places of the reflective and fluorescent materials.
    S5.1.2 Each warning device shall be protected from damage and 
deterioration--
    (a) By enclosure in an opaque protective reusable container, except 
that two or three warning devices intended to be sold for use as a set 
with a single vehicle may be enclosed in a single container; or
    (b) By secure attachment to any light-tight, enclosed, and easily 
accessible compartment of a new motor vehicle with which it is supplied 
by the vehicle manufacturer.
    S5.1.3 The warning device shall be designed to be erected, and 
replaced in its container, without the use of tools.
    S5.1.4 The warning device shall be permanently and legibly marked 
with:
    (a) Name of manufacturer;
    (b) Month and year of manufacture, which may be expressed 
numerically, as ``6/72''; and
    (c) The symbol DOT, or the statement that the warning device 
complies with all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards.
    S5.1.5 Each warning device shall have instructions for its erection 
and display.
    (a) The instructions shall be either indelibly printed on the 
warning device or attached in such a manner that they cannot be easily 
removed.
    (b) Instructions for each warning device shall include a 
recommendation that the driver activate the vehicular hazard warning 
signal lamps before leaving the vehicle to erect the warning device.
    (c) Instructions shall include the illustration depicted in Figure 3 
indicating recommended positioning.
    S5.2 Configuration.
    S5.2.1 When the warning device is erected on level ground:
    (a) Part of the warning device shall form an equilateral triangle 
that stands in a plane not more than 10[deg] from the vertical, with the 
lower edge of the base of the triangle horizontal and not less than 1 
inch above the ground.
    (b) None of the required portion of the reflective material and 
fluorescent material shall be obscured by any other part of the warning 
device except for any portion of the material over which it is necessary 
to provide fasteners, pivoting beads or other means to allow 
collapsibility or support of the device. In any event, sufficient 
reflective and fluorescent material shall be used on the triangle to 
meet the requirements of S5.4 and S5.5.
    S5.2.2 Each of the three sides of the triangular portion of the 
warning device shall not be less than 17 and not

[[Page 645]]

more than 22 inches long, and not less than 2 and not more than 3 inches 
wide (Figure 1).
    S5.2.3 Each face of the triangular portion of the warning device 
shall have an outer border of red reflex reflective material of uniform 
width and not less than 0.75 and not more than 1.75 inches wide, and an 
inner border of orange fluorescent material of uniform width and not 
less than 1.25 and not more than 1.30 inches wide (Figure 1). However, 
this requirement shall not apply if the dual purpose material is used.
    S5.2.4 Each vertex of the triangular portion of the warning device 
shall have a radius of not less than 0.25 inch and not more than 0.50 
inch.
    S5.2.5 All edges shall be rounded or chamfered, as necessary, to 
reduce the possibility of cutting or harm to the user.
    S5.2.6 The device shall consist entirely of the triangular portion 
and attachments necessary for its support and enclosure, without 
additional visible shapes or attachments.
    S5.3 Color.
    S5.3.1 The color of the red reflex reflective material on the 
warning device shall have the following characteristics, both before and 
after the warning device has been conditioned in accordance with S6.1, 
when the source of illumination is a lamp with a tungsten filament 
operating at 2856[deg] Kelvin color temperature. Expressed in terms of 
the International Commission on Illumination (CIE) 1931 standard 
colorimetric observer system (CIE chromaticity diagram, Figure 4), the 
chromaticity coordinates of the red reflex reflective material shall lie 
within the region bounded by the spectrum locus and the lines on the 
diagram defined by the following equations:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Boundary                             Equations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yellow....................................  y=0.33
White.....................................  x+y=0.98
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S5.3.2 The color of the orange fluorescent material on the warning 
device shall have the following characteristics, both before and after 
the warning device has been conditioned in accordance with S6.1, when 
the source of illumination is a 150-watt high pressure xenon compact arc 
lamp. Expressed in terms of the International Commission on Illumination 
(CIE) 1931 standard colorimetric observer system, the chromaticity 
coordinates of the orange fluorescent material shall lie within the 
region bounded by the spectrum locus and the lines on the diagram 
defined by the following equations:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Boundary                             Equations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yellow....................................  y=0.49 x+0.17
White.....................................  x+y=0.93
Red.......................................  y=0.35
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The 150-watt high pressure xenon compact arc lamp shall illuminate 
the sample using the unmodified spectrum at an angle of incidence of 
45[deg] and an angle of observation of 90[deg]. If dual purpose material 
is being tested, it shall be illuminated by a 150-watt high pressure 
xenon compact arc lamp, whose light is diffused by an integrating 
sphere.
    S5.4 Reflectivity. When the red reflex reflective material on the 
warning device is tested in accordance with S6.2, both before and after 
the warning device has been conditioned in accordance with S6.1, its 
total candlepower per incident foot candle shall be not less than the 
values specified in Table I for each of the listed entrance angles.
    S5.5 Luminance. When the orange fluorescent material on the warning 
device is tested in accordance with S6.3, both before and after the 
warning device has been conditioned in accordance with S6.1, it shall 
have a minimum relative luminance of 25 percent of a flat magnesium 
oxide surface and a minimum product of that relative luminance and width 
in inches of 44.
    S5.6 Stability. When the warning device is erected on a horizontal 
brushed concrete surface both with and against the brush marks and 
subjected to a horizontal wind of 40 miles per hour in any direction for 
3 minutes--
    (a) No part of it shall slide more than 3 inches from its initial 
position;
    (b) Its triangular portion shall not tilt to a position that is more 
than 10[deg] from the vertical; and
    (c) Its triangular position shall not turn through a horizontal 
angle of more than 10[deg] in either direction from the initial 
position.

[[Page 646]]

    S5.7 Durability. When the warning device is conditioned in 
accordance with S6.1, no part of the warning device shall become warped 
or separated from the rest of the warning device.
    S6. Test Procedures.
    S6.1 Conditions.
    S6.1.1 Submit the warning device to the following conditioning 
sequence, returning the device after each step in the sequence to 
ambient air at 68 [deg]F. for at least 2 hours.
    (a) Minus 40 [deg]F. for 16 hours in a circulating air chamber using 
ambient air which would have not less than 30 percent and not more than 
70 percent relative humidity at 70 [deg]F.;
    (b) 150 [deg]F. for 16 hours in a circulating air oven using ambient 
air which would have not less than 30 percent and not more than 70 
percent relative humidity at 70 [deg]F.;
    (c) 100 [deg]F. and 90 percent relative humidity for 16 hours;
    (d) Salt spray (fog) test in accordance with American Society of 
Testing and Materials Standard B-117, Standard Method of Salt Spray 
(fog) testing, August 1964, except that the test shall be for 4 hours 
rather than 40 hours; and
    (e) Immersion for 2 hours in water at a temperature of 100 [deg]F.
    S6.2 Reflectivity Test. Test the red reflex reflective materials as 
follows:
    (a) Unless dual purpose material is used, prevent the orange 
fluorescent material from affecting the photometric measurement of the 
reflectivity of the red reflex reflective material, either by separation 
or masking.
    (b) Use a lamp with a tungsten filament operating at 2856[deg] 
Kelvin color temperature as the source of illumination.
    (c) Place the source of illumination 100 feet from the red reflex 
reflective material (Figure 2).
    (d) Place the observation point directly above the source of 
illumination (Figure 2).
    (e) Calculate the total candlepower per incident foot candle of the 
red reflex reflective material at each of the entrance and observation 
angles specified in Table 1.
    S6.3 Luminance Test. Test the orange fluorescent material as 
follows:
    (a) Unless dual purpose material is used, prevent the red reflex 
reflective material from affecting the photometric measurement of the 
luminance of the orange fluorescent material.
    (b) Using a 150-watt high pressure xenon compact arc lamp as the 
light source, illuminate the test sample at an angle of incidence of 
45[deg] and an angle of observation of 90[deg]. If dual purpose material 
is being tested, illuminate the sample diffusely through an integrating 
sphere.
    (c) Measure the luminance of the material at a perpendicular viewing 
angle, with no ray of the viewing beam more than 5[deg] from the 
perpendicular to the specimen.
    (d) Repeat the procedure for a flat magnesium oxide surface, and 
compute the quotient (percentage) of the luminance of the material 
relative to that of the magnesium oxide surface.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.061

              Fig. 1--Dimensions of Warning Device (Inches)

[[Page 647]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.062


[[Page 648]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.063


[39 FR 28636, Aug. 9, 1974, as amended at 40 FR 4, Jan. 2, 1975; 59 FR 
49591, Sept. 29, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 571.126  Standard No. 126; Electronic stability control systems.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes performance and equipment 
requirements for electronic stability control (ESC) systems.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce the number of 
deaths and injuries that result from crashes in which the driver loses 
directional control of the vehicle, including those resulting in vehicle 
rollover.
    S3. Application and Incorporation by Reference.
    S3.1 Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses with a gross vehicle 
weight rating of

[[Page 649]]

4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds) or less, according to the phase-in 
schedule specified in S8 of this standard.
    S3.2 Incorporation by reference. ASTM E1337-90 (Reapproved 1996), 
Standard Test Method for Determining Longitudinal Peak Braking 
Coefficient of Paved Surfaces Using a STD Reference Test Tire, and ASTM 
E1136-93 (1993), Standard Specification for a Radial Standard Reference 
Test Tire, are incorporated by reference in S6.2.2 of this section. The 
Director of the Federal Register has approved the incorporation by 
reference of this material in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR 
part 51. Copies of ASTM E1337-90 (rev. 1996) and ASTM E1136-93 (1993) 
may be obtained from the ASTM Web site at http://www.astm.org, or by 
contacting ASTM, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, PA 19428-
2959. Copies of ASTM E1337-90 (Reapproved 1996) and ASTM E1136-93 (1993) 
may be inspected at NHTSA's Office of Rulemaking, 400 Seventh Street, 
SW., Washington, DC 20590, or at the National Archives and Records 
Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this 
material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/
federal--register/code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    S4. Definitions.
    Ackerman Steer Angle means the angle whose tangent is the wheelbase 
divided by the radius of the turn at a very low speed.
    Drive configuration means the driver-selected, or default, condition 
for distributing power from the engine to the drive wheels (examples 
include, but are not limited to, 2-wheel drive, front-wheel drive, rear-
wheel drive, all-wheel drive, 4-wheel drive high gear with locked 
differential, and 4-wheel drive low gear).
    Electronic stability control system or ESC system means a system 
that has all of the following attributes:
    (1) That augments vehicle directional stability by applying and 
adjusting the vehicle brake torques individually to induce a correcting 
yaw moment to a vehicle;
    (2) That is computer-controlled with the computer using a closed-
loop algorithm to limit vehicle oversteer and to limit vehicle 
understeer;
    (3) That has a means to determine the vehicle's yaw rate and to 
estimate its side slip or side slip derivative with respect to time;
    (4) That has a means to monitor driver steering inputs;
    (5) That has an algorithm to determine the need, and a means to 
modify engine torque, as necessary, to assist the driver in maintaining 
control of the vehicle; and
    (6) That is operational over the full speed range of the vehicle 
(except at vehicle speeds less than 20 km/h (12.4 mph), when being 
driven in reverse, or during system initialization).
    Lateral acceleration means the component of the vector acceleration 
of a point in the vehicle perpendicular to the vehicle's x-axis 
(longitudinal) and parallel to the road plane.
    Low-range four-wheel drive configuration means a drive configuration 
that has the effect of locking the drive gears at the front and rear 
axles together and providing an additional gear reduction between the 
engine speed and vehicle speed of at least 2.0.
    Mode means an ESC performance algorithm, whether driver-selected or 
not (examples include, but are not limited to, standard (default) mode, 
performance mode, snow or slippery road mode, or Off mode).
    Oversteer means a condition in which the vehicle's yaw rate is 
greater than the yaw rate that would occur at the vehicle's speed as a 
result of the Ackerman Steer Angle.
    Side slip or side slip angle means the arctangent of the lateral 
velocity of the center of gravity of the vehicle divided by the 
longitudinal velocity of the center of gravity.
    Understeer means a condition in which the vehicle's yaw rate is less 
than the yaw rate that would occur at the vehicle's speed as a result of 
the Ackerman Steer Angle.
    Yaw rate means the rate of change of the vehicle's heading angle 
measured in degrees/second of rotation about a vertical axis through the 
vehicle's center of gravity.
    S5. Requirements. Subject to the phase-in set forth in S8, each 
vehicle must be equipped with an ESC system

[[Page 650]]

that meets the requirements specified in S5 under the test conditions 
specified in S6 and the test procedures specified in S7 of this 
standard.
    S5.1 Required Equipment. Vehicles to which this standard applies 
must be equipped with an electronic stability control system that:
    S5.1.1 Is capable of applying brake torques individually to all four 
wheels and has a control algorithm that utilizes this capability.
    S5.1.2 Is operational during all phases of driving including 
acceleration, coasting, and deceleration (including braking), except 
when the driver has disabled ESC, the vehicle speed is below 20 km/h 
(12.4 mph), the vehicle is being driven in reverse, or during system 
initialization
    S5.1.3 Remains capable of activation even if the antilock brake 
system or traction control system is also activated.
    S5.2 Performance Requirements. During each test performed under the 
test conditions of S6 and the test procedure of S7.9, the vehicle with 
the ESC system engaged must satisfy the stability criteria of S5.2.1 and 
S5.2.2, and it must satisfy the responsiveness criterion of S5.2.3 
during each of those tests conducted with a commanded steering wheel 
angle of 5A or greater, where A is the steering wheel angle computed in 
S7.6.1.
    S5.2.1 The yaw rate measured one second after completion of the sine 
with dwell steering input (time T<INF>0</INF> + 1 in Figure 1) must not 
exceed 35 percent of the first peak value of yaw rate recorded after the 
steering wheel angle changes sign (between first and second peaks) 
([aring]Peak in Figure 1) during the same test run, and
    S5.2.2 The yaw rate measured 1.75 seconds after completion of the 
sine with dwell steering input must not exceed 20 percent of the first 
peak value of yaw rate recorded after the steering wheel angle changes 
sign (between first and second peaks) during the same test run.
    S5.2.3 The lateral displacement of the vehicle center of gravity 
with respect to its initial straight path must be at least 1.83 m (6 
feet) for vehicles with a GVWR of 3,500kg (7,716 lb) or less, and 1.52 m 
(5 feet) for vehicles with a GVWR greater than 3,500 kg (7,716 lb) when 
computed 1.07 seconds after the Beginning of Steer (BOS). BOS is defined 
in S7.11.6.
    S5.2.3.1 The computation of lateral displacement is performed using 
double integration with respect to time of the measurement of lateral 
acceleration at the vehicle center of gravity, as expressed by the 
formula:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR06AP07.008

    S5.2.3.2 Time t = 0 for the integration operation is the instant of 
steering initiation, known as the Beginning of Steer (BOS). BOS is 
defined in S7.11.6.
    S5.3 ESC Malfunction. The vehicle must be equipped with a telltale 
that provides a warning to the driver of the occurrence of one or more 
malfunctions that affect the generation or transmission of control or 
response signals in the vehicle's electronic stability control system. 
When tested according to S7.10, the ESC malfunction telltale:
    S5.3.1 As of September 1, 2011, must be mounted inside the occupant 
compartment in front of and in clear view of the driver;
    S5.3.2 As of September 1, 2011, must be identified by the symbol 
shown for ``ESC Malfunction Telltale'' or the specified words or 
abbreviations listed in Table 1 of Standard No. 101 (49 CFR 571.101);
    S5.3.3 As of September 1, 2011, except as provided in paragraphs 
S5.3.4, S5.3.5, S5.3.8, and S5.3.10, the ESC malfunction telltale must 
illuminate only when a malfunction(s) of the ESC system exists and must 
remain continuously illuminated under the conditions specified in S5.3 
for as long as the malfunction(s) exists (unless the ``ESC malfunction'' 
and ``ESC Off'' telltales are combined in a two-part telltale and the 
``ESC Off'' telltale is illuminated), whenever the ignition locking 
system is in the ``On'' (``Run'') position; and
    S5.3.4 As of September 1, 2011, except as provided in paragraph 
S5.3.5, each ESC malfunction telltale must be activated as a check of 
lamp function either when the ignition locking system is turned to the 
``On'' (``Run'') position when the engine is not running,

[[Page 651]]

or when the ignition locking system is in a position between ``On'' 
(``Run'') and ``Start'' that is designated by the manufacturer as a 
check position.
    S5.3.5 The ESC malfunction telltale need not be activated when a 
starter interlock is in operation.
    S5.3.6 The requirement S5.3.4 does not apply to telltales shown in a 
common space.
    S5.3.7 The ESC malfunction telltale must extinguish at the next 
ignition cycle after the malfunction has been corrected.
    S5.3.8 The manufacturer may use the ESC malfunction telltale in a 
flashing mode to indicate ESC operation.
    S5.3.9 Prior to September 1, 2011, a disconnection of the power to 
the ESC electronic control unit may be indicated by the ABS malfunction 
telltale instead of the ESC malfunction telltale.
    S5.3.10 Manufacturers may use the ESC malfunction telltale in a 
steady-burning mode to indicate malfunctions of ESC-related systems and 
functions including traction control, trailer stability assist, corner 
brake control, and other similar functions that use throttle and/or 
individual wheel torque control to operate and share common components 
with the ESC system, and may use the ESC malfunction telltale in a 
flashing mode to indicate operation of these ESC-related systems.
    S5.4 ESC Off and Other System Controls. The manufacturer may include 
an ``ESC Off'' control whose only purpose is to place the ESC system in 
a mode or modes in which it will no longer satisfy the performance 
requirements of S5.2.1, S5.2.2, and S5.2.3. An ``ESC Off'' control may 
be combined with other controls in a multi-function control. 
Manufacturers may also provide controls for other systems that have an 
ancillary effect upon ESC operation. Controls of either kind that place 
the ESC system in a mode in which it will no longer satisfy the 
performance requirements of S5.2.1, S5.2.2, and S5.2.3 are permitted, 
provided that:
    S5.4.1 The vehicle's ESC system must always return to the 
manufacturer's original default ESC mode that satisfies the requirements 
of S5.1 and S5.2 at the initiation of each new ignition cycle, 
regardless of what ESC mode the driver had previously selected, unless 
(a) the vehicle is in a low-range four-wheel drive configuration 
selected by the driver on the previous ignition cycle that is designed 
for low-speed, off-road driving, or (b) the vehicle is in a four-wheel 
drive configuration selected by the driver on the previous ignition 
cycle that is designed for operation at higher speeds on snow-, sand-, 
or dirt-packed roads and that has the effect of locking the drive gears 
at the front and rear axles together, provided that the vehicle meets 
the stability performance requirements of S5.2.1 and S5.2.2 in this 
mode.
    S5.4.2 In addition to the requirements of S5.4.1, if the vehicle's 
ESC system has more than one ESC mode that satisfies the requirements of 
S5.1 and S5.2 within the drive configuration selected for the previous 
ignition cycle, the system must return to the manufacturer's original 
default ESC mode.
    S5.4.3 As of September 1, 2011, a control whose only purpose is to 
place the ESC system in a mode or modes in which it will no longer 
satisfy the performance requirements of S5.2.1, S5.2.2, and S5.2.3 must 
be identified by the symbol shown for ``ESC Off'' in Table 1 of Standard 
No. 101 (49 CFR 571.101), or the text, ``ESC Off'' as listed under 
``Word(s) or Abbreviations'' in Table 1 of Standard No. 101 (49 CFR 
571.101).
    S5.4.4 A control for another system that has the ancillary effect of 
placing the ESC system in a mode in which it no longer satisfies the 
performance requirements of S5.2.1, S5.2.2, and S5.2.3 need not be 
identified by the ``ESC Off'' identifiers in Table 1 of Standard No. 101 
(49 CFR 571.101), but the ESC status must be identified by the ``ESC 
Off'' telltale in accordance with S5.5, as of September 1, 2011, except 
if the vehicle is in a 4-wheel drive high gear configuration that has 
the effect of locking the drive gears at the front and rear axles 
together provided the vehicle meets the stability performance criteria 
of S5.2.1 and S5.2.2.
    S5.5 ESC Off Telltale
    S5.5.1 Except as provided in S5.5.10, the vehicle manufacturer must 
provide a telltale indicating that the vehicle has been put into a mode 
that renders it unable to satisfy the requirements of

[[Page 652]]

S5.2.1, S5.2.2 and S5.2.3, if such a mode is provided.
    S5.5.2 As of September 1, 2011, the ``ESC Off'' telltale must be 
identified by the symbol shown for ``ESC Off'' in Table 1 of Standard 
No. 101 (49 CFR 571.101) or the text, ``ESC Off'' as listed under 
``Word(s) or Abbreviations'' in Table 1 of Standard No. 101 (49 CFR 
571.101).
    S5.5.3 As of September 1, 2011, the ``ESC Off'' telltale must be 
mounted inside the occupant compartment in front of and in clear view of 
the driver.
    S5.5.4 Except as provided in paragraph S5.4.4, the ``ESC Off'' 
telltale must remain continuously illuminated for as long as the ESC is 
in a mode that renders it unable to satisfy the requirements of S5.2.1, 
S5.2.2, and S5.2.3, and
    S5.5.5 Notwithstanding S5.3.1(e) of 49 CFR 571.101, the vehicle 
manufacturer may use the ``ESC Off'' telltale to indicate an ESC level 
of function other than the fully functional default mode even if the 
vehicle would meet S5.2.1, S5.2.2 and S5.2.3 at that level of ESC 
function.
    S5.5.6 As of September 1, 2011, except as provided in paragraph 
S5.5.7 and S5.5.8, each ``ESC Off'' telltale must be activated as a 
check of lamp function either when the ignition locking system is turned 
to the ``On'' (``Run'') position when the engine is not running, or when 
the ignition locking system is in a position between ``On'' (``Run'') 
and ``Start'' that is designated by the manufacturer as a check 
position.
    S5.5.7 The ``ESC Off'' telltale need not be activated when a starter 
interlock is in operation.
    S5.5.8 The requirement S5.5.6 does not apply to telltales shown in a 
common space.
    S5.5.9 The ``ESC Off'' telltale must extinguish after the ESC system 
has been returned to its fully functional default mode.
    S5.5.10 The ``ESC Off'' telltale need not illuminate when the 
vehicle is in a 4-wheel drive high gear locked differential 
configuration that has the effect of locking the drive gears at the 
front and rear axles together provided the vehicle meets the stability 
performance requirements of S5.2.1 and S5.2.2.
    S5.6 ESC System Technical Documentation. To ensure a vehicle is 
equipped with an ESC system that meets the definition of ``ESC System'' 
in S4, the vehicle manufacturer must make available to the agency, upon 
request, the following documentation:
    S5.6.1 A system diagram that identifies all ESC system hardware. The 
diagram must identify what components are used to generate brake torques 
at each wheel, determine vehicle yaw rate, estimated side slip or the 
side slip derivative and driver steering inputs.
    S5.6.2 A written explanation describing the ESC system basic 
operational characteristics. This explanation must include a discussion 
on the system's capability to apply brake torques at each wheel and how 
the system modifies engine torque during ESC system activation. The 
explanation must also identify the vehicle speed range and the driving 
phases (acceleration, deceleration, coasting, during activation of the 
ABS or traction control) under which the ESC system can activate.
    S5.6.3 A logic diagram that supports the explanation provided in 
S5.6.2.
    S5.6.4 Specifically for mitigating vehicle understeer, a discussion 
of the pertinent inputs to the computer or calculations within the 
computer and how its algorithm uses that information and controls ESC 
system hardware to limit vehicle understeer.
    S6. Test Conditions.
    S6.1 Ambient conditions.
    S6.1.1 The ambient temperature is between 7 [deg]C (45 [deg]F) and 
40 [deg]C (104 [deg]F).
    S6.1.2 The maximum wind speed is no greater than 10 m/s (22 mph) for 
passenger cars and 5 m/s (11 mph) for multipurpose passenger vehicles, 
trucks and buses.
    S6.2 Road test surface.
    S6.2.1 The tests are conducted on a dry, uniform, solid-paved 
surface. Surfaces with irregularities and undulations, such as dips and 
large cracks, are unsuitable.
    S6.2.2 The road test surface must produce a peak friction 
coefficient (PFC) of 0.9 when measured using an American Society for 
Testing and Materials (ASTM) E1136-93 (1993) standard reference test 
tire, in accordance with ASTM Method E 1337-90 (Reapproved

[[Page 653]]

1996), at a speed of 64.4 km/h (40 mph), without water delivery. (These 
standards are here incorporated by reference as explained in S3.2 
above.)
    S6.2.3 The test surface has a consistent slope between level and 1%.
    S6.3 Vehicle conditions.
    S6.3.1 The ESC system is enabled for all testing, except when it is 
turned off directly or by simulating a malfunction in accordance with 
S7.3 and S7.10, respectively. The ESC system shall be initialized as 
follows: Place the vehicle in a forward gear and obtain a vehicle speed 
of 48 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 8 km/h (30 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 mph). 
Drive the vehicle for at least two minutes including at least one left 
and one right turning maneuver and at least one application of the 
service brake.
    S6.3.2 Test Weight. The vehicle is loaded with the fuel tank filled 
to at least 75 percent of capacity, and total interior load of 168 kg 
(370 lbs) comprised of the test driver, approximately 59 kg (130 lbs) of 
test equipment (automated steering machine, data acquisition system and 
the power supply for the steering machine), and ballast as required by 
differences in the weight of test drivers and test equipment. Where 
required, ballast shall be placed on the floor behind the passenger 
front seat or if necessary in the front passenger foot well area. All 
ballast shall be secured in a way that prevents it from becoming 
dislodged during test conduct.
    S6.3.3 Tires. The vehicle is tested with the tires installed on the 
vehicle at time of initial vehicle sale. The tires are inflated to the 
vehicle manufacturer's recommended cold tire inflation pressure(s) 
specified on the vehicle's placard or the tire inflation pressure label. 
Tubes may be installed to prevent tire de-beading.
    S6.3.4 Outriggers. Outriggers must be used for testing trucks, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, and buses. Vehicles with a baseline 
weight under 2,722 kg (6,000 lbs) must be equipped with ``standard'' 
outriggers and vehicles with a baseline weight equal to or greater than 
2,722 kg (6,000 lbs) must be equipped with ``heavy'' outriggers. A 
vehicle's baseline weight is the weight of the vehicle delivered from 
the dealer, fully fueled, with a 73 kg (160 lb) driver. Standard 
outriggers shall be designed with a maximum weight of 32 kg (70 lb) and 
a maximum roll moment of inertia of 35.9 kg-m\2\ (26.5 ft-lb-sec\2\). 
Heavy outriggers shall be designed with a maximum weight of 39 kg (86 
lb) and a maximum roll moment of inertia of 40.7 kg-m\2\ (30.0 ft-lb-
sec\2\).
    S6.3.5 Automated steering machine. A steering machine programmed to 
execute the required steering pattern must be used in S7.5.2, S7.5.3, 
S7.6 and S7.9. The steering machine shall be capable of supplying 
steering torques between 40 to 60 Nm (29.5 to 44.3 lb-ft). The steering 
machine must be able to apply these torques when operating with steering 
wheel velocities up to 1200 degrees per second.
    S7. Test Procedure.
    S7.1 Inflate the vehicles' tires to the cold tire inflation 
pressure(s) provided on the vehicle's placard or the tire inflation 
pressure label.
    S7.2 Telltale bulb check. With the vehicle stationary and the 
ignition locking system in the ``Lock'' or ``Off'' position, activate 
the ignition locking system to the ``On'' (``Run'') position or, where 
applicable, the appropriate position for the lamp check. The ESC 
malfunction telltale must be activated as a check of lamp function, as 
specified in S5.3.4, and if equipped, the ``ESC Off'' telltale must also 
be activated as a check of lamp function, as specified in S5.5.6. The 
telltale bulb check is not required for a telltale shown in a common 
space as specified in S5.3.6 and S5.5.8.
    S7.3 ``ESC Off'' control check. For vehicles equipped with an ``ESC 
Off'' control, with the vehicle stationary and the ignition locking 
system in the ``Lock'' or ``Off'' position, activate the ignition 
locking system to the ``On'' (``Run'') position. Activate the ``ESC 
Off'' control and verify that the ``ESC Off'' telltale is illuminated, 
as specified in S5.5.4. Turn the ignition locking system to the ``Lock'' 
or ``Off'' position. Again, activate the ignition locking system to the 
``On'' (``Run'') position and verify that the ``ESC Off'' telltale has 
extinguished indicating that the ESC system has been reactivated as 
specified in S5.4.1.
    S7.4 Brake Conditioning. Condition the vehicle brakes as follows:

[[Page 654]]

    S7.4.1 Ten stops are performed from a speed of 56 km/h (35 mph), 
with an average deceleration of approximately 0.5 g.
    S7.4.2 Immediately following the series of 56 km/h (35 mph) stops, 
three additional stops are performed from 72 km/h (45 mph).
    S7.4.3 When executing the stops in S7.4.2, sufficient force is 
applied to the brake pedal to activate the vehicle's antilock brake 
system (ABS) for a majority of each braking event.
    S7.4.4 Following completion of the final stop in S7.4.2, the vehicle 
is driven at a speed of 72 km/h (45 mph) for five minutes to cool the 
brakes.
    S7.5 Tire Conditioning. Condition the tires using the following 
procedure to wear away mold sheen and achieve operating temperature 
immediately before beginning the test runs of S7.6 and S7.9.
    S7.5.1 The test vehicle is driven around a circle 30 meters (100 
feet) in diameter at a speed that produces a lateral acceleration of 
approximately 0.5 to 0.6 g for three clockwise laps followed by three 
counterclockwise laps.
    S7.5.2 Using a sinusoidal steering pattern at a frequency of 1 Hz, a 
peak steering wheel angle amplitude corresponding to a peak lateral 
acceleration of 0.5-0.6 g, and a vehicle speed of 56 km/h (35 mph), the 
vehicle is driven through four passes performing 10 cycles of sinusoidal 
steering during each pass.
    S7.5.3 The steering wheel angle amplitude of the final cycle of the 
final pass is twice that of the other cycles. The maximum time permitted 
between all laps and passes is five minutes.
    S7.6 Slowly Increasing Steer Test. The vehicle is subjected to two 
series of runs of the Slowly Increasing Steer Test using a constant 
vehicle speed of 80 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2 km/h (50 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 1 mph) and a steering pattern that increases by 13.5 
degrees per second until a lateral acceleration of approximately 0.5 g 
is obtained. Three repetitions are performed for each test series. One 
series uses counterclockwise steering, and the other series uses 
clockwise steering. The maximum time permitted between each test run is 
five minutes.
    S7.6.1 From the Slowly Increasing Steer tests, the quantity ``A'' is 
determined. ``A'' is the steering wheel angle in degrees that produces a 
steady state lateral acceleration (corrected using the methods specified 
in S7.11.3) of 0.3 g for the test vehicle. Utilizing linear regression, 
A is calculated, to the nearest 0.1 degrees, from each of the six Slowly 
Increasing Steer tests. The absolute value of the six A's calculated is 
averaged and rounded to the nearest 0.1 degrees to produce the final 
quantity, A, used below.
    S7.7 After the quantity A has been determined, without replacing the 
tires, the tire conditioning procedure described in S7.5 is performed 
immediately prior to conducting the Sine with Dwell Test of S7.9. 
Initiation of the first Sine with Dwell test series shall begin within 
two hours after completion of the Slowly Increasing Steer tests of S7.6.
    S7.8 Check that the ESC system is enabled by ensuring that the ESC 
malfunction and ``ESC Off'' (if provided) telltales are not illuminated.
    S7.9 Sine with Dwell Test of Oversteer Intervention and 
Responsiveness. The vehicle is subjected to two series of test runs 
using a steering pattern of a sine wave at 0.7 Hz frequency with a 500 
ms delay beginning at the second peak amplitude as shown in Figure 2 
(the Sine with Dwell tests). One series uses counterclockwise steering 
for the first half cycle, and the other series uses clockwise steering 
for the first half cycle. The vehicle is provided a cool-down period 
between each test run of 90 seconds to five minutes, with the vehicle 
stationary.
    S7.9.1 The steering motion is initiated with the vehicle coasting in 
high gear at 80 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 km/h (50 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 
mph).
    S7.9.2 In each series of test runs, the steering amplitude is 
increased from run to run, by 0.5A, provided that no such run will 
result in a steering amplitude greater than that of the final run 
specified in S7.9.4.
    S7.9.3 The steering amplitude for the initial run of each series is 
1.5A where A is the steering wheel angle determined in S7.6.1.
    S7.9.4 The steering amplitude of the final run in each series is the 
greater of 6.5A or 270 degrees, provided the calculated magnitude of 
6.5A is less than

[[Page 655]]

or equal to 300 degrees. If any 0.5A increment, up to 6.5A, is greater 
than 300 degrees, the steering amplitude of the final run shall be 300 
degrees.
    S7.9.5 Upon completion of the two series of test runs, post 
processing of yaw rate and lateral acceleration data is done as 
specified in S7.11.
    S7.10 ESC Malfunction Detection.
    S7.10.1 Simulate one or more ESC malfunction(s) by disconnecting the 
power source to any ESC component, or disconnecting any electrical 
connection between ESC components (with the vehicle power off). When 
simulating an ESC malfunction, the electrical connections for the 
telltale lamp(s) are not to be disconnected.
    S7.10.2 With the vehicle initially stationary and the ignition 
locking system in the ``Lock'' or ``Off'' position, activate the 
ignition locking system to the ``Start'' position and start the engine. 
Place the vehicle in a forward gear and obtain a vehicle speed of 48 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 8 km/h (30 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 mph). Drive 
the vehicle for at least two minutes including at least one left and one 
right turning maneuver and at least one application of the service 
brake. Verify that within two minutes after obtaining this vehicle speed 
the ESC malfunction indicator illuminates in accordance with S5.3.
    S7.10.3 As of September 1, 2011, stop the vehicle, deactivate the 
ignition locking system to the ``Off'' or ``Lock'' position. After a 
five-minute period, activate the vehicle's ignition locking system to 
the ``Start'' position and start the engine. Verify that the ESC 
malfunction indicator again illuminates to signal a malfunction and 
remains illuminated as long as the engine is running or until the fault 
is corrected.
    S7.10.4 Deactivate the ignition locking system to the ``Off'' or 
``Lock'' position. Restore the ESC system to normal operation, activate 
the ignition system to the ``Start'' position and start the engine. 
Place the vehicle in a forward gear and obtain a vehicle speed of 48 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 8 km/h (30 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 mph). Drive 
the vehicle for at least two minutes including at least one left and one 
right turning maneuver and at least one application of the service 
brake. Verify that within two minutes after obtaining this vehicle speed 
that the ESC malfunction indicator has extinguished.
    S7.11 Post Data Processing--Calculations for Performance Metrics. 
Yaw rate and lateral displacement measurements and calculations must be 
processed utilizing the following techniques:
    S7.11.1 Raw steering wheel angle data is filtered with a 12-pole 
phaseless Butterworth filter and a cutoff frequency of 10Hz. The 
filtered data is then zeroed to remove sensor offset utilizing static 
pretest data.
    S7.11.2 Raw yaw rate data is filtered with a 12-pole phaseless 
Butterworth filter and a cutoff frequency of 6Hz. The filtered data is 
then zeroed to remove sensor offset utilizing static pretest data.
    S7.11.3 Raw lateral acceleration data is filtered with a 12-pole 
phaseless Butterworth filter and a cutoff frequency of 6Hz. The filtered 
data is then zeroed to remove sensor offset utilizing static pretest 
data. The lateral acceleration data at the vehicle center of gravity is 
determined by removing the effects caused by vehicle body roll and by 
correcting for sensor placement via use of coordinate transformation. 
For data collection, the lateral accelerometer shall be located as close 
as possible to the position of the vehicle's longitudinal and lateral 
centers of gravity.
    S7.11.4 Steering wheel velocity is determined by differentiating the 
filtered steering wheel angle data. The steering wheel velocity data is 
then filtered with a moving 0.1 second running average filter.
    S7.11.5 Lateral acceleration, yaw rate and steering wheel angle data 
channels are zeroed utilizing a defined ``zeroing range.'' The methods 
used to establish the zeroing range are defined in S7.11.5.1 and 
S7.11.5.2.
    S7.11.5.1 Using the steering wheel rate data calculated using the 
methods described in S7.11.4, the first instant steering wheel rate 
exceeds 75 deg/sec is identified. From this point, steering wheel rate 
must remain greater than 75 deg/sec for at least 200 ms. If the second 
condition is not met, the next instant steering wheel rate exceeds 75 
deg/sec is identified and the 200 ms validity check applied. This 
iterative process

[[Page 656]]

continues until both conditions are ultimately satisfied.
    S7.11.5.2 The ``zeroing range'' is defined as the 1.0 second time 
period prior to the instant the steering wheel rate exceeds 75 deg/sec 
(i.e., the instant the steering wheel velocity exceeds 75 deg/sec 
defines the end of the ``zeroing range'').
    S7.11.6 The Beginning of Steer (BOS) is defined as the first 
instance filtered and zeroed steering wheel angle data reaches -5 
degrees (when the initial steering input is counterclockwise) or +5 
degrees (when the initial steering input is clockwise) after time 
defining the end of the ``zeroing range.'' The value for time at the BOS 
is interpolated.
    S7.11.7 The Completion of Steer (COS) is defined as the time the 
steering wheel angle returns to zero at the completion of the Sine with 
Dwell steering maneuver. The value for time at the zero degree steering 
wheel angle is interpolated.
    S7.11.8 The second peak yaw rate is defined as the first local yaw 
rate peak produced by the reversal of the steering wheel. The yaw rates 
at 1.000 and 1.750 seconds after COS are determined by interpolation.
    S7.11.9 Determine lateral velocity by integrating corrected, 
filtered and zeroed lateral acceleration data. Zero lateral velocity at 
BOS event. Determine lateral displacement by integrating zeroed lateral 
velocity. Zero lateral displacement at BOS event. Lateral displacement 
at 1.07 seconds from BOS event is determined by interpolation.
    S8. Phase-in schedule.
    S8.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2008, and before 
September 1, 2009. For vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 
2008, and before September 1, 2009, the number of vehicles complying 
with this standard must not be less than 55 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2005, and before September 1, 
2008; or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2008, and 
before September 1, 2009.
    S8.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2009, and before 
September 1, 2010. For vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 
2009, and before September 1, 2010, the number of vehicles complying 
with this standard must not be less than 75 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2006, and before September 1, 
2009; or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2009, and 
before September 1, 2010.
    S8.3 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2010, and before 
September 1, 2011. For vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 
2010, and before September 1, 2011, the number of vehicles complying 
with this standard must not be less than 95 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2007, and before September 1, 
2010; or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2010, and 
before September 1, 2011.
    S8.4 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2011. All 
vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2011 must comply with 
this standard.
    S8.5 Calculation of complying vehicles.
    (a) For purposes of complying with S8.1, a manufacturer may count a 
vehicle if it is certified as complying with this standard and is 
manufactured on or after June 5, 2007, but before September 1, 2009.
    (b) For purpose of complying with S8.2, a manufacturer may count a 
vehicle if it:
    (1)(i) Is certified as complying with this standard and is 
manufactured on or after June 5, 2007, but before September 1, 2010; and
    (ii) Is not counted toward compliance with S8.1; or
    (2) Is manufactured on or after September 1, 2009, but before 
September 1, 2010.
    (c) For purposes of complying with S8.3, a manufacturer may count a 
vehicle if it:
    (1)(i) Is certified as complying with this standard and is 
manufactured on or after June 5, 2007, but before September 1, 2011; and
    (ii) Is not counted toward compliance with S8.1 or S8.2; or

[[Page 657]]

    (2) Is manufactured on or after September 1, 2010, but before 
September 1, 2011.
    S8.6 Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S8.6.1 For the purpose of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer under S8.1 through S8.4, a vehicle produced by more 
than one manufacturer must be attributed to a single manufacturer as 
follows, subject to S8.6.2:
    (a) A vehicle that is imported must be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, must be attributed 
to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    S8.6.2 A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer must be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR Part 585, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S8.6.1.
    S8.7 Small volume manufacturers.
    Vehicles manufactured during any of the three years of the September 
1, 2008 through August 31, 2011 phase-in by a manufacturer that produces 
fewer than 5,000 vehicles for sale in the United States during that year 
are not subject to the requirements of S8.1, S8.2, S8.3, and S8.5.
    S8.8 Final-stage manufacturers and alterers.
    Vehicles that are manufactured in two or more stages or that are 
altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) after having previously 
been certified in accordance with part 567 of this chapter are not 
subject to the requirements of S8.1 through S8.5. Instead, all vehicles 
produced by these manufacturers on or after September 1, 2012 must 
comply with this standard.

[[Page 658]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR06AP07.006


[72 FR 17310, Apr. 6, 2007, as amended at 72 FR 34410, June 22, 2007; 73 
FR 54542, Sept. 22, 2008]

    Effective Date Note: At 76 FR 55833, Sept. 9, 2011, Sec. 571.126 
was amended by revising S6.3.4, effective October 11, 2011. For the 
convenience of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:

[[Page 659]]


<R05>
Sec. 571.126  Standard No. 126; Electronic stability control systems.

                                * * * * *

    S6.3.4 Outriggers. Outriggers are used for testing trucks, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, and buses. Vehicles with a baseline 
weight less than 1,588 kg (3,500 lbs) are equipped with ``light'' 
outriggers. Vehicles with a baseline weight equal to or greater than 
1,588 kg (3,500 lbs) and less than 2,722 kg (6,000 lbs) are equipped 
with ``standard'' outriggers. Vehicles with a baseline weight equal to 
or greater than 2,722 kg (6,000 lbs) are equipped with ``heavy'' 
outriggers. A vehicle's baseline weight is the weight of the vehicle 
delivered from the dealer, fully fueled, with a 73 kg (160 lb) driver. 
Light outriggers are designed with a maximum weight of 27 kg (59.5 lb) 
and a maximum roll moment of inertia of 27 kg-m\2\ (19.9 ft-lb-sec\2\). 
Standard outriggers are designed with a maximum weight of 32 kg (70 lb) 
and a maximum roll moment of inertia of 35.9 kg-m\2\ (26.5 ft-lb-
sec\2\). Heavy outriggers are designed with a maximum weight of 39 kg 
(86 lb) and a maximum roll moment of inertia of 40.7 kg-m\2\ (30.0 ft-
lb-sec\2\).

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 571.127-571.128  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 571.129  Standard No. 129; New non-pneumatic tires for passenger cars.

    S1 Scope. This standard specifies tire dimensions and laboratory 
test requirements for lateral strength, strength, endurance, and high 
speed performance; defines the tire load rating; and specifies labeling 
requirements for non-pneumatic spare tires.
    S2 Application. This standard applies to new temporary spare non-
pneumatic tires for use on passenger cars.
    S3 Definitions.
    Carcass means the tire structure except for the tread which provides 
the major portion of the tire's capability to deflect in response to the 
vertical loads and tractive forces that the tire transmits from the 
roadway to the non-pneumatic rim, the wheel center member, or the 
vehicle and which attaches to the vehicle or attaches, either integrally 
or separably, to the wheel center member or non-pneumatic rim.
    Carcass separation means the pulling away of the carcass from the 
non-pneumatic rim or wheel center member.
    Chunking means the breaking away of pieces of the carcass or tread.
    Cracking means any parting within the carcass, tread, or any 
components that connect the tire to the non-pneumatic rim or wheel 
center member and, if the non-pneumatic tire is integral with the non-
pneumatic rim or wheel center member, any parting within the non-
pneumatic rim, or wheel center member.
    Load rating means the maximum load a tire is rated to carry.
    Maximum tire width means the greater of either the linear distance 
between the exterior edges of the carcass or the linear distance between 
the exterior edges of the tread, both being measured parallel to the 
rolling axis of the tire.
    Non-pneumatic rim means a mechanical device which, when a non-
pneumatic tire assembly incorporates a wheel, supports the tire, and 
attaches, either integrally or separably, to the wheel center member and 
upon which the tire is attached.
    Non-pneumatic test rim means with reference to a tire to be tested, 
any non-pneumatic rim that is listed as appropriate for use with that 
tire in accordance with S4.4.
    Non-pneumatic tire means a mechanical device which transmits, either 
directly or through a wheel or wheel center member, the vertical load 
and tractive forces from the roadway to the vehicle, generates the 
tractive forces that provide the directional control of the vehicle and 
does not rely on the containment of any gas or fluid for providing those 
functions.
    Non-pneumatic tire assembly means a non-pneumatic tire, alone or in 
combination with a wheel or wheel center member, which can be mounted on 
a vehicle.
    Non-pneumatic tire identification code means an alphanumeric code 
that is assigned by the manufacturer to identify the tire with regard to 
its size, application to a specific non-pneumatic rim or wheel center 
member or application to a specific vehicle.
    Test wheel center member means with reference to a tire to be 
tested, any wheel center member that is listed as appropriate for use 
with that tire in accordance with S4.4.

[[Page 660]]

    Tread means that portion of the tire that comes in contact with the 
road.
    Tread separation means pulling away of the tread from the carcass.
    Wheel means a mechanical device which consists of a non-pneumatic 
rim and wheel center member and which, in the case of a non-pneumatic 
tire assembly incorporating a wheel, provides the connection between the 
tire and the vehicle.
    Wheel center member means, in the case of a non-pneumatic tire 
assembly incorporating a wheel, a mechanical device which attaches, 
either integrally or separably, to the non-pneumatic rim and provides 
the connection between the non-pneumatic rim and the vehicle; or in the 
case of a non-pneumatic tire assembly not incorporating a wheel, a 
mechanical device which attaches, either integrally or separably, to the 
non-pneumatic tire and provides the connection between the tire and the 
vehicle.
    S4 Requirements.
    S4.1 Size and Construction. Each tire shall be designed to fit each 
non-pneumatic rim or wheel center member specified for its non-pneumatic 
tire identification code designation in a listing in accordance with 
section S4.4.
    S4.2 Performance Requirements
    S4.2.1 General. Each tire shall conform to the following:
    (a) Its load rating shall be that specified in a submission made by 
a manufacturer, pursuant to S4.4(a), or in one of the publications 
described in S4.4(b) for its non-pneumatic tire identification code 
designation.
    (b) It shall incorporate a tread wear indicator that will provide a 
visual indication that the tire has worn to a tread depth of \1/16\ 
inch.
    (c) It shall, before being subjected to either the endurance test 
procedure specified in S5.4 or the high speed performance procedure 
specified in S5.5, exhibit no visual evidence of tread or carcass 
separation, chunking or cracking.
    (d) It shall meet the requirements of S4.2.2.5 and S4.2.2.6 when 
tested on a test wheel described in S5.4.2.1 either alone or 
simultaneously with up to 5 tires.
    S4.2.2 Test Requirements.
    S.4.2.2.1 Test Sample. For each test sample use:
    (a) One tire for physical dimensions, lateral strength, and strength 
in sequence;
    (b) A second tire for tire endurance; and
    (c) A third tire for high speed performance.
    S4.2.2.2 Physical Dimensions. For a non-pneumatic tire assembly in 
which the tire is separable from the non-pneumatic rim or wheel center 
member, the dimensions, measured in accordance with S5.1, for that 
portion of the tire that attaches to that non-pneumatic rim or wheel 
center member shall satisfy the dimensional specifications contained in 
the submission made by an individual manufacturer, pursuant to S4.4(a), 
or in one of the publications described in S4.4(b) for that tire's non-
pneumatic tire identification code designation.
    S4.2.2.3 Lateral Strength. There shall be no visual evidence of 
tread or carcass separation, cracking or chunking, when a tire is tested 
in accordance with S5.2 to a load of:
    (a) 1,500 pounds for tires with a load rating less than 880 pounds;
    (b) 2,000 pounds for tires with a load rating of 880 pounds or more 
but less than 1,400 pounds.
    (c) 2,500 pounds for tires with a load rating of 1,400 pounds or 
more, using the load rating marked on the tire or tire assembly.
    S4.2.2.4 Tire Strength. There shall be no visual evidence of tread 
carcass separation, cracking or chunking, when a tire is tested in 
accordance with S5.3 to a minimum energy level of:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Load rating                     Minimum energy level
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Below 880 pounds......................  1950 inch pounds.
880 pounds and above..................  2600 inch pounds.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S4.2.2.5 Tire Endurance. When the tire has been subjected to the 
laboratory endurance test specified in S5.4, using, if applicable, a 
non-pneumatic test rim or test wheel center member that undergoes no 
permanent deformation, there shall be no visual evidence of tread or 
carcass separation, cracking or chunking. In the case of a non-pneumatic 
tire assembly in which the non-pneumatic tire is an integral part of

[[Page 661]]

the assembly, the assembly shall undergo no permanent deformation with 
the exception of wear of the tread.
    S4.2.2.6 High Speed Performance. When the tire has been subjected to 
the laboratory high speed performance test specified in S5.5, using if 
applicable, a non-pneumatic test rim or test wheel center member that 
undergoes no permanent deformation, there shall be no visual evidence of 
tread or carcass separation, cracking or chunking. In the case of a non-
pneumatic tire assembly in which the non-pneumatic tire is an integral 
part of the assembly, the assembly shall undergo no permanent 
deformation with the exception of wear of the tread.
    S4.3 Labeling requirements. Each new non-pneumatic tire shall 
comply, according to the phase-in schedule specified in S7 of this 
standard, with the requirements of S5.5 and S5.5.1 of Sec. 571.139.
    S4.4 Non-Pneumatic Tire Identification Code and Non-Pneumatic Rim/
Wheel Center Member Matching Information. For purposes of this standard, 
S8 of 49 CFR 571.110 and S10 of 49 CFR 571.120, each manufacturer of a 
non-pneumatic tire that is not an integral part of a non-pneumatic tire 
assembly shall ensure that it provides a listing to the public for each 
non-pneumatic tire that it produces. The listing shall include the non-
pneumatic tire identification code, tire load rating, dimensional 
specifications and a diagram of the portion of the tire that attaches to 
the non-pneumatic rim or wheel center member, and a list of the non-
pneumatic rims or wheel center members that may be used with that tire. 
For each non-pneumatic rim or wheel center member included in such a 
listing, the information provided shall include a size and type 
designation for the non-pneumatic rim or wheel center member, and 
dimensional specifications and a diagram of the non-pneumatic rim or 
portion of the wheel center member that attaches to the tire. A listing 
compiled in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section need not 
include dimensional specifications or a diagram of the non-pneumatic rim 
or portion of the wheel center member that attaches to the tire if the 
non-pneumatic rim's or portion of the wheel center member's dimensional 
specifications and diagram are contained in each listing published in 
accordance with paragraph (b) of this section. The listing shall be in 
one of the following forms:
    (a) Listed by manufacturer name or brand name in a document 
furnished to dealers of the manufacturer's tires or, in the case of non-
pneumatic tires supplied only as a temporary spare tire on a vehicle, in 
a document furnished to dealers of vehicles equipped with the tires, to 
any person upon request, and in duplicate to the Office of Vehicle 
Safety Standards, Crash Avoidance Division, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation, Washington, DC 
20590; or
    (b) Contained in publications, current at the date of manufacture of 
the tire or any later date, of at least one of the following 
organizations:

The Tire and Rim Association
The European Tyre and Rim Technical Organization
Japan Automobile Tire Manufacturers' Association, Inc.
Deutche Industrie Norm
British Standards Institute
Scandinavian Tire and Rim Organization
Tyre and Rim Association of Australia

    S5. Test Procedures.
    S5.1 Physical Dimensions. After conditioning the tire at room 
temperature for at least 24 hours, using equipment with minimum 
measurement capabilities of one-half the smallest tolerance specified in 
the listing contained in the submission made by a manufacturer pursuant 
to S4.4(a), or in one of the publications described in S4.4(b) for that 
tire's non-pneumatic tire identification code designation, measure the 
portion of the tire that attaches to the non-pneumatic rim or the wheel 
center member. For any inner diameter dimensional specifications, or 
other dimensional specifications that are uniform or uniformly spaced 
around some circumference of the tire, these measurements shall be taken 
at least six points around the tire, or, if specified, at the points 
specified in the listing contained in the submission made by an 
individual manufacturer, pursuant to S4.4(a), or in one of the 
publications described in S4.4(b) for that tire's non-

[[Page 662]]

pneumatic tire identification code designation.
    S5.2 Lateral Strength.
    S5.2.1 Preparation of the tire.
    S5.2.1.1 If applicable, mount a new tire on a non-pneumatic test rim 
or test wheel center member.
    S5.2.1.2 Mount the tire assembly in a fixture as shown in Figure 1 
with the surface of the tire assembly that would face outward when 
mounted on a vehicle facing toward the lateral strength test block shown 
in Figure 2 and force the lateral strength test block against the tire.
    S5.2.2 Test Procedure.
    S5.2.2.1 Apply a load through the block to the tire at a rate of 2 
inches per minute, with the load arm parallel to the tire assembly at 
the time of engagement and the first point of contact with the test 
block being the test block centerline shown in Figure 2, at the 
following distances, B, in sequence, as shown in Figure 1:

B=A--1 inch
B=A--2 inches
B=A--3 inches
B=A--4 inches
B=A--5 inches, and
B=A--6 inches.


However, if at any time during the conduct of the test, the test block 
comes in contact with the non-pneumatic test rim or test wheel center 
member, the test shall be suspended and no further testing at smaller 
values of the distance B shall be conducted. When tested to the above 
procedure, satisfying the requirements of S4.2.2.3 for all values of B 
greater than that for which contact between the non-pneumatic test rim 
or test wheel center member and the test block is made, shall constitute 
compliance to the requirements set forth in S4.2.2.3.
    S5.3 Tire Strength.
    S5.3.1 Preparation of the Tire.
    S5.3.1.1 If applicable, mount the tire on a non-pneumatic test rim 
or test wheel center member.
    S5.3.1.2 Condition the tire assembly at room temperature for at 
least three hours.
    S5.3.2 Test Procedures.
    S5.3.2.1 Force the test cleat, as defined in S5.3.2.2, with its 
length axis (see S5.3.2.2(a)) parallel to the rolling axis of the non-
pneumatic tire assembly, and its height axis (see S5.3.2.2(c)), 
coinciding with a radius of the non-pneumatic tire assembly, into the 
tread of the tire at five test points equally spaced around the 
circumference of the tire. At each test point, the test cleat is forced 
into the tire at a rate of two inches per minute until the applicable 
minimum energy level, as shown in S4.2.2.4, calculated using the formula 
contained in S5.3.2.3, is reached.
    S5.3.2.2 The test cleat is made of steel and has the following 
dimensions;
    (a) Minimum length of one inch greater than the maximum tire width 
of the tire,
    (b) Width of one-half inch with the surface which contacts the 
tire's tread having one-quarter inch radius, and
    (c) Minimum height of one inch greater than the difference between 
the unloaded radius of the non-pneumatic tire assembly and the maximum 
radius of the non-pneumatic rim or wheel center member, if used with the 
non-pneumatic tire assembly being tested.
    S5.3.2.3 The energy level is calculated by the following formula:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.066
    
where

E=Energy level, inch-pounds;
F=Force, pounds; and
P=Penetration, inches

    S5.4 Tire Endurance.
    S5.4.1 Preparation of the tire.
    S5.4.1.1 If applicable, mount a new tire on a non-pneumatic test rim 
or test wheel center member.
    S5.4.1.2 Condition the tire assembly to 100 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 
[deg]F. for at least three hours.
    S5.4.2 Test Procedure.
    S5.4.2.1 Mount the tire assembly on a test axle and press it against 
a flat-faced steel test wheel 67.23 inches in diameter and at least as 
wide as the maximum tire width of the tire to be tested or an approved 
equivalent test wheel, with the applicable test load specified in the 
table in S5.4.2.3 for the tire's non-pneumatic tire identification code 
designation.
    S5.4.2.2 During the test, the air surrounding the test area shall be 
100 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]F.

[[Page 663]]

    S5.4.2.3 Conduct the test at 50 miles per hour (m.p.h.) in 
accordance with the following schedule without interruption: The loads 
for the following periods are the specified percentage of the load 
rating marked on the tire or tire assembly:

                                                                 Percent
4 hours...............................................................85
86 hours..............................................................90
24 hours.............................................................100

    S5.4.2.4 Immediately after running the tire the required time, allow 
the tire to cool for one hour, then, if applicable, detach it from the 
non-pneumatic test rim or test wheel center member, and inspect it for 
the conditions specified in S4.2.2.5.
    S5.5 High Speed Endurance.
    S5.5.1 After preparing the tire in accordance with S5.4.1, if 
applicable, mount the tire assembly in accordance with S5.4.2.1, and 
press it against the test wheel with a load of 88 percent of the tire's 
load rating as marked on the tire or tire assembly.
    S5.5.2 Break in the tire by running it for 2 hours at 50 m.p.h.
    S5.5.3 Allow to cool to 100 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 [deg]F.
    S5.5.4 Test at 75 m.p.h. for 30 minutes, 80 m.p.h. for 30 minutes 
and 85 m.p.h. for 30 minutes.
    S5.5.5 Immediately after running the tire for the required time, 
allow the tire to cool for one hour, then, if applicable, detach it from 
the non-pneumatic test rim or test wheel center member, and inspect it 
for the conditions specified in S4.2.2.6.
    S6. Nonconforming tires. Any non-pneumatic tire that is designed for 
use on passenger cars that does not conform to all the requirements of 
this standard, shall not be sold, offered for sale, introduced or 
delivered for introduction into interstate commerce, or imported into 
the United States, for any purpose.
    S7 Phase-In Schedule for labeling requirements.
    S7.1 Tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 and before 
September 1, 2006. For tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 
and before September 1, 2006, the number of tires complying with S4.3 of 
this standard must be equal to not less than 40% of the manufacturer's 
production during that period.
    S7.2 Tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2006 and before 
September 1, 2007. For tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2006 
and before September 1, 2007, the number of tires complying with S4.3 of 
this standard must be equal to not less than 70% of the manufacturer's 
production during that period.
    S7.3 Tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2007. Each tire 
must comply with S6.3 of this standard.

[[Page 664]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.067


[[Page 665]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.068


[55 FR 29590, July 20, 1990, as amended at 56 FR 19312, Apr. 26, 1991; 
67 FR 69627, Nov. 18, 2002; 69 FR 31319, June 3, 2004]

[[Page 666]]


<R05>
Sec. 571.131  Standard No. 131; School bus pedestrian safety devices.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes requirements for devices that 
can be installed on school buses to improve the safety of pedestrians in 
the vicinity of stopped school buses.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries by minimizing the likelihood of vehicles passing a stopped 
school bus and striking pedestrians in the vicinity of the bus.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to school buses other than 
multifunction school activity buses.
    S4. Definitions.
    Stop signal arm means a device that can be extended outward from the 
side of a school bus to provide a signal to other motorists not to pass 
the bus because it has stopped to load or discharge passengers.
    S5. Requirements. Each school bus shall be equipped with a stop 
signal arm meeting the requirements of S5.1 through S5.5 as depicted in 
Figure 1.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.069

    S5.1 The stop signal arm shall be a regular octagon which is at 
least 450 mmx450 mm (17.72 inchesx17.72 inches) in diameter.
    S5.2 The stop signal arm shall be red on both sides, except as 
provided in S5.2.1 and S5.2.2, and S5.2.3.
    S5.2.1 The stop signal arm shall have a white border at least 12 mm 
(0.47 inches) wide on both sides, except as provided in S5.2.3. Mounting 
brackets, clips, bolts, or other components necessary to the mechanical 
or electrical operation of the stop signal arm may not obscure more than 
15 percent of the border on each side of the stop arm. The portion of 
the border that may be obscured is in addition to that portion which may 
be obscured by the two red lamps specified in S5.3.2.
    S.5.2.2 The stop signal arm shall have the word ``STOP'' displayed 
in white upper-case letters on both sides, except as provided in S5.2.3. 
The letters shall be at least 150 mm (5.9 inches) in height. The letters 
shall have a stroke width of at least 20 mm (0.79 inches), except as 
provided in S.5.3.1.1.

[[Page 667]]

    S5.2.3 When two stop signal arms are installed on a school bus, the 
rearmost stop signal arm shall not contain any lettering, symbols, or 
markings on the forward side.
    S5.3 Conspicuity. The stop signal arm shall comply with either 
S5.3.1 or S5.3.2, or both.
    S5.3.1 Except as provided in S5.3.1.1, S5.3.1.2, or S5.3.1.3, the 
entire surface of both sides of each stop signal arm shall be 
reflectorized with Type III retroreflectorized material that meets the 
minimum specific intensity requirements of S6.1 and Table I.
    S.5.3.1.1 The legend of the retroreflective stop arm may be 
illuminated in a manner such that light is emitted from the surface of 
each letter or from the area immediately surrounding each letter. Only 
red lamps may be used. They shall form the complete shape of each letter 
of the legend, and shall be affixed to all letters (or to the areas 
immediately surrounding all letters) in the legend. The shape of each 
letter shall remain constant and, if the lamps are contained within each 
letter, the net stroke width (stroke width minus the width of the 
lamp(s)) of each letter of the legend, specified in S5.2.2, shall not be 
less than 15 mm (0.59 inch). When the stop arm is extended, the lamps 
shall flash at the rate specified in S6.2.2, with a current ``on'' time 
specified in S6.2.2.1. All lamps shall be positioned in one of the two 
following ways:
    (1) centered within the stroke of each letter of the legend, or
    (2) outlining each letter of the legend.
    S5.3.1.2 Nonreflectorized mounting brackets, clips, bolts, or other 
components necessary to the mechanical or electrical operation of the 
stop signal arm shall not obscure more than 7.5 percent of the total 
surface area of either side of the stop signal arm.
    S5.3.1.3 When two stop signal arms are installed on a school bus, 
the forward side of the rearmost stop signal arm shall not be 
reflectorized.
    S5.3.2 Each side of the stop signal arm shall have at least two red 
lamps that meet the requirements of S6.2. The lamps shall be centered on 
the vertical centerline of the stop arm. One of the lamps shall be 
located at the extreme top of the stop arm and the other at its extreme 
bottom.
    S5.4 The stop signal arm shall be installed on the left side of the 
bus.
    S5.4.1 The stop signal arm shall be located such that, when in the 
extended position:
    (a) The stop signal arm is perpendicular to the side of the bus, 
plus or minus five degrees;
    (b) The top edge of the stop signal arm is parallel to and not more 
than 6 inches from a horizontal plane tangent to the lower edge of the 
frame of the passenger window immediately behind the driver's window; 
and
    (c) The vertical centerline of the stop signal arm is not less than 
9 inches away from the side of the school bus.
    S5.4.2 A second stop signal arm may be installed on a school bus. 
That stop signal arm shall comply with S5.4 and S5.4.1.
    S5.5 The stop signal arm shall be automatically extended in such a 
manner that it complies with S5.4.1, at a minimum whenever the red 
signal lamps required by S5.1.4 of Standard No. 108 are activated; 
except that a device may be installed that prevents the automatic 
extension of a stop signal arm. The mechanism for activating the device 
shall be within the reach of the driver. While the device is activated, 
a continuous or intermittent signal audible to the driver shall sound. 
The audible signal may be equipped with a timing device requiring the 
signal to sound for at least 60 seconds. If a timing device is used, it 
shall automatically recycle every time the service entry door is opened 
while the engine is running and the manual override is engaged.
    S6 Test Procedures.
    S6.1 Reflectivity Test. When tested under the conditions specified 
in S6.2 (b), (c), and (d) of Federal motor vehicle safety standard 125, 
Warning Devices, (49 CFR 571.125), the retroreflective materials shall 
meet the criteria specified in table 1.

[[Page 668]]



         Table 1--Minimum Specific Intensity Per Unit Area (SIA)
                (Candelas per Footcandle Per Square Foot)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                              Entrance
         Observation Angle ([deg])             Angle     White     Red
                                              ([deg])
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                Type III Retroreflective Element Material
------------------------------------------------------------------------
             A--Glass Bead Retroreflective Element Material
------------------------------------------------------------------------
0.2........................................         -4      250       45
0.2........................................        +30      150       25
0.5........................................         -4       95       15
0.5........................................        +30       65       10
--------------------------------------------
              B--Prismatic Retroreflective Element Material
------------------------------------------------------------------------
0.2........................................         -4      250       45
0.2........................................        +30       95     13.3
0.5........................................         -4      200       28
0.5........................................        +30       65       10
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S6.2 Lighting Tests.
    S6.2.1 Color. The procedure shall be done in accordance with the 
Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) J578, Color Specification (May 
1988), 1990 SAE Handbook, Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc. Along 
with the incorporation by reference in S6.2.3, this incorporation by 
reference was approved by the Director of the Federal Register in 
accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. Copies may be 
obtained from the Society of Automotive Engineers, 400 Commonwealth 
Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096-0001. Copies may be inspected at Docket 
Room, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh 
Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590 or at the National Archives and 
Records Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of 
this material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://
www.archives.gov/federal--register/code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--
locations.html. When visually compared to the light emitted from a 
filter/source with a combination of chromaticity coordinates as 
explained in SAE J578, Color Specification (May 1988), within specific 
boundaries [y=0.33 (yellow boundary) and y=0.98--x(purple boundary)] the 
color of light emitted from the test object shall not be less saturated 
(paler), yellower, or purpler. The test object shall be placed 
perpendicular to the light source to simulate lamps on stop signal arms. 
In making visual comparisons, the light from the test object shall light 
one portion of a comparison field and the light from the filter/source 
standard shall light an adjacent area. To make a valid visual 
comparison, the two fields to be viewed shall be of near equal 
luminance.
    S6.2.2. Flash rate. The lamps on each side of the stop signal arm, 
when operated at the manufacturer's design load, shall flash alternately 
at a rate of 60 to 120 flashes per minute.
    S6.2.2.1 Lamps, except those subject to S6.2.2.2, shall have a 
current ``on'' time of 30 to 75 percent of the total flash cycle. The 
total current ``on'' time for the two terminals shall be between 90 and 
110 percent of the total flash cycle.
    S6.2.2.2 Xenon short-arc gaseous discharge lamps shall have an 
``off'' time before each flash of at least 50 percent of the total flash 
cycle.
    S6.2.3 Vibration, Moisture, Dust, Corrosion, Photometry, and Warpage 
Tests. The procedure shall be done in accordance with the Society of 
Automotive Engineers (SAE) J575, Tests for Motor Vehicle Lighting 
Devices and Components, (July 1983) and Society of Automotive Engineers 
(SAE) J1133, School Bus Stop Arm, (April 1984), 1990 SAE Handbook, 
Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc. Lamps and lighting components 
shall meet the criteria for vibration, moisture, dust, corrosion, 
photometry, and warpage in SAE J575, Tests for Motor Vehicle Lighting 
Devices and Components, (July 1983) and SAE J1133, School Bus Stop Arm, 
(April 1984) under the test conditions specified herein.

[56 FR 20370, May 3, 1991, as amended at 57 FR 40134, Sept. 2, 1992; 59 
FR 26761, May 24, 1994; 63 FR 29143, May 28, 1998; 68 FR 44901, July 31, 
2003]


<R05>
Sec. 571.135  Standard No. 135; Light vehicle brake systems.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for service brake 
and associated parking brake systems.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to ensure safe braking 
performance under normal and emergency driving conditions.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2000 and to multi-purpose 
passenger vehicles, trucks and buses with a gross vehicle

[[Page 669]]

weight rating (GVWR) of 3,500 kilograms (7,716 pounds) or less, 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2002. In addition, at the option 
of the manufacturer, passenger cars manufactured before September 1, 
2000, and multi-purpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses with a GVWR 
of 3,500 kilograms (7,716 pounds) or less, manufactured before September 
1, 2002, may meet the requirements of this standard instead of Federal 
Motor Vehicle No. 105, Hydraulic Brake Systems.
    S4. Definitions.
    Adhesion utilization curves means curves showing, for specified load 
conditions, the adhesion utilized by each axle of a vehicle plotted 
against the braking ratio of the vehicle.
    Antilock brake system or ABS means a portion of a service brake 
system that automatically controls the degree of rotational wheel slip 
during braking by:
    (1) Sensing the rate of angular rotation of the wheels;
    (2) Transmitting signals regarding the rate of wheel angular 
rotation to one or more controlling devices which interpret those 
signals and generate responsive controlling output signals; and
    (3) Transmitting those controlling signals to one or more modulator 
devices which adjust brake actuating forces in response to those 
signals.
    Backup system means a portion of a service brake system, such as a 
pump, that automatically supplies energy in the event of a primary brake 
power source failure.
    Brake factor means the slope of the linear least squares regression 
equation best representing the measured torque output of a brake as a 
function of the measured applied line pressure during a given brake 
application for which no wheel lockup occurs.
    Brake hold-off pressure means the maximum applied line pressure for 
which no brake torque is developed, as predicted by the pressure axis 
intercept of the linear least squares regression equation best 
representing the measured torque output of a brake as a function of the 
measured applied line pressure during a given brake application.
    Brake power assist unit means a device installed in a hydraulic 
brake system that reduces the amount of muscular force that a driver 
must apply to actuate the system, and that, if inoperative, does not 
prevent the driver from braking the vehicle by a continued application 
of muscular force on the service brake control.
    Brake power unit means a device installed in a brake system that 
provides the energy required to actuate the brakes, either directly or 
indirectly through an auxiliary device, with driver action consisting 
only of modulating the energy application level.
    Braking ratio means the deceleration of the vehicle divided by the 
gravitational acceleration constant.
    Electric vehicle or EV means a motor vehicle that is powered by an 
electric motor drawing current from rechargeable storage batteries, fuel 
cells, or other portable sources of electrical current, and which may 
include a non-electrical source of power designed to charge batteries 
and components thereof.
    Electrically-actuated service brakes means service brakes that 
utilize electrical energy to actuate the foundation brakes.
    Functional failure means a failure of a component (either electrical 
or mechanical in nature) which renders the system totally or partially 
inoperative yet the structural integrity of the system is maintained.
    Hydraulic brake system means a system that uses hydraulic fluid as a 
medium for transmitting force from a service brake control to the 
service brake and that may incorporate a brake power assist unit, or a 
brake power unit.
    Initial brake temperature or IBT means the average temperature of 
the service brakes on the hottest axle of the vehicle 0.32 km (0.2 
miles) before any brake application.
    Lightly loaded vehicle weight or LLVW means unloaded vehicle weight 
plus the weight of a mass of 180 kg (396 pounds), including driver and 
instrumentation.
    Maximum speed of a vehicle or VMax means the highest speed 
attainable by accelerating at a maximum rate from a standing start for a 
distance of 3.2 km (2 miles) on a level surface, with the

[[Page 670]]

vehicle at its lightly loaded vehicle weight, and, if an EV, with the 
propulsion batteries at a state of charge of not less than 95 percent at 
the beginning of the run.
    Objective brake factor means the arithmetic average of all the brake 
factors measured over the twenty brake applications defined in S7.4, for 
all wheel positions having a given brake configuration.
    Peak friction coefficient or PFC means the ratio of the maximum 
value of braking test wheel longitudinal force to the simultaneous 
vertical force occurring prior to wheel lockup, as the braking torque is 
progressively increased.
    Pressure component means a brake system component that contains the 
brake system fluid and controls or senses the fluid pressure.
    Regenerative braking system or RBS means an electrical energy system 
that is installed in an EV for recovering or dissipating kinetic energy, 
and which uses the propulsion motor(s) as a retarder for partial braking 
of the EV while returning electrical energy to the propulsion battery(s) 
or dissipating electrical energy.
    Snub means the braking deceleration of a vehicle from a higher 
reference speed to a lower reference speed that is greater than zero.
    Split service brake system means a brake system consisting of two or 
more subsystems actuated by a single control, designed so that a single 
failure in any subsystem (such as a leakage-type failure of a pressure 
component of a hydraulic subsystem except structural failure of a 
housing that is common to two or more subsystems, or an electrical 
failure in an electric subsystem) does not impair the operation of any 
other subsystem.
    Stopping distance means the distance traveled by a vehicle from the 
point of application of force to the brake control to the point at which 
the vehicle reaches a full stop.
    Variable brake proportioning system means a system that has one or 
more proportioning devices which automatically change the brake pressure 
ratio between any two or more wheels to compensate for changes in wheel 
loading due to static load changes and/or dynamic weight transfer, or 
due to deceleration.
    Wheel lockup means 100 percent wheel slip.
    S5. Equipment requirements.
    S5.1. Service brake system. Each vehicle shall be equipped with a 
service brake system acting on all wheels.
    S5.1.1. Wear adjustment. Wear of the service brakes shall be 
compensated for by means of a system of automatic adjustment.
    S5.1.2. Wear status. The wear condition of all service brakes shall 
be indicated by either:
    (a) Acoustic or optical devices warning the driver at his or her 
driving position when lining replacement is necessary, or
    (b) A means of visually checking the degree of brake lining wear, 
from the outside or underside of the vehicle, utilizing only the tools 
or equipment normally supplied with the vehicle. The removal of wheels 
is permitted for this purpose.
    S5.1.3 Regenerative braking system. (a) For an EV equipped with RBS, 
the RBS is considered to be part of the service brake system if it is 
automatically activated by an application of the service brake control, 
if there is no means provided for the driver to disconnect or otherwise 
deactivate it, and if it is activated in all transmission positions, 
including neutral.
    (b) For an EV that is equipped with both ABS and RBS that is part of 
the service brake system, the ABS must control the RBS.
    S5.2. Parking brake system. Each vehicle shall be equipped with a 
parking brake system of a friction type with solely mechanical means to 
retain engagement.
    S5.3. Controls.
    S5.3.1. The service brakes shall be activated by means of a foot 
control. The control of the parking brake shall be independent of the 
service brake control, and may be either a hand or foot control.
    S5.3.2. For vehicles equipped with ABS, a control to manually 
disable the ABS, either fully or partially, is prohibited.
    S5.4. Reservoirs.
    S5.4.1. Master cylinder reservoirs. A master cylinder shall have a 
reservoir

[[Page 671]]

compartment for each service brake subsystem serviced by the master 
cylinder. Loss of fluid from one compartment shall not result in a 
complete loss of brake fluid from another compartment.
    S5.4.2. Reservoir capacity. Reservoirs, whether for master cylinders 
or other type systems, shall have a total minimum capacity equivalent to 
the fluid displacement resulting when all the wheel cylinders or caliper 
pistons serviced by the reservoirs move from a new lining, fully 
retracted position (as adjusted initially to the manufacturer's 
recommended setting) to a fully worn, fully applied position, as 
determined in accordance with S7.17(c) of this standard. Reservoirs 
shall have completely separate compartments for each subsystem except 
that in reservoir systems utilizing a portion of the reservoir for a 
common supply to two or more subsystems, individual partial compartments 
shall each have a minimum volume of fluid equal to at least the volume 
displaced by the master cylinder piston servicing the subsystem, during 
a full stroke of the piston. Each brake power unit reservoir servicing 
only the brake system shall have a minimum capacity equivalent to the 
fluid displacement required to charge the system piston(s) or 
accumulator(s) to normal operating pressure plus the displacement 
resulting when all the wheel cylinders or caliper pistons serviced by 
the reservoir or accumulator(s) move from a new lining, fully retracted 
position (as adjusted initially to the manufacturer's recommended 
setting) to a fully worn, fully applied position.
    S5.4.3. Reservoir labeling. Each vehicle equipped with hydraulic 
brakes shall have a brake fluid warning statement that reads as follows, 
in letters at least 3.2 mm (\1/8\ inch) high: ``WARNING: Clean filler 
cap before removing. Use only ------ fluid from a sealed container.'' 
(Inserting the recommended type of brake fluid as specified in 49 CFR 
571.116, e.g., ``DOT 3.'') The lettering shall be:
    (a) Permanently affixed, engraved or embossed;
    (b) Located so as to be visible by direct view, either on or within 
100 mm (3.94 inches) of the brake fluid reservoir filler plug or cap; 
and
    (c) Of a color that contrasts with its background, if it is not 
engraved or embossed.
    S5.4.4. Fluid level indication. Brake fluid reservoirs shall be so 
constructed that the level of fluid can be checked without need for the 
reservoir to be opened. This requirement is deemed to have been met if 
the vehicle is equipped with a transparent brake fluid reservoir or a 
brake fluid level indicator meeting the requirements of S5.5.1(a)(1).
    S5.5. Brake system warning indicator. Each vehicle shall have one or 
more visual brake system warning indicators, mounted in front of and in 
clear view of the driver, which meet the requirements of S5.5.1 through 
S5.5.5. In addition, a vehicle manufactured without a split service 
brake system shall be equipped with an audible warning signal that 
activates under the conditions specified in S5.5.1(a).
    S5.5.1. Activation. An indicator shall be activated when the 
ignition (start) switch is in the ``on'' (``run'') position and whenever 
any of conditions (a) through (g) occur:
    (a) A gross loss of fluid or fluid pressure (such as caused by 
rupture of a brake line but not by a structural failure of a housing 
that is common to two or more subsystems) as indicated by one of the 
following conditions (chosen at the option of the manufacturer):
    (1) A drop in the level of the brake fluid in any master cylinder 
reservoir compartment to less than the recommended safe level specified 
by the manufacturer or to one-fourth of the fluid capacity of that 
reservoir compartment, whichever is greater.
    (2) For vehicles equipped with a split service brake system, a 
differential pressure of 1.5 MPa (218 psi) between the intact and failed 
brake subsystems measured at a master cylinder outlet or a slave 
cylinder outlet.
    (3) A drop in the supply pressure in a brake power unit to one-half 
of the normal system pressure.
    (b) Any electrical functional failure in an antilock or variable 
brake proportioning system.
    (c) Application of the parking brake.

[[Page 672]]

    (d) Brake lining wear-out, if the manufacturer has elected to use an 
electrical device to provide an optical warning to meet the requirements 
of S5.1.2(a).
    (e) For a vehicle with electrically-actuated service brakes, failure 
of the source of electric power to those brakes, or diminution of state 
of charge of the batteries to less than a level specified by the 
manufacturer for the purpose of warning a driver of degraded brake 
performance.
    (f) For a vehicle with electric transmission of the service brake 
control signal, failure of a brake control circuit.
    (g) For an EV with a regenerative braking system that is part of the 
service brake system, failure of the RBS.
    S5.5.2. Function check. (a) All indicators shall be activated as a 
check function by either:
    (1) Automatic activation when the ignition (start) switch is turned 
to the ``on'' (``run'') position when the engine is not running, or when 
the ignition (``start'') switch is in a position between ``on'' 
(``run'') and ``start'' that is designated by the manufacturer as a 
check position, or
    (2) A single manual action by the driver, such as momentary 
activation of a test button or switch mounted on the instrument panel in 
front of and in clear view of the driver, or, in the case of an 
indicator for application of the parking brake, by applying the parking 
brake when the ignition is in the ``on'' (``run'') position.
    (b) In the case of a vehicle that has an interlock device that 
prevents the engine from being started under one or more conditions, 
check functions meeting the requirements of S5.5.2(a) need not be 
operational under any condition in which the engine cannot be started.
    (c) The manufacturer shall explain the brake check function test 
procedure in the owner's manual.
    S5.5.3. Duration. Each indicator activated due to a condition 
specified in S5.5.1 shall remain activated as long as the condition 
exists, whenever the ignition (``start'') switch is in the ``on'' 
(``run'') position, whether or not the engine is running.
    S5.5.4. Function. When a visual warning indicator is activated, it 
may be continuous or flashing, except that the visual warning indicator 
on a vehicle not equipped with a split service brake system shall be 
flashing. The audible warning required for a vehicle manufactured 
without a split service brake system may be continuous or intermittent.
    S5.5.5. Labeling. (a) Each visual indicator shall display a word or 
words in accordance with the requirements of Standard No. 101 (49 CFR 
571.101) and this section, which shall be legible to the driver under 
all daytime and nighttime conditions when activated. Unless otherwise 
specified, the words shall have letters not less than 3.2 mm (\1/8\ 
inch) high and the letters and background shall be of contrasting 
colors, one of which is red. Words or symbols in addition to those 
required by Standard No. 101 and this section may be provided for 
purposes of clarity.
    (b) Vehicles manufactured with a split service brake system may use 
a common brake warning indicator to indicate two or more of the 
functions described in S5.5.1(a) through S5.5.1(g). If a common 
indicator is used, it shall display the word ``Brake.''
    (c) A vehicle manufactured without a split service brake system 
shall use a separate indicator to indicate the failure condition in 
S5.5.1(a). This indicator shall display the words ``STOP--BRAKE 
FAILURE'' in block capital letters not less than 6.4 mm (\1/4\ inch) in 
height.
    (d) If separate indicators are used for one or more of the 
conditions described in S5.5.1(a) through S5.5.1(g), the indicators 
shall display the following wording:
    (1) If a separate indicator is provided for the low brake fluid 
condition in S5.5.1(a)(1), the words ``Brake Fluid'' shall be used 
except for vehicles using hydraulic system mineral oil.
    (2) If a separate indicator is provided for the gross loss of 
pressure condition in S5.5.1(a)(2), the words ``Brake Pressure'' shall 
be used.
    (3) If a separate indicator is provided for the condition specified 
in S5.5.1(b), the letters and background shall be of contrasting colors, 
one of which is yellow. The indicator shall be labeled with the words 
``Antilock'' or ``Anti-lock'' or ``ABS''; or ``Brake Proportioning,''

[[Page 673]]

in accordance with Table 2 of Standard No. 101.
    (4) If a separate indicator is provided for application of the 
parking brake as specified for S5.5.1(c), the single word ``Park'' or 
the words ``Parking Brake'' may be used.
    (5) If a separate indicator is provided to indicate brake lining 
wear-out as specified in S5.5.1(d), the words ``Brake Wear'' shall be 
used.
    (6) If a separate indicator is provided for the condition specified 
in S5.5.1(g), the letters and background shall be of contrasting colors, 
one of which is yellow. The indicator shall be labeled with the symbol 
``RBS.'' RBS failure in a system that is part of the service brake 
system may also be indicated by a yellow lamp that also indicates 
``ABS'' failure and displays the symbol ``ABS/RBS.''
    (7) If a separate indicator is provided for any other function, the 
display shall include the word ``Brake'' and the appropriate additional 
labeling.
    S5.6. Brake system integrity. Each vehicle shall meet the complete 
performance requirements of this standard without:
    (a) Detachment or fracture of any component of the braking system, 
such as brake springs and brake shoes or disc pad facings other than 
minor cracks that do not impair attachment of the friction facings. All 
mechanical components of the braking system shall be intact and 
functional. Friction facing tearout (complete detachment of lining) 
shall not exceed 10 percent of the lining on any single frictional 
element.
    (b) Any visible brake fluid or lubricant on the friction surface of 
the brake, or leakage at the master cylinder or brake power unit 
reservoir cover, seal, and filler openings.
    S6. General test conditions. Each vehicle must meet the performance 
requirements specified in S7 under the following test conditions and in 
accordance with the test procedures and test sequence specified. Where a 
range of conditions is specified, the vehicle must meet the requirements 
at all points within the range.
    S6.1. Ambient conditions.
    S6.1.1. Ambient temperature. The ambient temperature is any 
temperature between 0 [deg]C (32 [deg]F) and 40 [deg]C (104 [deg]F).
    S6.1.2. Wind speed. The wind speed is not greater than 5 m/s (11.2 
mph).
    S6.2. Road test surface.
    S6.2.1. Pavement friction. Unless otherwise specified, the road test 
surface produces a peak friction coefficient (PFC) of 0.9 when measured 
using an American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) E1136 
standard reference test tire, in accordance with ASTM Method E 1337-90, 
at a speed of 64.4 km/h (40 mph), without water delivery.
    S6.2.2. Gradient. Except for the parking brake gradient holding 
test, the test surface has no more than a 1% gradient in the direction 
of testing and no more than a 2% gradient perpendicular to the direction 
of testing.
    S6.2.3. Lane width. Road tests are conducted on a test lane 3.5 m 
(11.5 ft) wide.
    S6.3. Vehicle conditions.
    S6.3.1. Vehicle weight.
    S6.3.1.1. For the tests at GVWR, the vehicle is loaded to its GVWR 
such that the weight on each axle as measured at the tire-ground 
interface is in proportion to its GAWR, with the fuel tank filled to 
100% of capacity. However, if the weight on any axle of a vehicle at 
LLVW exceeds the axle's proportional share of the GVWR, the load 
required to reach GVWR is placed so that the weight on that axle remains 
the same as at LLVW.
    S6.3.1.2. For the test at LLVW, the vehicle is loaded to its LLVW 
such that the added weight is distributed in the front passenger seat 
area.
    S6.3.2. Fuel tank loading. The fuel tank is filled to 100% of 
capacity at the beginning of testing and may not be less than 75% of 
capacity during any part of the testing.
    S6.3.3. Lining preparation. At the beginning of preparation for the 
road tests, the brakes of the vehicle are in the same condition as when 
the vehicle was manufactured. No burnishing or other special preparation 
is allowed, unless all vehicles sold to the public are similarly 
prepared as a part of the manufacturing process.

[[Page 674]]

    S6.3.4. Adjustments and repairs. These requirements must be met 
without replacing any brake system parts or making any adjustments to 
the brake system except as specified in this standard. Where brake 
adjustments are specified (S7.1.3), adjust the brakes, including the 
parking brakes, in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation. No 
brake adjustments are allowed during or between subsequent tests in the 
test sequence.
    S6.3.5. Automatic brake adjusters. Automatic adjusters are 
operational throughout the entire test sequence. They may be adjusted 
either manually or by other means, as recommended by the manufacturer, 
only prior to the beginning of the road test sequence.
    S6.3.6. Antilock brake system (ABS). If a car is equipped with an 
ABS, the ABS is fully operational for all tests, except where specified 
in the following sections.
    S6.3.7. Variable brake proportioning valve. If a car is equipped 
with a variable brake proportioning system, the proportioning valve is 
fully operational for all tests except the test for failed variable 
brake proportioning system.
    S6.3.8. Tire inflation pressure. Tires are inflated to the pressure 
recommended by the vehicle manufacturer for the GVWR of the vehicle.
    S6.3.9. Engine. Engine idle speed and ignition timing are set 
according to the manufacturer's recommendations. If the vehicle is 
equipped with an adjustable engine speed governor, it is adjusted 
according to the manufacturer's recommendations.
    S6.3.10. Vehicle openings. All vehicle openings (doors, windows, 
hood, trunk, convertible top, cargo doors, etc.) are closed except as 
required for instrumentation purposes.
    S6.3.11 State of charge of batteries for EVs.
    S6.3.11.1 The state of charge of the propulsion batteries is 
determined in accordance with SAE Recommended Practice J227a, Electric 
Vehicle Test Procedure, February 1976. The applicable sections of J227a 
are 3.2.1 through 3.2.4, 3.3.1 through 3.3.2.2, 3.4.1 and 3.4.2, 4.2.1, 
5.2, 5.2.1 and 5.3.
    S6.3.11.2 At the beginning of the burnish procedure (S7.1 of this 
standard) in the test sequence, each propulsion battery is at the 
maximum state of charge recommended by the manufacturer, as stated in 
the vehicle operator's manual or on a label that is permanently attached 
to the vehicle, of, if the manufacturer has made no recommendation, not 
less than 95 percent. During the 200-stop burnish procedure, the 
propulsion batteries are restored to the maximum state of charge 
determined as above, after each increment of 40 burnish stops until the 
burnish procedure is complete. The batteries may be charged at a more 
frequent interval during a particular 40-stop increment only if the EV 
is incapable of achieving the initial burnish test speed during that 
increment. During the burnish procedure, the propulsion batteries may be 
charged by external means or replaced by batteries that are at a state 
of charge of not less than 95 percent. For an EV having a manual control 
for setting the level of regenerative braking, the manual control, at 
the beginning of the burnish procedure, is set to provide maximum 
regenerative braking throughout the burnish.
    S6.3.11.3 At the beginning of each performance test in the test 
sequence (S7.2 through S7.17 of this standard), unless otherwise 
specified, an EV's propulsion batteries are at the state of charge 
recommended by the manufacturer, as stated in the vehicle operator's 
manual or on a label that is permanently attached to the vehicle, or, if 
the manufacturer has made no recommendation, at a state of charge of not 
less than 95 percent. No further charging of any propulsion battery 
occurs during any of the performance tests in the test sequence of this 
standard. If the propulsion batteries are depleted during a test 
sequence such that the vehicle reaches automatic shut-down, will not 
accelerate, or the low state of charge brake warning lamp is 
illuminated, the vehicle is to be accelerated to brake test speed by 
auxiliary means. If a battery is replaced rather than recharged, the 
replacement battery shall be charged and measured for state of charge in 
accordance with these procedures.
    S6.3.12 State of charge of batteries for electrically-actuated 
service brakes. A vehicle equipped with electrically-actuated service 
brakes also performs the

[[Page 675]]

following test series. Conduct 10 stopping tests from a speed of 100 kph 
or the maximum vehicle speed, whichever is less. At least two of the 10 
stopping distances must be less than or equal to 70 meters. The vehicle 
is loaded to GVWR and the transmission is in the neutral position when 
the service brake control is actuated and throughout the remainder of 
the test. Each battery providing power to the electrically-actuated 
service brakes, shall be in a depleted state of charge for conditions 
(a), (b), or (c) of this paragraph as appropriate. An auxiliary means 
may be used to accelerate an EV to test speed.
    (a) For an EV equipped with electrically-actuated service brakes 
deriving power from the propulsion batteries and with automatic shut-
down capability of the propulsion motor(s), the propulsion batteries are 
at not more than five percent above the EV actual automatic shut-down 
critical value. The critical value is determined by measuring the state-
of-charge of each propulsion battery at the instant that automatic shut-
down occurs.
    (b) For an EV equipped with electrically-actuated service brakes 
deriving power from the propulsion batteries and with no automatic shut-
down capability of the propulsion motor(s), the propulsion batteries are 
at an average of not more than five percent above the actual state of 
charge at which the brake failure warning signal, required by S5.5.1(e) 
of this standard, is illuminated.
    (c) For a vehicle which has one or more auxiliary batteries that 
provides electrical energy to operate the electrically-actuated service 
brakes, each auxiliary battery is at not more than five percent above 
the actual state of charge at which the brake failure warning signal, 
required by S5.5.1(e) of this standard, is illuminated.
    S6.3.13 Electric vehicles.
    S6.3.13.1 (a) For an EV equipped with an RBS that is part of the 
service brake system, the RBS is operational during the burnish and all 
tests, except for the test of a failed RBS.
    (b) For an EV equipped with an RBS that is not part of the service 
brake system, the RBS is operational and set to produce the maximum 
regenerative braking effect during the burnish, and is disabled during 
the test procedures. If the vehicle is equipped with a neutral gear that 
automatically disables the RBS, the test procedures which are designated 
to be conducted in gear may be conducted in neutral.
    S6.3.13.2 For tests conducted ``in neutral'', the operator of an EV 
with no ``neutral'' position (or other means such as a clutch for 
disconnecting the drive train from the propulsion motor(s)) does not 
apply any electromotive force to the propulsion motor(s). Any 
electromotive force that is applied to the propulsion motor(s) 
automatically remains in effect unless otherwise specified by the test 
procedure.
    S6.4. Instrumentation.
    S6.4.1. Brake temperature measurement. The brake temperature is 
measured by plug-type thermocouples installed in the approximate center 
of the facing length and width of the most heavily loaded shoe or disc 
pad, one per brake, as shown in Figure 1. A second thermocouple may be 
installed at the beginning of the test sequence if the lining wear is 
expected to reach a point causing the first thermocouple to contact the 
metal rubbing surface of a drum or rotor. For center-grooved shoes or 
pads, thermocouples are installed within 3 mm (.12 in) to 6 mm (.24 in) 
of the groove and as close to the center as possible.
    S6.4.2. Brake line pressure measurement for the torque wheel test. 
The vehicle shall be fitted with pressure transducers in each hydraulic 
circuit. On hydraulically proportioned circuits, the pressure transducer 
shall be downstream of the operative proportioning valve.
    S6.4.3. Brake torque measurement for the torque wheel test. The 
vehicle shall be fitted with torque wheels at each wheel position, 
including slip ring assemblies and wheel speed indicators to permit 
wheel lock to be detected.

[[Page 676]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.070

    S6.5. Procedural conditions.
    S6.5.1. Brake control. All service brake system performance 
requirements, including the partial system requirements of S7.7, S7.10 
and S7.11, must be met solely by use of the service brake control.
    S6.5.2. Test speeds. If a vehicle is incapable of attaining the 
specified normal test speed, it is tested at a speed that is a multiple 
of 5 km/h (3.1 mph) that is 4 to 8 km/h (2.5 to 5.0 mph) less than its 
maximum speed and its performance must be within a stopping distance 
given by the formula provided for the specific requirement.
    S6.5.3. Stopping distance.
    S6.5.3.1. The braking performance of a vehicle is determined by 
measuring the stopping distance from a given initial speed.
    S6.5.3.2. Unless otherwise specified, the vehicle is stopped in the 
shortest distance achievable (best effort) on all stops. Where more than 
one stop is required for a given set of test conditions, a vehicle is 
deemed to comply with the corresponding stopping distance requirements 
if at least one of the stops is made within the prescribed distance.

[[Page 677]]

    S6.5.3.3. In the stopping distance formulas given for each 
applicable test (such as S<=0.10V+0.0060V\2\), S is the maximum stopping 
distance in meters, and V is the test speed in km/h.
    S6.5.4. Vehicle position and attitude.
    S6.5.4.1. The vehicle is aligned in the center of the lane at the 
start of each brake application. Steering corrections are permitted 
during each stop.
    S6.5.4.2. Stops are made without any part of the vehicle leaving the 
lane and without rotation of the vehicle about its vertical axis of more 
than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>15[deg] from the center line of the test lane 
at any time during any stop.
    S6.5.5. Transmission selector control.
    S6.5.5.1. For tests in neutral, a stop or snub is made in accordance 
with the following procedures:
    (a) Exceed the test speed by 6 to 12 km/h (3.7 to 7.5 mph);
    (b) Close the throttle and coast in gear to approximately 3 km/h 
(1.9 mph) above the test speed;
    (c) Shift to neutral; and
    (d) When the test speed is reached, apply the brakes.
    S6.5.5.2. For tests in gear, a stop or snub is made in accordance 
with the following procedures:
    (a) With the transmission selector in the control position 
recommended by the manufacturer for driving on a level surface at the 
applicable test speed, exceed the test speed by 6 to 12 km/h (3.7 to 7.5 
mph);
    (b) Close the throttle and coast in gear; and
    (c) When the test speed is reached apply the brakes.
    (d) To avoid engine stall, a manual transmission may be shifted to 
neutral (or the clutch disengaged) when the vehicle speed is below 30 
km/h (18.6 mph).
    S6.5.6. Initial brake temperature (IBT). If the lower limit of the 
specified IBT for the first stop in a test sequence (other than a 
parking brake grade holding test) has not been reached, the brakes are 
heated to the IBT by making one or more brake applications from a speed 
of 50 km/h (31.1 mph), at a deceleration rate not greater than 3 m/s\2\ 
(9.8 fps\2\).
    S7. Road test procedures and performance requirements. Each vehicle 
shall meet all the applicable requirements of this section, when tested 
according to the conditions and procedures set forth below and in S6, in 
the sequence specified in Table 1:

                       Table 1--Road Test Sequence
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Section
                        Testing order                             No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Vehicle loaded to GVWR:
  1 Burnish..................................................      S7.1
  2 Wheel lock sequence......................................      S7.2
Vehicle loaded to LLVW:
  3 Wheel lock sequence......................................      S7.2
  4 ABS performance..........................................      S7.3
  5 Torque wheel.............................................      S7.4
Vehicle loaded to GVWR:
  6 Torque wheel.............................................      S7.4
  7 Cold effectiveness.......................................      S7.5
  8 High speed effectiveness.................................      S7.6
  9 Stops with engine off....................................      S7.7
Vehicle loaded to LLVW:
  10 Cold effectiveness......................................      S7.5
  11 High speed effectiveness................................      S7.6
  12 Failed antilock.........................................      S7.8
  13 Failed proportioning valve..............................      S7.9
  14 Hydraulic circuit failure...............................      S7.10
Vehicle loaded to GVWR:
  15 Hydraulic circuit failure...............................      S7.10
  16 Failed antilock.........................................      S7.8
  17 Failed proportioning valve..............................      S7.9
  18 Power brake unit failure................................      S7.11
  19 Parking brake...........................................      S7.12
  20 Heating Snubs...........................................      S7.13
  21 Hot Performance.........................................      S7.14
  22 Brake cooling...........................................      S7.15
  23 Recovery Performance....................................      S7.16
  24 Final Inspection........................................      S7.17
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S7.1. Burnish.
    S7.1.1. General information. Any pretest instrumentation checks are 
conducted as part of the burnish procedure, including any necessary 
rechecks after instrumentation repair, replacement or adjustment. 
Instrumentation check test conditions must be in accordance with the 
burnish test procedure specified in S7.1.2 and S7.1.3.
    S7.1.2. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR only.
    (b) Transmission position: In gear.
    S7.1.3. Test conditions and procedures. The road test surface 
conditions specified in S6.2 do not apply to the burnish procedure.
    (a) IBT: <=100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F).
    (b) Test speed: 80 km/h (49.7 mph).
    (c) Pedal force: Adjust as necessary to maintain specified constant 
deceleration rate.
    (d) Deceleration rate: Maintain a constant deceleration rate of 3.0 
m/s\2\ (9.8 fps\2\).

[[Page 678]]

    (e) Wheel lockup: No lockup of any wheel allowed for longer than 0.1 
seconds at speeds greater than 15 km/h (9.3 mph).
    (f) Number of runs: 200 stops.
    (g) Interval between runs: The interval from the start of one 
service brake application to the start of the next is either the time 
necessary to reduce the IBT to 100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F) or less, or the 
distance of 2 km (1.24 miles), whichever occurs first.
    (h) Accelerate to 80 km/h (49.7 mph) after each stop and maintain 
that speed until making the next stop.
    (i) After burnishing, adjust the brakes as specified in S6.3.4.
    S7.2 Wheel lockup sequence.
    S7.2.1 General information. (a) The purpose of this test is to 
ensure that lockup of both front wheels occurs either simultaneously 
with, or at a lower deceleration rate than, the lockup of both rear 
wheels, when tested on road surfaces affording adhesion such that wheel 
lockup of the first axle occurs at a braking ratio of between 0.15 and 
0.80, inclusive.
    (b) This test is for vehicles without antilock brake systems.
    (c) This wheel lock sequence test is to be used as a screening test 
to evaluate a vehicle's axle lockup sequence and to determine whether 
the torque wheel test in S7.4 must be conducted.
    (d) For this test, a simultaneous lockup of the front and rear 
wheels refers to the conditions when the time interval between the first 
occurrence of lockup of the last (second) wheel on the rear axle and the 
first occurrence of lockup of the last (second) wheel on the front axle 
is <= 0.1 second for vehicle speeds <ls-thn-eq> 15 km/h (9.3 mph).
    (e) A front or rear axle lockup is defined as the point in time when 
the last (second) wheel on an axle locks up.
    (f) Vehicles that lock their front axle simultaneously or at lower 
deceleration rates than their rear axle need not be tested to the torque 
wheel procedure.
    (g) Vehicles which lock their rear axle at deceleration rates lower 
than the front axle shall also be tested in accordance with the torque 
wheel procedure in S7.4.
    (h) Any determination of noncompliance for failing adhesion 
utilization requirements shall be based on torque wheel test results.
    S7.2.2 Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR and LLVW.
    (b) Transmission position: In neutral.
    S7.2.3. Test Conditions and Procedures. (a) IBT: <=65 [deg]C (149 
[deg]F), <=100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F).
    (b) Test speed: 65 km/h (40.4 mph) for a braking ratio <= 0.50; 100 
km/h (62.1 mph) for a braking ratio <ls-thn-eq> 0.50.
    (c) Pedal force:
    (1) Pedal force is applied and controlled by the vehicle driver or 
by a mechanical brake pedal actuator.
    (2) Pedal force is increased at a linear rate such that the first 
axle lockup occurs no less than one-half (0.5) second and no more than 
one and one-half (1.5) seconds after the initial application of the 
pedal.
    (3) The pedal is released when the second axle locks, or when the 
pedal force reaches 1kN (225 lbs), or 0.1 seconds after first axle 
lockup, whichever occurs first.
    (d) Wheel lockup: Only wheel lockups above a vehicle speed of 15 km/
h (9.3 mph) are considered in determining the results of this test.
    (e) Test surfaces: This test is conducted, for each loading 
condition, on two different test surfaces that will result in a braking 
ratio of between 0.15 and 0.80, inclusive. NHTSA reserves the right to 
choose the test surfaces to be used based on adhesion utilization curves 
or any other method of determining ``worst case'' conditions.
    (f) The data recording equipment shall have a minimum sampling rate 
of 40 Hz.
    (g) Data to be recorded. The following information must be 
automatically recorded in phase continuously throughout each test run 
such that values of the variables can be cross referenced in real time.
    (1) Vehicle speed.
    (2) Brake pedal force.
    (3) Angular velocity at each wheel.
    (4) Actual instantaneous vehicle deceleration or the deceleration 
calculated by differentiation of the vehicle speed.
    (h) Speed channel filtration. For analog instrumentation, the speed 
channel shall be filtered by using a low-pass filter having a cut-off 
frequency of less than one fourth the sampling rate.

[[Page 679]]

    (i) Test procedure. For each test surface, three runs meeting the 
pedal force application and time for wheel lockup requirements shall be 
made. Up to a total of six runs will be allowed to obtain three valid 
runs. Only the first three valid runs obtained shall be used for data 
analysis purposes.
    S7.2.4. Performance requirements. (a) In order to pass this test a 
vehicle shall be capable of meeting the test requirements on all test 
surfaces that will result in a braking ratio of between 0.15 and 0.80, 
inclusive.
    (b) If all three valid runs on each surface result in the front axle 
locking before or simultaneously with the rear axle, or the front axle 
locks up with only one or no wheels locking on the rear axle, the torque 
wheel procedure need not be run, and the vehicle is considered to meet 
the adhesion utilization requirements of this Standard. This performance 
requirement shall be met for all vehicle braking ratios between 0.15 and 
0.80.
    (c) If any one of the three valid runs on any surface results in the 
rear axle locking before the front axle or the rear axle locks up with 
only one or no wheels locking on the front axle the torque wheel 
procedure shall be performed. This performance requirement shall be met 
for all vehicle braking ratios between 0.15 and 0.80.
    (d) If any one of the three valid runs on any surface results in 
neither axle locking (i.e., only one or no wheels locked on each axle) 
before a pedal force of 1kN (225 lbs) is reached, the vehicle shall be 
tested to the torque wheel procedure.
    (e) If the conditions listed in paragraph (c) or (d) of this section 
occur, vehicle compliance shall be determined from the results of a 
torquesults of a torque wheel test performed in accordance with S7.4.
    (f) An EV with RBS that is part of the service brake system shall 
meet the performance requirements over the entire normal operating range 
of the RBS.
    S7.3. ABS performance. [Reserved]
    S7.4. Adhesion utilization (Torque Wheel Method).
    S7.4.1. General information. This test is for vehicles without any 
ABS. The purpose of the test is to determine the adhesion utilization of 
a vehicle.
    S7.4.2. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR and LLVW.
    (b) Transmission position: In neutral.
    (c) Tires: For this test, a separate set of tires, identical to 
those used for all other tests under Section 7.0, may be used.
    S7.4.3. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT: <=65 [deg]C (149 
[deg]F), <=100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F).
    (b) Test speeds: 100 km/h (62.1 mph), and 50 km/h (31.1 mph).
    (c) Pedal force: Pedal force is increased at a linear rate between 
100 and 150 N/sec (22.5 and 33.7 lbs/sec) for the 100 km/h test speed, 
or between 100 and 200 N/sec (22.5 and 45.0 lbs/sec) for the 50 km/h 
test speed, until the first axle locks or until a pedal force of 1 kN 
(225 lbs) is reached, whichever occurs first.
    (d) Cooling: Between brake applications, the vehicle is driven at 
speeds up to 100 km/h (62.1 mph) until the IBT specified in S7.4.3(a) is 
reached.
    (e) Number of runs: With the vehicle at LLVW, run five stops from a 
speed of 100 km/h (62.1 mph) and five stops from a speed of 50 km/h 
(31.1 mph), while alternating between the two test speeds after each 
stop. With the vehicle at GVWR, repeat the five stops at each test speed 
while alternating between the two test speeds.
    (f) Test surface: PFC of at least 0.9.
    (g) Data to be recorded. The following information must be 
automatically recorded in phase continuously throughout each test run 
such that values of the variables can be cross referenced in real time:
    (1) Vehicle speed.
    (2) Brake pedal force.
    (3) Angular velocity at each wheel.
    (4) Brake torque at each wheel.
    (5) Hydraulic brake line pressure in each brake circuit. 
Hydraulically proportioned circuits shall be fitted with transducers on 
at least one front wheel and one rear wheel downstream of the operative 
proportioning or pressure limiting valve(s).
    (6) Vehicle deceleration.
    (h) Sample rate: All data acquisition and recording equipment shall 
support a minimum sample rate of 40 Hz on all channels.
    (i) Determination of front versus rear brake pressure. Determine the 
front

[[Page 680]]

versus rear brake pressure relationship over the entire range of line 
pressures. Unless the vehicle has a variable brake proportioning system, 
this determination is made by static test. If the vehicle has a variable 
brake proportioning system, dynamic tests are run with the vehicle both 
empty and loaded. 15 snubs from 50 km/h (31.1 mph) are made for each of 
the two load conditions, using the same initial conditions specified in 
this section.
    S7.4.4. Data reduction. (a) The data from each brake application 
under S7.4.3 is filtered using a five-point, on-center moving average 
for each data channel.
    (b) For each brake application under S7.4.3 determine the slope 
(brake factor) and pressure axis intercept (brake hold-off pressure) of 
the linear least squares equation best describing the measured torque 
output at each braked wheel as a function of measured line pressure 
applied at the same wheel. Only torque output values obtained from data 
collected when the vehicle deceleration is within the range of 0.15g to 
0.80g are used in the regression analysis.
    (c) Average the results of paragraph (b) of this section to 
calculate the average brake factor and brake hold-off pressure for all 
brake applications for the front axle.
    (d) Average the results of paragraph (b) of this section to 
calculate the average brake factor and brake hold-off pressure for all 
brake applications for the rear axle.
    (e) Using the relationship between front and rear brake line 
pressure determined in S7.4.3(i) and the tire rolling radius, calculate 
the braking force at each axle as a function of front brake line 
pressure.
    (f) Calculate the braking ratio of the vehicle as a function of the 
front brake line pressure using the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.071

where z = braking ratio at a given front line pressure;
T<INF>1</INF>, T<INF>2</INF> = Braking forces at the front and rear 
axles, respectively, corresponding to the same front brake line 
pressure, and
P = total vehicle weight.

    (g) Calculate the adhesion utilized at each axle as a function of 
braking ratio using the following equations:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02FE95.014

where f<INF>i</INF> = adhesion utilized by axle i
T<INF>i</INF> = braking force at axle i (from (e))
P<INF>i</INF> = static weight on axle i
i = 1 for the front axle, or 2 for the rear axle
z = braking ratio (from (f))
h = height of center of gravity of the vehicle
P = total vehicle weight
E = wheelbase

    (h) Plot f<INF>1</INF> and f<INF>2</INF> obtained in (g) as a 
function of z, for both GVWR and LLVW load conditions. These are the 
adhesion utilization curves for the vehicle, which are compared to the 
performance requirements in S7.4.5. shown graphically in Figure 2:

[[Page 681]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.072

    S7.4.5. Performance requirements. For all braking ratios between 
0.15 and 0.80, each adhesion utilization curve for a rear axle shall be 
situated below a line defined by z=0.9k where z is the braking ratio and 
k is the PFC.
    S7.4.5.1 An EV with RBS that is part of the service brake system 
shall meet the performance requirement over the entire normal operating 
range of the RBS.
    S7.5. Cold effectiveness.
    S7.5.1. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR and LLVW.
    (b) Transmission position: In neutral.
    S7.5.2. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT: <=65 [deg]C (149 
[deg]F), <=100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F).
    (b) Test speed: 100 km/h (62.1 mph).
    (c) Pedal force: <=65N (14.6 lbs), <=500N (112.4 lbs).
    (d) Wheel lockup: No lockup of any wheel for longer than 0.1 seconds 
allowed at speeds greater than 15 km/h (9.3 mph).
    (e) Number of runs: 6 stops.
    (f) Test surface: PFC of 0.9.
    (g) For each stop, bring the vehicle to test speed and then stop the 
vehicle in the shortest possible distance under the specified 
conditions.

[[Page 682]]

    S7.5.3. Performance requirements. (a) Stopping distance for 100 km/h 
test speed: <=70m (230 ft).
    (b) Stopping distance for reduced test speed: S<=0.10V+0.0060V\2\.
    S7.6. High speed effectiveness. This test is not run if vehicle 
maximum speed is less than or equal to 125 km/h (77.7 mph).
    S7.6.1. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR and LLVW.
    (b) Transmission position: In gear.
    S7.6.2. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT: <=65 [deg]C (149 
[deg]F), <=100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F).
    (b) Test speed: 80% of vehicle maximum speed if 125 km/h (77.7 mph) 
< vehicle maximum speed < 200 km/h (124.3 mph), or 160 km/h (99.4 mph) 
if vehicle maximum speed <= 200 km/h (124.3 mph).
    (c) Pedal force: <=65N (14.6 lbs), <=500N (112.4 lbs).
    (d) Wheel lockup: No lockup of any wheel for longer than 0.1 seconds 
allowed at speeds greater than 15 km/h (9.3 mph).
    (e) Number of runs: 6 stops.
    (f) Test surface: PFC of 0.9.
    S7.6.3. Performance requirements.
    Stopping distance: S<=0.10V+0.0067V\2\.
    S7.7. Stops with Engine Off.
    S7.7.1. General information. This test is for vehicles equipped with 
one or more brake power units or brake power assist units. This test is 
also for EVs.
    S7.7.2. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR only.
    (b) Transmission position: In neutral.
    (c) Vehicle engine: Off (not running).
    (d) Ignition key position: May be returned to ``on'' position after 
turning engine off, or a device may be used to ``kill'' the engine while 
leaving the ignition key in the ``on'' position.
    S7.7.3. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT: <=65 [deg]C (149 
[deg]F), <=100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F).
    (b) Test speed: 100 km/h (62.1 mph).
    (c) Pedal force: <=65N (14.6 lbs), <=500N (112.4 lbs).
    (d) Wheel lockup: No lockup of any wheel allowed for longer than 0.1 
seconds at speeds greater than 15 km/h (9.3 mph).
    (e) Number of runs: 6 stops.
    (f) Test surface: PFC of 0.9.
    (g) All system reservoirs (brake power and/or assist units) are 
fully charged and the vehicle's engine is off (not running) at the 
beginning of each stop.
    (h) For an EV, this test is conducted with no electrical power 
supplied to the vehicle's propulsion motor(s), but with the RBS and 
brake power or power assist still operating, unless cutting off the 
supply of electrical power to the propulsion motor(s) also disables 
those systems.
    S7.7.4. Performance requirements. (a) Stopping distance for 100 km/h 
test speed: <=70m (230 ft.)
    (b) Stopping distance for reduced test speed: S <= 0.10V + 
0.0060V\2\.
    S7.8. Antilock functional failure.
    S7.8.1. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle loading: LLVW and GVWR.
    (b) Transmission position: In neutral.
    S7.8.2. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT: <=65 [deg]C (149 
[deg]F), <=100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F).
    (b) Test speed: 100 km/h (62.1 mph).
    (c) Pedal force: <= 65 N (14.6 lbs), <= 500 N (112.4 lbs).
    (d) Wheel lockup: No lockup of any wheel for more than 0.1 seconds 
allowed at speeds greater than 15 km/h (9.3 mph).
    (e) Number of runs: 6 stops.
    (f) Test surface: PFC of 0.9.
    (g) Functional failure simulation:
    (1) Disconnect the functional power source, or any other electrical 
connector that creates a functional failure.
    (2) Determine whether the brake system indicator is activated when 
any electrical functional failure of the antilock system is created.
    (3) Restore the system to normal at the completion of this test.
    (h) If more than one antilock brake subsystem is provided, repeat 
test for each subsystem.
    S7.8.3. Performance requirements. For service brakes on a vehicle 
equipped with one or more antilock systems, in the event of any single 
functional failure in any such system, the service brake system shall 
continue to operate and shall stop the vehicle as specified in S7.8.3(a) 
or S7.8.3(b).
    (a) Stopping distance for 100 km/h test speed: <= 85 m (279 ft).
    (b) Stopping distance for reduced test speed: S <= 0.10V + 
0.0075V\2\.
    S7.9. Variable brake proportioning system functional failure.
    S7.9.1. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: LLVW and GVWR.
    (b) Transmission position: In neutral.

[[Page 683]]

    S7.9.2. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT: <=65 [deg]C (149 
[deg]F), <=100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F).
    (b) Test speed: 100 km/h (62.1 mph).
    (c) Pedal force: <= 65 N (14.6 lbs), <= 500 N (112.4 lbs).
    (d) Wheel lockup: No lockup of any wheel for longer than 0.1 seconds 
allowed at speeds greater than 15 km/h (9.3 mph).
    (e) Number of runs: 6 stops.
    (f) Test surface: PFC of 0.9.
    (g) Functional failure simulation:
    (1) Disconnect the functional power source or mechanical linkage to 
render the variable brake proportioning system inoperative.
    (2) If the system utilizes electrical components, determine whether 
the brake system indicator is activated when any electrical functional 
failure of the variable proportioning system is created.
    (3) Restore the system to normal at the completion of this test.
    (h) If more than one variable brake proportioning subsystem is 
provided, repeat the test for each subsystem.
    S7.9.3. Performance requirements. The service brakes on a vehicle 
equipped with one or more variable brake proportioning systems, in the 
event of any single functional failure in any such system, shall 
continue to operate and shall stop the vehicle as specified in S7.9.3(a) 
or S7.9.3(b).
    (a) Stopping distance for 100 km/h test speed: <= 110 m (361 ft).
    (b) Stopping distance for reduced test speed: S <=0.10V + 
0.0100V\2\.
    S7.10. Hydraulic circuit failure.
    S7.10.1. General information. This test is for vehicles manufactured 
with or without a split service brake system.
    S7.10.2. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: LLVW and GVWR.
    (b) Transmission position: In neutral.
    S7.10.3. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT: <=65 [deg]C (149 
[deg]F), <=100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F).
    (b) Test speed: 100 km/h (62.1 mph).
    (c) Pedal force: <=65N (14.6 lbs), <=500 N (112.4 lbs).
    (d) Wheel lockup: No lockup of any wheel for longer than 0.1 seconds 
allowed at speeds greater than 15 km/h (9.3 mph).
    (e) Test surface: PFC of 0.9.
    (f) Alter the service brake system to produce any single failure. 
For a hydraulic circuit, this may be any single rupture or leakage type 
failure, other than a structural failure of a housing that is common to 
two or more subsystems. For a vehicle in which the brake signal is 
transmitted electrically between the brake pedal and some or all of the 
foundation brakes, regardless of the means of actuation of the 
foundation brakes, this may be any single failure in any circuit that 
electrically transmits the brake signal. For an EV with RBS that is part 
of the service brake system, this may be any single failure in the RBS.
    (g) Determine the control force pressure level or fluid level (as 
appropriate for the indicator being tested) necessary to activate the 
brake warning indicator.
    (h) Number of runs: After the brake warning indicator has been 
activated, make the following stops depending on the type of brake 
system:
    (1) 4 stops for a split service brake system.
    (2) 10 consecutive stops for a non-split service brake system.
    (i) Each stop is made by a continuous application of the service 
brake control.
    (j) Restore the service brake system to normal at the completion of 
this test.
    (k) Repeat the entire sequence for each of the other subsystems.
    S7.10.4 Performance requirements. For vehicles manufactured with a 
split service brake system, in the event of any failure in a single 
subsystem, as specified in S7.10.3(f) of this standard, and after 
activation of the brake system indicator as specified in S5.5.1, the 
remaining portions of the service brake system shall continue to operate 
and shall stop the vehicle as specified in S7.10.4(a) or S7.10.4(b). For 
vehicles not manufactured with a split service brake system, in the 
event of any failure in any component of the service brake system, as 
specified in S7.10.3(f), and after activation of the brake system 
indicator as specified in S5.5.1 of this standard, the vehicle shall, by 
operation of the service brake control, stop 10 times consecutively as 
specified in S7.10.4(a) or S7.10.4(b).
    (a) Stopping distance from 100 km/h test speed: <= 168 m (551 ft).

[[Page 684]]

    (b) Stopping distance for reduced test speed: S <= 0.10V + 
0.0158V\2\.
    S7.11. Brake power unit or brake power assist unit inoperative 
(System depleted).
    S7.11.1. General information. This test is for vehicles equipped 
with one or more brake power units or brake power assist units.
    S7.11.2. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR only.
    (b) Transmission position: In neutral.
    S7.11.3. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT: <=65 [deg]C (149 
[deg]F), <=100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F).
    (b) Test speed: 100 km/h (62.1 mph).
    (c) Pedal force: <= 65 N (14.6 lbs), <= 500 N (112.4 lbs).
    (d) Wheel lockup: No lockup of any wheel for longer than 0.1 seconds 
allowed at speeds greater than 15 km/h (9.3 mph).
    (e) Number of runs: 6 stops.
    (f) Test surface: PFC of 0.9.
    (g) Disconnect the primary source of power for one brake power 
assist unit or brake power unit, or one of the brake power unit or brake 
power assist unit subsystems if two or more subsystems are provided.
    (h) If the brake power unit or power assist unit operates in 
conjunction with a backup system and the backup system is automatically 
activated in the event of a primary power service failure, the backup 
system is operative during this test.
    (i) Exhaust any residual brake power reserve capability of the 
disconnected system.
    (j) Make each of the 6 stops by a continuous application of the 
service brake control.
    (k) Restore the system to normal at completion of this test.
    (l) For vehicles equipped with more than one brake power unit or 
brake power assist unit, conduct tests for each in turn.
    (m) For vehicles with electrically-actuated service brakes (brake 
power unit), this test is conducted with any single electrical failure 
in the electrically-actuated service brakes instead of a failure of any 
other brake power or brake power assist unit, and all other systems 
intact.
    S7.11.4. Performance requirements. The service brakes on a vehicle 
equipped with one or more brake power assist units or brake power units, 
with one such unit inoperative and depleted of all reserve capability, 
shall stop the vehicle as specified in S7.11.4(a) or S7.11.4(b).
    (a) Stopping distance from 100 km/h test speed: <= 168 m (551 ft).
    (b) Stopping distance for reduced test speed: S <= 0.10V + 
0.0158V\2\.
    S7.12. Parking brake.
    S7.12.1. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR only.
    (b) Transmission position: In neutral.
    (c) Parking brake burnish:
    (1) For vehicles with parking brake systems not utilizing the 
service friction elements, the friction elements of such a system are 
burnished prior to the parking brake test according to the published 
recommendations furnished to the purchaser by the manufacturer.
    (2) If no recommendations are furnished, the vehicle's parking brake 
system is tested in an unburnished condition.
    (d) Parking brake applications: 1 application and up to 2 
reapplications, if necessary.
    S7.12.2. Test conditions and procedures.
    (a) IBT:
    (1) Parking brake systems utilizing service brake friction materials 
shall be tested with the IBT <= 100 [deg]C (212 [deg]F) and shall have 
no additional burnishing or artificial heating prior to the start of the 
parking brake test.
    (2) Parking brake systems utilizing non-service brake friction 
materials shall be tested with the friction materials at ambient 
temperature at the start of the test. The friction materials shall have 
no additional burnishing or artificial heating prior to or during the 
parking brake test.
    (b) Parking brake control force: Hand control <= 400 N (89.9 lbs); 
foot control <= 500 N (112.4 lbs).
    (c) Hand force measurement locations: The force required for 
actuation of a hand-operated brake system is measured at the center of 
the hand grip area or at a distance of 40 mm (1.57 in) from the end of 
the actuation lever as illustrated in Figure 3.
    (d) Parking brake applications: 1 application and up to 2 
reapplications, if necessary.

[[Page 685]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.073

    (e) Test surface gradient: 20% grade.
    (f) Drive the vehicle onto the grade with the longitudinal axis of 
the vehicle in the direction of the slope of the grade.
    (g) Stop the vehicle and hold it stationary by applying the service 
brake control and place the transmission in neutral.
    (h) With the service brake applied sufficiently to just keep the 
vehicle from rolling, apply the parking brake as specified in S7.12.2(i) 
or S7.12.2(j).
    (i) For a vehicle equipped with mechanically-applied parking brakes, 
make a single application of the parking brake control with a force not 
exceeding the limits specified in S7.12.2(b). For a vehicle using an 
electrically-activated parking brake, apply the parking brake by 
activating the parking brake control.
    (j) In the case of a parking brake system that does not allow 
application of the specified force in a single application, a series of 
applications may be made to achieve the specified force.
    (k) Following the application of the parking brakes, release all 
force on the service brake control and, if the vehicle remains 
stationary, start the measurement of time.
    (l) If the vehicle does not remain stationary, reapplication of a 
force to the parking brake control at the level specified in S7.12.2(b) 
as appropriate for the vehicle being tested (without release of the 
ratcheting or other holding mechanism of the parking brake) is used up 
to two times to attain a stationary position.
    (m) Verify the operation of the parking brake application indicator.
    (n) Following observation of the vehicle in a stationary condition 
for the specified time in one direction, repeat

[[Page 686]]

the same test procedure with the vehicle orientation in the opposite 
direction on the same grade.
    S7.12.3. Performance requirement. The parking brake system shall 
hold the vehicle stationary for 5 minutes in both a forward and reverse 
direction on the grade.
    S7.13. Heating Snubs.
    S7.13.1. General information. The purpose of the snubs is to heat up 
the brakes in preparation for the hot performance test which follows 
immediately.
    S7.13.2. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR only.
    (b) Transmission position: In gear.
    S7.13.3. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT:
    (1) Establish an IBT before the first brake application (snub) of 
<=55 [deg]C (131 [deg]F), <=65 [deg]C (149 [deg]F).
    (2) IBT before subsequent snubs are those occurring at the distance 
intervals.
    (b) Number of snubs: 15.
    (c) Test speeds: The initial speed for each snub is 120 km/h (74.6 
mph) or 80% of Vmax, whichever is slower. Each snub is terminated at 
one-half the initial speed.
    (d) Deceleration rate:
    (1) Maintain a constant deceleration rate of 3.0 m/s\2\ (9.8 
fps\2\).
    (2) Attain the specified deceleration within one second and maintain 
it for the remainder of the snub.
    (e) Pedal force: Adjust as necessary to maintain the specified 
constant deceleration rate.
    (f) Time interval: Maintain an interval of 45 seconds between the 
start of brake applications (snubs).
    (g) Accelerate as rapidly as possible to the initial test speed 
immediately after each snub.
    (h) Immediately after the 15th snub, accelerate to 100 km/h (62.1 
mph) and commence the hot performance test.
    S7.14. Hot performance.
    S7.14.1. General information. The hot performance test is conducted 
immediately after completion of the 15th heating snub.
    S7.14.2. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR only.
    (b) Transmission position: In neutral.
    S7.14.3. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT: Temperature 
achieved at completion of heating snubs.
    (b) Test speed: 100 km/h (62.1 mph).
    (c) Pedal force:
    (1) The first stop is done with an average pedal force not greater 
than the average pedal force recorded during the shortest GVWR cold 
effectiveness stop.
    (2) The second stop is done with a pedal force not greater than 500 
N (112.4 lbs).
    (d) Wheel lockup: No lockup of any wheel for longer than 0.1 seconds 
allowed at speeds greater than 15 km/h (9.3 mph).
    (e) Number of runs: 2 stops.
    (f) Immediately after the 15th heating snub, accelerate to 100 km/h 
(62.1 mph) and commence the first stop of the hot performance test.
    (g) If the vehicle is incapable of attaining 100 km/h, it is tested 
at the same speed used for the GVWR cold effectiveness test.
    (h) Immediately after completion of the first hot performance stop, 
accelerate as rapidly as possible to the specified test speed and 
conduct the second hot performance stop.
    (i) Immediately after completion of the second hot performance stop, 
drive 1.5 km (0.93 mi) at 50 km/h (31.1 mph) before the first cooling 
stop.
    S7.14.4. Performance requirements. (a) For the first hot stop, the 
stopping distance must be less than or equal to a calculated distance 
which is based on 60 percent of the deceleration actually achieved on 
the shortest GVWR cold effectiveness stop. The following equations shall 
be used in calculating the performance requirement:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02FE95.015

where d<INF>c</INF> = the average deceleration actually achieved during 
the shortest cold effectiveness stop at GVWR (m/s\2\),
S<INF>c</INF> = actual stopping distance measured on the shortest cold 
effectiveness stop at GVWR (m), and
V = cold effectiveness test speed (km/h).


[[Page 687]]


    (b) In addition to the requirement in S7.14.4(a), the stopping 
distance for at least one of the two hot stops must be S <= 89 m (292 
ft) from a test speed of 100 km/h (62.1 mph) or, for reduced test speed, 
S <= 0.10V + 0.0079V\2\. The results of the second stop may not be used 
to meet the requirements of S7.14.4(a).
    S7.15. Brake cooling stops.
    S7.15.1. General information. The cooling stops are conducted 
immediately after completion of the hot performance test.
    S7.15.2. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR only.
    (b) Transmission position: In gear.
    S7.15.3. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT: Temperature 
achieved at completion of hot performance.
    (b) Test speed: 50 km/h (31.1 mph).
    (c) Pedal force: Adjust as necessary to maintain specified constant 
deceleration rate.
    (d) Deceleration rate: Maintain a constant deceleration rate of 3.0 
m/s\2\ (9.8 fps\2\).
    (e) Wheel lockup: No lockup of any wheel for longer than 0.1 seconds 
allowed at speeds greater than 15

km/h (9.3 mph).
    (f) Number of runs: 4 stops.
    (g) Immediately after the hot performance stops drive 1.5 km (0.93 
mi) at 50 km/h (31.1 mph) before the first cooling stop.
    (h) For the first through the third cooling stops:
    (1) After each stop, immediately accelerate at the maximum rate to 
50 km/h (31.1 mph).
    (2) Maintain that speed until beginning the next stop at a distance 
of 1.5 km (0.93 mi) from the beginning of the previous stop.
    (i) For the fourth cooling stop:
    (1) Immediately after the fourth stop, accelerate at the maximum 
rate to 100 km/h (62.1 mph).
    (2) Maintain that speed until beginning the recovery performance 
stops at a distance of 1.5 km (0.93 mi) after the beginning of the 
fourth cooling stop.
    S7.16. Recovery performance.
    S7.16.1. General information. The recovery performance test is 
conducted immediately after completion of the brake cooling stops.
    S7.16.2. Vehicle conditions. (a) Vehicle load: GVWR only.
    (b) Transmission position: In neutral.
    S7.16.3. Test conditions and procedures. (a) IBT: Temperature 
achieved at completion of cooling stops.
    (b) Test speed: 100 km/h (62.1 mph).
    (c) Pedal force: The average pedal force shall not be greater than 
the average pedal force recorded during the shortest GVWR cold 
effectiveness stop.
    (d) Wheel lockup: No lockup of any wheel for longer than 0.1 seconds 
allowed at speeds greater than 15 km/h (9.3 mph).
    (e) Number of runs: 2 stops.
    (f) Immediately after the fourth cooling stop, accelerate at the 
maximum rate to 100 km/h (62.1 mph).
    (g) Maintain that speed until beginning the first recovery 
performance stop at a distance of 1.5 km (0.93 mi) after the beginning 
of the fourth cooling stop.
    (h) If the vehicle is incapable of attaining 100 km/h, it is tested 
at the same speed used for the GVWR cold effectiveness test.
    (i) Immediately after completion of the first recovery performance 
stop accelerate as rapidly as possible to the specified test speed and 
conduct the second recovery performance stop.
    S7.16.4. Performance requirements.
    The stopping distance, S, for at least one of the two stops must be 
within the following limits:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02FE95.016

where d<INF>c</INF> and V are defined in S7.14.4(a).

    S7.17. Final Inspection. Inspect:
    (a) The service brake system for detachment or fracture of any 
components, such as brake springs and brake shoes or disc pad facings.
    (b) The friction surface of the brake, the master cylinder or brake 
power unit reservoir cover, and seal and filler openings, for leakage of 
brake fluid or lubricant.
    (c) The master cylinder or brake power unit reservoir for compliance 
with the volume and labeling requirements of S5.4.2 and S5.4.3. In 
determining the fully applied worn condition, assume that the lining is 
worn to (1) rivet or bolt heads on riveted or bolted linings or (2) 
within 0.8 mm (1/32

[[Page 688]]

inch) of shoe or pad mounting surface on bonded linings or (3) the limit 
recommended by the manufacturer, whichever is larger relative to the 
total possible shoe or pad movement. Drums or rotors are assumed to be 
at nominal design drum diameter or rotor thickness. Linings are assumed 
adjusted for normal operating clearance in the released position.
    (d) The brake system indicators, for compliance with operation in 
various key positions, lens color, labeling, and location, in accordance 
with S5.5.

[60 FR 6434, Feb. 2, 1995; as amended at 60 FR 37847, July 24, 1995; 60 
FR 44548, Aug. 28, 1995; 62 FR 46917, Sept. 5, 1997; 62 FR 51070, Sept. 
30, 1997; 65 FR 6332, Feb. 9, 2000; 70 FR 37713, June 30, 2005]


<R05>
Sec. 571.138  Standard No. 138; Tire pressure monitoring systems.

    S1 Purpose and scope. This standard specifies performance 
requirements for tire pressure monitoring systems (TPMSs) to warn 
drivers of significant under-inflation of tires and the resulting safety 
problems.
    S2 Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses that have a gross 
vehicle weight rating of 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds) or less, except 
those vehicles with dual wheels on an axle, according to the phase-in 
schedule specified in S7 of this standard.
    S3 Definitions. The following definitions apply to this standard:
    Lightly loaded vehicle weight means unloaded vehicle weight plus the 
weight of a mass of 180 kg (396 pounds), including test driver and 
instrumentation.
    Tire pressure monitoring system means a system that detects when one 
or more of a vehicle's tires is significantly under-inflated and 
illuminates a low tire pressure warning telltale.
    Vehicle Placard and Tire inflation pressure label mean the sources 
of information for the vehicle manufacturer's recommended cold tire 
inflation pressure pursuant to Sec. 571.110 of this Part.
    S4 Requirements.
    S4.1 General. To the extent provided in S7, each vehicle must be 
equipped with a tire pressure monitoring system that meets the 
requirements specified in S4 under the test conditions specified in S5 
and the test procedures specified in S6 of this standard.
    S4.2 TPMS detection requirements. The tire pressure monitoring 
system must:
    (a) Illuminate a low tire pressure warning telltale not more than 20 
minutes after the inflation pressure in one or more of the vehicle's 
tires, up to a total of four tires, is equal to or less than either the 
pressure 25 percent below the vehicle manufacturer's recommended cold 
inflation pressure, or the pressure specified in the 3rd column of Table 
1 of this standard for the corresponding type of tire, whichever is 
higher;
    (b) Continue to illuminate the low tire pressure warning telltale as 
long as the pressure in any of the vehicle's tires is equal to or less 
than the pressure specified in S4.2(a), and the ignition locking system 
is in the ``On'' (``Run'') position, whether or not the engine is 
running, or until manually reset in accordance with the vehicle 
manufacturer's instructions.
    S4.3 Low tire pressure warning telltale.
    S4.3.1 Each tire pressure monitoring system must include a low tire 
pressure warning telltale that:
    (a) Is mounted inside the occupant compartment in front of and in 
clear view of the driver;
    (b) Is identified by one of the symbols shown for the ``Low Tire 
Pressure'' Telltale in Table 1 of Standard No. 101 (49 CFR 571.101); and
    (c) Is illuminated under the conditions specified in S4.2.
    S4.3.2 In the case of a telltale that identifies which tire(s) is 
(are) under-inflated, each tire in the symbol for that telltale must 
illuminate when the tire it represents is under-inflated to the extent 
specified in S4.2.
    S4.3.3 (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, each 
low tire pressure warning telltale must illuminate as a check of lamp 
function either when the ignition locking system is activated to the 
``On'' (``Run'') position when the engine is not running, or when the 
ignition locking system is in a position between ``On'' (``Run'') and 
``Start'' that is designated

[[Page 689]]

by the manufacturer as a check position.
    (b) The low tire pressure warning telltale need not illuminate when 
a starter interlock is in operation.
    S4.4 TPMS malfunction.
    (a) The vehicle shall be equipped with a tire pressure monitoring 
system that includes a telltale that provides a warning to the driver 
not more than 20 minutes after the occurrence of a malfunction that 
affects the generation or transmission of control or response signals in 
the vehicle's tire pressure monitoring system. The vehicle's TPMS 
malfunction indicator shall meet the requirements of either S4.4(b) or 
S4.4(c).
    (b) Dedicated TPMS malfunction telltale. The vehicle meets the 
requirements of S4.4(a) when equipped with a dedicated TPMS malfunction 
telltale that:
    (1) Is mounted inside the occupant compartment in front of and in 
clear view of the driver;
    (2) Is identified by the word ``TPMS'' as described under the ``Tire 
Pressure Monitoring System Malfunction'' Telltale in Table 1 of Standard 
No. 101 (49 CFR 571.101);
    (3) Continues to illuminate the TPMS malfunction telltale under the 
conditions specified in S4.4(a) for as long as the malfunction exists, 
whenever the ignition locking system is in the ``On'' (``Run'') 
position; and
    (4) (i) Except as provided in paragraph (ii), each dedicated TPMS 
malfunction telltale must be activated as a check of lamp function 
either when the ignition locking system is activated to the ``On'' 
(``Run'') position when the engine is not running, or when the ignition 
locking system is in a position between ``On'' (``Run'') and ``Start'' 
that is designated by the manufacturer as a check position.
    (ii) The dedicated TPMS malfunction telltale need not be activated 
when a starter interlock is in operation.
    (c) Combination low tire pressure/TPMS malfunction telltale. The 
vehicle meets the requirements of S4.4(a) when equipped with a combined 
Low Tire Pressure/TPMS malfunction telltale that:
    (1) Meets the requirements of S4.2 and S4.3; and
    (2) Flashes for a period of at least 60 seconds but no longer than 
90 seconds upon detection of any condition specified in S4.4(a) after 
the ignition locking system is activated to the ``On'' (``Run'') 
position. After each period of prescribed flashing, the telltale must 
remain continuously illuminated as long as a malfunction exists and the 
ignition locking system is in the ``On'' (``Run'') position. This 
flashing and illumination sequence must be repeated each time the 
ignition locking system is placed in the ``On'' (``Run'') position until 
the situation causing the malfunction has been corrected. Multiple 
malfunctions occurring during any ignition cycle may, but are not 
required to, reinitiate the prescribed flashing sequence.
    S4.5 Written instructions.
    (a) Beginning on September 1, 2006, the owner's manual in each 
vehicle certified as complying with S4 must provide an image of the Low 
Tire Pressure Telltale symbol (and an image of the TPMS Malfunction 
Telltale warning (``TPMS''), if a dedicated telltale is utilized for 
this function) with the following statement in English:

    Each tire, including the spare (if provided), should be checked 
monthly when cold and inflated to the inflation pressure recommended by 
the vehicle manufacturer on the vehicle placard or tire inflation 
pressure label. (If your vehicle has tires of a different size than the 
size indicated on the vehicle placard or tire inflation pressure label, 
you should determine the proper tire inflation pressure for those 
tires.)
    As an added safety feature, your vehicle has been equipped with a 
tire pressure monitoring system (TPMS) that illuminates a low tire 
pressure telltale when one or more of your tires is significantly under-
inflated. Accordingly, when the low tire pressure telltale illuminates, 
you should stop and check your tires as soon as possible, and inflate 
them to the proper pressure. Driving on a significantly under-inflated 
tire causes the tire to overheat and can lead to tire failure. Under-
inflation also reduces fuel efficiency and tire tread life, and may 
affect the vehicle's handling and stopping ability.
    Please note that the TPMS is not a substitute for proper tire 
maintenance, and it is the driver's responsibility to maintain correct 
tire pressure, even if under-inflation has not reached the level to 
trigger illumination of the TPMS low tire pressure telltale.
    [The following paragraph is required for all vehicles certified to 
the standard starting on

[[Page 690]]

September 1, 2007 and for vehicles voluntarily equipped with a compliant 
TPMS MIL before that time.] Your vehicle has also been equipped with a 
TPMS malfunction indicator to indicate when the system is not operating 
properly. [For vehicles with a dedicated MIL telltale, add the following 
statement: The TPMS malfunction indicator is provided by a separate 
telltale, which displays the symbol ``TPMS'' when illuminated.] [For 
vehicles with a combined low tire pressure/MIL telltale, add the 
following statement: The TPMS malfunction indicator is combined with the 
low tire pressure telltale. When the system detects a malfunction, the 
telltale will flash for approximately one minute and then remain 
continuously illuminated. This sequence will continue upon subsequent 
vehicle start-ups as long as the malfunction exists.] When the 
malfunction indicator is illuminated, the system may not be able to 
detect or signal low tire pressure as intended. TPMS malfunctions may 
occur for a variety of reasons, including the installation of 
replacement or alternate tires or wheels on the vehicle that prevent the 
TPMS from functioning properly. Always check the TPMS malfunction 
telltale after replacing one or more tires or wheels on your vehicle to 
ensure that the replacement or alternate tires and wheels allow the TPMS 
to continue to function properly.

    (b) The owner's manual may include additional information about the 
time for the TPMS telltale(s) to extinguish once the low tire pressure 
condition or the malfunction is corrected. It may also include 
additional information about the significance of the low tire pressure 
warning telltale illuminating, a description of corrective action to be 
undertaken, whether the tire pressure monitoring system functions with 
the vehicle's spare tire (if provided), and how to use a reset button, 
if one is provided.
    (c) If a vehicle does not come with an owner's manual, the required 
information shall be provided in writing to the first purchaser of the 
vehicle.
    S5 Test conditions.
    S5.1 Ambient temperature. The ambient temperature is between 0 
[deg]C (32 [deg]F) and 40 [deg]C (104 [deg]F).
    S5.2 Road test surface. Compliance testing is conducted on any 
portion of the Southern Loop of the Treadwear Test Course defined in 
appendix A and Figure 2 of section 575.104 of this chapter. The road 
surface is dry during testing.
    S5.3 Vehicle conditions.
    S5.3.1 Test weight. The vehicle may be tested at any weight between 
its lightly loaded vehicle weight and its gross vehicle weight rating 
(GVWR) without exceeding any of its gross axle weight ratings.
    S5.3.2 Vehicle speed. The vehicle's TPMS is calibrated and tested at 
speeds between 50 km/h (31.1 mph) and 100 km/h (62.2 mph). For vehicles 
equipped with cruise control, cruise control is not to be engaged during 
testing.
    S5.3.3 Rim position. The vehicle rims may be positioned at any wheel 
position, consistent with any related instructions or limitations in the 
vehicle owner's manual.
    S5.3.4 Stationary location. The vehicle's tires are shaded from 
direct sun when the vehicle is parked.
    S5.3.5 Brake pedal application. Driving time shall not accumulate 
during service brake application.
    S5.3.6 Range of conditions or test parameters. Whenever a range of 
conditions or test parameters is specified in this standard, the vehicle 
must meet applicable requirements when tested at any point within the 
range.
    S5.3.7 Tires. The vehicle is tested with the tires installed on the 
vehicle at the time of initial vehicle sale, excluding the spare tire 
(if provided). However, the spare tire may be utilized for TPMS 
malfunction testing purposes.
    S6 Test procedures.
    (a) Inflate the vehicle's tires to the cold tire inflation 
pressure(s) provided on the vehicle placard or the tire inflation 
pressure label.
    (b) With the vehicle stationary and the ignition locking system in 
the ``Lock'' or ``Off'' position, activate the ignition locking system 
to the ``On'' (``Run'') position or, where applicable, the appropriate 
position for the lamp check. The tire pressure monitoring system must 
perform a check of lamp function for the low tire pressure telltale as 
specified in paragraph S4.3.3 of this standard. If the vehicle is 
equipped with a separate TPMS malfunction telltale, the tire pressure 
monitoring system also must perform a check of lamp function as 
specified in paragraph S4.4(b)(4) of this standard.

[[Page 691]]

    (c) If applicable, set or reset the tire pressure monitoring system 
in accordance with the instructions in the vehicle owner's manual.
    (d) System calibration/learning phase.
    (1) Drive the vehicle for up to 15 minutes of cumulative time (not 
necessarily continuously) along any portion of the test course.
    (2) Reverse direction on the course and drive the vehicle for an 
additional period of time for a total cumulative time of 20 minutes 
(including the time in S6(d)(1), and not necessarily continuously).
    (e) Stop the vehicle and deflate any combination of one to four 
tires until the deflated tire(s) is (are) at 7 kPa (1 psi) below the 
inflation pressure at which the tire pressure monitoring system is 
required to illuminate the low tire pressure warning telltale.
    (f) System detection phase.
    (1) Within 5 minutes of reducing the inflation pressure in the 
tire(s), drive the vehicle for up to 10-15 minutes of cumulative time 
(not necessarily continuously) along any portion of the test course.
    (2) Reverse direction on the course and drive the vehicle for an 
additional period of time for a total cumulative time of 20 minutes 
(including the time in S6(f)(1), and not necessarily continuously).
    (3) The sum of the total cumulative drive time under paragraphs 
S6(f)(1) and (2) shall be the lesser of 20 minutes or the time at which 
the low tire pressure telltale illuminates.
    (4) If the low tire pressure telltale did not illuminate, 
discontinue the test.
    (g) If the low tire pressure telltale illuminated during the 
procedure in paragraph S6(f), deactivate the ignition locking system to 
the ``Off'' or ``Lock'' position. After a 5-minute period, activate the 
vehicle's ignition locking system to the ``On'' (``Run'') position. The 
telltale must illuminate and remain illuminated as long as the ignition 
locking system is in the ``On'' (``Run'') position.
    (h) Keep the vehicle stationary for a period of up to one hour with 
the engine off.
    (i) Inflate all of the vehicle's tires to the same inflation 
pressure used in paragraph S6(a). If the vehicle's tire pressure 
monitoring system has a manual reset feature, reset the system in 
accordance with the instructions specified in the vehicle owner's 
manual. Determine whether the telltale has extinguished. If necessary, 
drive the vehicle until the telltale has been extinguished.
    (j) The test may be repeated, using the test procedures in 
paragraphs S6(a)-(b) and S6(d)-(i), with any one, two, three, or four of 
the tires on the vehicle under-inflated.
    (k) Simulate one TPMS malfunction by disconnecting the power source 
to any TPMS component, disconnecting any electrical connection between 
TPMS components, or installing a tire or wheel on the vehicle that is 
incompatible with the TPMS. When simulating a TPMS malfunction, the 
electrical connections for the telltale lamps are not to be 
disconnected.
    (l) TPMS malfunction detection.
    (1) Drive the vehicle for up to 15 minutes of cumulative time (not 
necessarily continuously) along any portion of the test course.
    (2) Reverse direction on the course and drive the vehicle for an 
additional period of time for a total cumulative time of 20 minutes 
(including the time in S6(l)(1), and not necessarily continuously).
    (3) The sum of the total cumulative drive time under paragraphs 
S6(l)(1) and (2) shall be the lesser of 20 minutes or the time at which 
the TPMS malfunction telltale illuminates.
    (4) If the TPMS malfunction indicator did not illuminate in 
accordance with paragraph S4.4, as required, discontinue the test.
    (m) If the TPMS malfunction indicator illuminated during the 
procedure in paragraph S6(l), deactivate the ignition locking system to 
the ``Off'' or ``Lock'' position. After a 5-minute period, activate the 
vehicle's ignition locking system to the ``On'' (``Run'') position. The 
TPMS malfunction indicator must again signal a malfunction and remain 
illuminated as long as the ignition locking system is in the ``On'' 
(``Run'') position.
    (n) Restore the TPMS to normal operation. If necessary, drive the 
vehicle until the telltale has extinguished.

[[Page 692]]

    (o) The test may be repeated using the test procedures in paragraphs 
S6(k)-(n), with each such test limited to simulation of a single 
malfunction.
    S7 Phase-in schedule.
    S7.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after October 5, 2005, and before 
September 1, 2006. For vehicles manufactured on or after October 5, 
2005, and before September 1, 2006, the number of vehicles complying 
with this standard (except for the provisions of S4.4 unless the 
manufacturer elects to also certify to those provisions) must not be 
less than 20 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2002, and before October 5, 2005; 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after October 5, 2005, and 
before September 1, 2006.
    S7.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2006, and before 
September 1, 2007. For vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 
2006, and before September 1, 2007, the number of vehicles complying 
with this standard (except for the provisions of S4.4 unless the 
manufacturer elects to also certify to those provisions) must not be 
less than 70 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2003, and before September 1, 
2006; or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2006, and 
before September 1, 2007.
    S7.3 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2007. Except as 
provided in S7.7, all vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 
2007 must comply with all requirements of this standard.
    S7.4 Calculation of complying vehicles.
    (a) Carry-Forward Credits. For purposes of complying with S7.1, a 
manufacturer may count a vehicle if it is certified as complying with 
this standard and is manufactured on or after April 8, 2005, but before 
September 1, 2006.
    (b) For purposes of complying with S7.2, a manufacturer may count a 
vehicle if it:
    (1) (i) Is certified as complying with this standard and is 
manufactured on or after April 8, 2005, but before September 1, 2007; 
and
    (ii) Is not counted toward compliance with S7.1; or
    (2) Is manufactured on or after September 1, 2006, but before 
September 1, 2007.
    (c) Carry-Backward Credits. At the vehicle manufacturer's option, 
for purposes of complying with S7.1, a manufacturer may count a vehicle 
it plans to manufacture and to certify as complying with this standard 
that will be produced on or after September 1, 2006 but before September 
1, 2007. However, a vehicle counted toward compliance with S7.1 may not 
be counted toward compliance with S7.2. If the vehicle manufacturer 
decides to exercise the option for carry-backward credits, the 
manufacturer must indicate this in its report for the production period 
corresponding to S7.1 filed pursuant to 49 CFR 585.66. The vehicles are 
counted in fulfillment of the requirements of S7.1, subject to actually 
being produced in compliance with this standard during the specified 
time period and not being counted toward the requirements of S7.2.
    S7.5 Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S7.5.1 For the purpose of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer under S7.1 through S7.3, a vehicle produced by more 
than one manufacturer must be attributed to a single manufacturer as 
follows, subject to S7.5.2:
    (a) A vehicle that is imported must be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, must be attributed 
to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    S7.5.2 A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer must be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR Part 585, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S7.5.1.
    S7.6 Small volume manufacturers. Vehicles manufactured by a 
manufacturer that produces fewer than 5,000 vehicles

[[Page 693]]

for sale in the United States during the period of September 1, 2005 to 
August 31, 2006, or the period from September 1, 2006 to August 31, 
2007, are not subject to the corresponding requirements of S7.1, S7.2, 
and S7.4.
    S7.7 Final-stage manufacturers and alterers. Vehicles that are 
manufactured in two or more stages or that are altered (within the 
meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) after having previously been certified in 
accordance with part 567 of this chapter are not subject to the 
requirements of S7.1 through S7.4. Instead, vehicles that are 
manufactured in two or more stages or that are altered must comply with 
this standard beginning on September 1, 2008.

                         Tables to Sec. 571.138

                    Table 1--Low Tire Pressure Warning Telltale--Minimum Activation Pressure
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Column 2--maximum or        Column 3--minimum
                                                              rated inflation pressure     activation pressure
                     Column 1--tire type                     ---------------------------------------------------
                                                                 (kPa)        (psi)        (kPa)        (psi)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
P-metric--Standard Load.....................................         240,          35,          140           20
                                                                  300, or       44, or          140           20
                                                                      350           51          140           20
P-metric--Extra Load........................................       280 or        41 or          160           23
                                                                      340           49          160           23
Load Range C................................................          350           51          200           29
Load Range D................................................          450           65          240           35
Load Range E................................................          550           80          240           35
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[70 FR 18187, Apr. 8, 2005, as amended at 70 FR 53100, Sept. 7, 2005; 72 
FR 38025, July 12, 2007]


<R05>
Sec. 571.139  Standard No. 139; New pneumatic radial tires for light vehicles.

    S1. Scope and purpose. This standard specifies tire dimensions, test 
requirements, labeling requirements, and defines tire load ratings.
    S2 Application and Incorporation by Reference.
    S2.1 Application. This standard applies to new pneumatic radial 
tires for use on motor vehicles (other than motorcycles and low speed 
vehicles) that have a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 10,000 
pounds or less and that were manufactured after 1975. This standard does 
not apply to special tires (ST) for trailers in highway service, tires 
for use on farm implements (FI) in agricultural service with 
intermittent highway use, tires with rim diameters of 8 inches and 
below, or T-type temporary use spare tires with radial construction.
    S2.2 Incorporation by reference. ASTM F-1805-00, Standard Test 
Method for Single Wheel Driving Traction in a Straight Line on Snow- and 
Ice-Covered Surfaces is incorporated by reference in S3 of this section. 
The Director of the Federal Register has approved the incorporation by 
reference of this material in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR 
Part 51. A copy of ASTM F-1805-00 may be obtained from the ASTM Web site 
http://www.astm.org/ or by contacting ASTM, or by contacting ASTM, 100 
Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959. A copy of ASTM F-
1805-00 may be obtained from the NHTSA docket at Docket No. 2005-23439, 
or at the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). For 
information on the availability of this material at NARA, call 202-741-
6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/federal--register/code--of--
federal--regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    S3 Definitions.
    Bead means the part of the tire that is made of steel wires, wrapped 
or reinforced by ply cords and that is shaped to fit the rim.
    Bead separation means a breakdown of the bond between components in 
the bead.
    Bias ply tire means a pneumatic tire in which the ply cords that 
extend to the beads are laid at alternate angles substantially less than 
90 degrees to the centerline of the tread.

[[Page 694]]

    Carcass means the tire structure, except tread and sidewall rubber 
which, when inflated, bears the load.
    Chunking means the breaking away of pieces of the tread or sidewall.
    Cord means the strands forming the plies in the tire.
    Cord separation means the parting of cords from adjacent rubber 
compounds.
    Cracking means any parting within the tread, sidewall, or inner 
liner of the tire extending to cord material.
    Extra load tire means a tire designed to operate at higher loads and 
higher inflation pressure than the corresponding standard tire.
    Groove means the space between two adjacent tread ribs.
    Innerliner means the layer(s) forming the inside surface of a 
tubeless tire that contains the inflating medium within the tire.
    Innerliner separation means the parting of the innerliner from cord 
material in the carcass.
    Light truck (LT) tire means a tire designated by its manufacturer as 
primarily intended for use on lightweight trucks or multipurpose 
passenger vehicles.
    Load rating means the maximum load that a tire is rated to carry for 
a given inflation pressure.
    Maximum load rating means the load rating for a tire at the maximum 
permissible inflation pressure for that tire.
    Maximum permissible inflation pressure means the maximum cold 
inflation pressure to which a tire may be inflated.
    Measuring rim means the rim on which a tire is fitted for physical 
dimension requirements.
    Open splice means any parting at any junction of tread, sidewall, or 
innerliner that extends to cord material.
    Outer diameter means the overall diameter of an inflated new tire.
    Overall width means the linear distance between the exteriors of the 
sidewalls of an inflated tire, including elevations due to labeling, 
decorations, or protective bands or ribs.
    Passenger car tire means a tire intended for use on passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, and trucks, that have a gross vehicle 
weight rating (GVWR) of 10,000 pounds or less.
    Ply means a layer of rubber-coated parallel cords.
    Ply separation means a parting of rubber compound between adjacent 
plies.
    Pneumatic tire means a mechanical device made of rubber, chemicals, 
fabric and steel or other materials, that, when mounted on an automotive 
wheel, provides the traction and contains the gas or fluid that sustains 
the load.
    Radial ply tire means a pneumatic tire in which the ply cords that 
extend to the beads are laid at substantially 90 degrees to the 
centerline of the tread.
    Reinforced tire means a tire designed to operate at higher loads and 
at higher inflation pressures than the corresponding standard tire.
    Rim means a metal support for a tire or a tire and tube assembly 
upon which the tire beads are seated.
    Section width means the linear distance between the exteriors of the 
sidewalls of an inflated tire, excluding elevations due to labeling, 
decoration, or protective bands.
    Sidewall means that portion of a tire between the tread and bead.
    Sidewall separation means the parting of the rubber compound from 
the cord material in the sidewall.
    Snow tire means a tire that attains a traction index equal to or 
greater than 110, compared to the ASTM E-1136 Standard Reference Test 
Tire when using the snow traction test as described in ASTM F-1805-00, 
Standard Test Method for Single Wheel Driving Traction in a Straight 
Line on Snow- and Ice-Covered Surfaces, and which is marked with an 
Alpine Symbol specified in S5.5(i) on at least one sidewall.
    Test rim means the rim on which a tire is fitted for testing, and 
may be any rim listed as appropriate for use with that tire.
    Tread means that portion of a tire that comes into contact with the 
road.
    Tread rib means a tread section running circumferentially around a 
tire.
    Tread separation means pulling away of the tread from the tire 
carcass.
    Treadwear indicators (TWI) means the projections within the 
principal

[[Page 695]]

grooves designed to give a visual indication of the degrees of wear of 
the tread.
    Wheel-holding fixture means the fixture used to hold the wheel and 
tire assembly securely during testing.
    S4. Tire and rim matching information.
    S4.1. Each manufacturer of tires must ensure that a listing of the 
rims that may be used with each tire that it produces is provided to the 
public in accordance with S4.1.1 and S4.1.2.
    S4.1.1 Each rim listing for a tire must include dimensional 
specifications and a diagram of the rim and must be in one of the 
following forms:
    (a) Listed by manufacturer name or brand name in a document 
furnished to dealers of the manufacturer's tires, to any person upon 
request, and in duplicate to: Docket Section, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590; or
    (b) Contained in publications, current at the date of manufacture of 
the tire or any later date, of at least one of the following 
organizations:
    (1) The Tire and Rim Association.
    (2) The European Tyre and Rim Technical Organization.
    (3) Japan Automobile Tire Manufacturers' Association, Inc.
    (4) Tyre & Rim Association of Australia.
    (5) Associacao Latino Americana de Pneus e Aros (Brazil).
    (6) South African Bureau of Standards.
    S4.1.2 A listing compiled in accordance with paragraph (a) of S4.1.1 
need not include dimensional specifications or a diagram of a rim whose 
dimensional specifications and diagram are contained in a listing 
published in accordance with paragraph (b) of S4.1.1.
    S4.2. Information contained in a publication specified in S4.1.1(b) 
that lists general categories of tires and rims by size designation, 
type of construction, and/or intended use, is considered to be 
manufacturer's information required by S4.1 for the listed tires, unless 
the publication itself or specific information provided according to 
S4.1(a) indicates otherwise.

                        S5. General requirements

    S5.1. Size and construction. Each tire shall fit each rim specified 
for its size designation in accordance with S4.1.
    S5.2. Performance requirements. Each tire shall conform to each of 
the following:
    (a) It shall meet the requirements specified in S6 for its tire size 
designation, type, and maximum permissible inflation pressure.
    (b) It shall meet each of the applicable requirements set forth in 
paragraphs (c) and (d) of this S5.2, when mounted on a model rim 
assembly corresponding to any rim designated by the tire manufacturer 
for use with the tire in accordance with S4.
    (c) Its maximum permissible inflation pressure shall be 240, 280, 
300, 340, or 350 kPa.
    (d) Its load rating shall be that specified either in a submission 
made by an individual manufacturer, pursuant to S4, or in one of the 
publications described in S4 for its size designation, type and each 
appropriate inflation pressure. If the maximum load rating for a 
particular tire size is shown in more than one of the publications 
described in S4, each tire of that size designation shall have a maximum 
load rating that is not less than the published maximum load rating, or 
if there are differing maximum load ratings for the same tire size 
designation, not less then the lowest published maximum load rating.
    S5.3. Test sample. For the tests specified in S6, use:
    (a) One tire for high speed;
    (b) Another tire for endurance and low inflation pressure 
performance; and
    (c) A third tire for physical dimensions, resistance to bead 
unseating, and strength, in sequence.
    S5.4. Treadwear indicators. Except in the case of tires with a 12-
inch or smaller rim diameter, each tire shall have not less than six 
treadwear indicators spaced approximately equally around the 
circumference of the tire that enable a person inspecting the tire to 
determine visually whether the tire has worn to a tread depth of one 
sixteenth of an inch. Tires with 12-inch or smaller rim diameter shall 
have not

[[Page 696]]

less than three such treadwear indicators.
    S5.5 Tire markings. Except as specified in paragraphs (a) through 
(i) of S5.5, each tire must be marked on each sidewall with the 
information specified in S5.5(a) through (d) and on one sidewall with 
the information specified in S5.5(e) through (i) according to the phase-
in schedule specified in S7 of this standard. The markings must be 
placed between the maximum section width and the bead on at least one 
sidewall, unless the maximum section width of the tire is located in an 
area that is not more than one-fourth of the distance from the bead to 
the shoulder of the tire. If the maximum section width falls within that 
area, those markings must appear between the bead and a point one-half 
the distance from the bead to the shoulder of the tire, on at least one 
sidewall. The markings must be in letters and numerals not less than 
0.078 inches high and raised above or sunk below the tire surface not 
less than 0.015 inches.
    (a) The symbol DOT, which constitutes a certification that the tire 
conforms to applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards;
    (b) The tire size designation as listed in the documents and 
publications specified in S4.1.1 of this standard;
    (c) The maximum permissible inflation pressure, subject to the 
limitations of S5.5.4 through S5.5.6 of this standard;
    (d) The maximum load rating and for LT tires, the letter designating 
the tire load range;
    (e) The generic name of each cord material used in the plies (both 
sidewall and tread area) of the tire;
    (f) The actual number of plies in the sidewall, and the actual 
number of plies in the tread area, if different;
    (g) The term ``tubeless'' or ``tube type,'' as applicable;
    (h) The word ``radial,'' if the tire is a radial ply tire; and
    (i) Alpine Symbol. A tire meeting the definition of a snow tire as 
defined in paragraph S3 may, at the option of the manufacturer, show the 
pictograph of a mountain with a snowflake as shown below. If the 
manufacturer chooses to mark the snow tire with the alpine symbol, the 
mountain profile must have a minimum base of 15 mm and a minimum height 
of 15 mm, and must contain three peaks with the middle peak being the 
tallest. Inside the mountain, there must be a six-sided snowflake having 
a minimum height of one-half the tallest peak.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR28NO08.009

    S5.5.1 Tire identification number.
    (a) Tires manufactured before September 1, 2009. Each tire must be 
labeled with the tire identification number required by 49 CFR part 574 
on a sidewall of the tire. Except for retreaded tires, either the tire 
identification number or a partial tire identification number, 
containing all characters in the tire identification number, except for 
the date code and, at the discretion of the manufacturer, any optional 
code, must be labeled on the other sidewall of the tire.
    (b) Tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2009. Each tire must 
be labeled with the tire identification number required by 49 CFR part 
574 on the intended outboard sidewall of the tire. Except for retreaded 
tires, either the tire identification number or a partial tire 
identification number, containing all characters in the tire 
identification number, except for the date code and, at the discretion 
of the manufacturer, any optional code, must be labeled on the other 
sidewall of the tire. Except for retreaded tires, if a tire does not 
have an intended outboard sidewall, the tire must be labeled with the 
tire identification number required by 49 CFR part 574 on one sidewall 
and with either the tire identification number or a partial tire 
identification number, containing all characters in the tire 
identification number except for the date code and, at the discretion of 
the manufacturer, any optional code, on the other sidewall.

[[Page 697]]

    S5.5.2 [Reserved]
    S5.5.3 Each tire must be labeled with the name of the manufacturer, 
or brand name and number assigned to the manufacturer in the manner 
specified in 49 CFR part 574.
    S5.5.4 For passenger car tires, if the maximum inflation pressure of 
a tire is 240, 280, 300, 340, or 350 kPa, then:
    (a) Each marking of that inflation pressure pursuant to S5.5(c) must 
be followed in parenthesis by the equivalent psi, rounded to the next 
higher whole number; and
    (b) Each marking of the tire's maximum load rating pursuant to 
S5.5(d) in kilograms must be followed in parenthesis by the equivalent 
load rating in pounds, rounded to the nearest whole number.
    S5.5.5 If the maximum inflation pressure of a tire is 420 kPa (60 
psi), the tire must have permanently molded into or onto both sidewalls, 
in letters and numerals not less than \1/2\ inch high, the words 
``Inflate to 60 psi'' or ``Inflate to 420 kPa (60 psi).'' On both 
sidewalls, the words must be positioned in an area between the tire 
shoulder and the bead of the tire. However, the words must be also 
positioned on the tire so that they are not obstructed by the flange of 
any rim designated for use with that tire in this standard or in 
Standard No. 110 (Sec. 571.110 of this part).
    S5.5.6 For LT tires, the maximum permissible inflation pressure 
shown must be the inflation pressure that corresponds to the maximum 
load of the tire for the tire size as specified in one of the 
publications described in S4.1.1.(b) of Sec. 571.139. At the 
manufacturer's option, the shown inflation pressure may be as much as 10 
psi (69 kPa) greater than the inflation pressure corresponding to the 
specified maximum load.
    S6. Test procedures, conditions and performance requirements. Each 
tire shall meet all of the applicable requirements of this section when 
tested according to the conditions and procedures set forth in S5 and 
S6.1 through S6.7.

                          S6.1. Tire dimensions

    S6.1.1 Test conditions and procedures.
    S6.1.1.1 Tire Preparation.
    S6.1.1.1.1 Mount the tire on the measuring rim specified by the tire 
manufacturer or in one of the publications listed in S4.1.1
    S6.1.1.1.2 For passenger car tires, inflate to the pressure 
specified in the following table:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Inflation pressure (kPa)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Standard                            Reinforced
------------------------------------------------------------------------
180.....................................................             220
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S6.1.1.1.3 In the case of a LT tire, inflate it to the pressure at 
maximum load as labeled on sidewall.
    S6.1.1.1.4 Condition the assembly at an ambient room temperature of 
20 [deg]C to 30 [deg]C for not less than 24 hours.
    S6.1.1.1.5 Readjust the tire pressure to that specified in 
S6.1.1.1.2.
    S6.1.1.2 Test procedure.
    S6.1.1.2.1 Measure the section width and overall width by caliper at 
six points approximately equally spaced around the circumference of the 
tire, avoiding measurement of the additional thickness of the special 
protective ribs or bands. The average of the measurements so obtained 
are taken as the section width and overall width, respectively.
    S6.1.1.2.2 Determine the outer diameter by measuring the maximum 
circumference of the tire and dividing the figure so obtained by Pi 
(3.14).
    S6.1.2 Performance Requirements. The actual section width and 
overall width for each tire measured in accordance with S6.1.1.2 shall 
not exceed the section width specified in a submission made by an 
individual manufacturer, pursuant to S4.1.1(a) or in one of the 
publications described in S4.1.1(b) for its size designation and type by 
more than:
    (a) (For tires with a maximum permissible inflation pressure of 32, 
36, or 40 psi) 7 percent, or
    (b) (For tires with a maximum permissible inflation pressure of 240, 
280, 300, 340 or 350 kPa) 7 percent or 10 mm (0.4 inches), whichever is 
larger.

                       S6.2 High Speed Performance

    S6.2.1 Test conditions and procedures.
    S6.2.1.1 Preparation of tire.
    S6.2.1.1.1 Mount the tire on a test rim and inflate it to the 
pressure specified for the tire in the following table:

[[Page 698]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Test
                      Tire application                         pressure
                                                                (kPa)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Passenger car tires
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Standard load..............................................          220
Extra load.................................................          260
Load Range C...............................................          320
Load Range D...............................................          410
Load Range E...............................................          500
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Light truck tires with a nominal cross section <ls-thn-eq> 295 mm (11.5
                                 inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Load Range C...............................................          230
Load Range D...............................................          320
Load Range E...............................................          410
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S6.2.1.1.2 Condition the assembly at 32 to 38 [deg]C for not less 
than 3 hours.
    S6.2.1.1.3 Before or after mounting the assembly on a test axle, 
readjust the tire pressure to that specified in S6.2.1.1.1.
    S6.2.1.2 Test procedure.
    S6.2.1.2.1 Press the assembly against the outer face of a test drum 
with a diameter of 1.70 m <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 1%.
    S6.2.1.2.2 Apply to the test axle a load equal to 85% of the tire's 
maximum load carrying capacity.
    S6.2.1.2.3 Break-in the tire by running it for 2 hours at 80 km/h.
    S6.2.1.2.4 Allow tire to cool to 38 [deg]C and readjust inflation 
pressure to applicable pressure in 6.2.1.1.1 immediately before the 
test.
    S6.2.1.2.5 Throughout the test, the inflation pressure is not 
corrected and the test load is maintained at the value applied in 
S6.2.1.2.2.
    S6.2.1.2.6 During the test, the ambient temperature, measured at a 
distance of not less than 150 mm and not more than 1 m from the tire, is 
maintained at not less than 32 [deg]C or more than 38 [deg]C.
    S6.2.1.2.7 The test is conducted, continuously and uninterrupted, 
for ninety minutes through three thirty-minute consecutive test stages 
at the following speeds: 140, 150, and 160 km/h.
    S6.2.1.2.8 Allow the tire to cool for between 15 minutes and 25 
minutes. Measure its inflation pressure. Then, deflate the tire, remove 
it from the test rim, and inspect it for the conditions specified in 
S6.2.2(a).
    S6.2.2 Performance requirements. When the tire is tested in 
accordance with S6.2.1:
    (a) There shall be no visual evidence of tread, sidewall, ply, cord, 
innerliner, belt or bead separation, chunking, open splices, cracking, 
or broken cords.
    (b) The tire pressure, when measured at any time between 15 minutes 
and 25 minutes after the end of the test, shall not be less than 95% of 
the initial pressure specified in S6.2.1.1.1.

                           S6.3 Tire Endurance

    S6.3.1 Test conditions and procedures.
    S6.3.1.1 Preparation of Tire.
    S6.3.1.1.1 Mount the tire on a test rim and inflate it to the 
pressure specified for the tire in the following table:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Test
                      Tire application                         pressure
                                                                (kPa)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Passenger car tires
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Standard load..............................................          180
Extra load.................................................          220
Load Range C...............................................          260
Load Range D...............................................          340
Load Range E...............................................          410
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Light truck tires with a nominal cross section <ls-thn-eq> 295 mm (11.5
                                 inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Load Range C...............................................          190
Load Range D...............................................          260
Load Range E...............................................          340
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S6.3.1.1.2 Condition the assembly at 32 to 38 [deg]C for not less 
than 3 hours.
    S6.3.1.1.3 Readjust the pressure to the value specified in 
S6.3.1.1.1 immediately before testing.
    S6.3.1.2 Test Procedure.
    S6.3.1.2.1 Mount the assembly on a test axle and press it against 
the outer face of a smooth wheel having a diameter of 1.70 m <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 1%.
    S6.3.1.2.2 During the test, the ambient temperature, at a distance 
of not less than 150 mm and not more than 1 m from the tire, is 
maintained at not less than 32 [deg]C or more than 38 [deg]C.
    S6.3.1.2.3 Conduct the test, without interruptions, at the test 
speed of not less than 120 km/h with loads and test periods not less 
than those shown in the following table. For snow tires, conduct the 
test at not less than 110 km/h.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Load as a
                                                              percentage
                  Test period                     Duration     of tire
                                                  (hours)      maximum
                                                             load rating
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.............................................            4           85
2.............................................            6           90
3.............................................           24          100
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 699]]

    S6.3.1.2.4 Throughout the test, the inflation pressure is not 
corrected and the test loads are maintained at the value corresponding 
to each test period, as shown in the table in S6.3.1.2.3.
    S6.3.1.2.5 Allow the tire to cool for between 15 minutes and 25 
minutes after running the tire for the time specified in the table in 
S6.3.1.2.3, measure its inflation pressure. Inspect the tire externally 
on the test rim for the conditions specified in S6.3.2(a).
    S6.3.2 Performance requirements. When the tire is tested in 
accordance with S6.3.1:
    (a) There shall be no visual evidence of tread, sidewall, ply, cord, 
belt or bead separation, chunking, open splices, cracking or broken 
cords.
    (b) The tire pressure, when measured at any time between 15 minutes 
and 25 minutes after the end of the test, shall not be less than 95% of 
the initial pressure specified in S6.3.1.1.1.

                 S6.4 Low Inflation Pressure Performance

    S6.4.1 Test conditions and procedures.
    S6.4.1.1 Preparation of tire.
    S6.4.1.1.1 This test is conducted following completion of the tire 
endurance test using the same tire and rim assembly tested in accordance 
with S6.3 with the tire deflated to the following appropriate pressure:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Test
                      Tire application                         pressure
                                                                (kPa)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Passenger car tires
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Standard load..............................................          140
Extra load.................................................          160
Load Range C...............................................          200
Load Range D...............................................          260
Load Range E...............................................          320
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Light truck tires with a nominal cross section <ls-thn-eq> 295 mm (11.5
                                 inches)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Load Range C...............................................          150
Load Range D...............................................          200
Load Range E...............................................          260
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S6.4.1.1.2 After the tire is deflated to the appropriate test 
pressure in S6.4.1.1.1 at the completion of the endurance test, 
condition the assembly at 32 to 38 [deg]C for not less than 2 hours.
    S6.4.1.1.3 Before or after mounting the assembly on a test axle, 
readjust the tire pressure to that specified in S6.4.1.1.1.
    S6.4.1.2 Test procedure.
    S6.4.1.2.1 The test is conducted for ninety minutes at the end of 
the test specified in S6.3, continuous and uninterrupted, at a speed of 
120 km/h (75 mph). For snow tires, conduct the test at not less than 110 
km/h.
    S6.4.1.2.2 Press the assembly against the outer face of a test drum 
with a diameter of 1.70 m + 1%.
    S6.4.1.2.3 Apply to the test axle a load equal to 100% of the tire's 
maximum load carrying capacity.
    S6.4.1.2.4 Throughout the test, the inflation pressure is not 
corrected and the test load is maintained at the initial level.
    S6.4.1.2.5 During the test, the ambient temperature, at a distance 
of not less than 150 mm and not more than 1 m from the tire, is 
maintained at not less than 32 [deg]C or more than 38 [deg]C.
    S6.4.1.2.6 Allow the tire to cool for between 15 minutes and 25 
minutes. Measure its inflation pressure. Then, deflate the tire, remove 
it from the test rim, and inspect it for the conditions specified in 
S6.4.2(a).
    S6.4.2 Performance requirements. When the tire is tested in 
accordance with S6.4.1:
    (a) There shall be no visual evidence of tread, sidewall, ply, cord, 
innerliner, belt or bead separation, chunking, open splices, cracking, 
or broken cords, and
    (b) The tire pressure, when measured at any time between 15 minutes 
and 25 minutes after the end of the test, shall not be less than 95% of 
the initial pressure specified in S6.4.1.1.1.
    S6.5 Tire strength.
    S6.5.1 Tire strength for passenger car tires. Each tire shall comply 
with the requirements of S5.3 of Sec. 571.109.
    S6.5.2 Tire strength for LT tires. Each tire shall comply with the 
requirements of S7.3 of Sec. 571.119.
    S6.6 Tubeless tire bead unseating resistance. Each tire shall comply 
with the requirements of S5.2 of Sec. 571.109. For light truck tires, 
the maximum permissible inflation pressure to be used for the bead 
unseating test is as follows:

Load Range C...............................  260 kPa.
Load Range D...............................  340 kPa.
Load Range E...............................  410 kPa.
 

    For light truck tires with a nominal cross section greater than 295 
mm (11.5

[[Page 700]]

inches), the maximum permissible inflation pressure to be used for the 
bead unseating test is as follows:

Load Range C...............................  190 kPa.
Load Range D...............................  260 kPa.
Load Range E...............................  340 kPa.
 

    S7. Phase-in schedule for tire markings.
    S7.1 Tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 and before 
September 1, 2006. For tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 
and before September 1, 2006, the number of tires complying with S4, 
S5.5, S5.5.1, S5.5.2, S5.5.3, S5.5.4, S5.5.5, and S5.5.6 of this 
standard must be equal to not less than 40% of the manufacturer's 
production during that period.
    S7.2 Tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2006 and before 
September 1, 2007. For tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2006 
and before September 1, 2007, the number of tires complying with S4, 
S5.5, S5.5.1, S5.5.2, S5.5.3, S5.5.4, S5.5.5, and S5.5.6 of this 
standard must be equal to not less than 70% of the manufacturer's 
production during that period.
    S7.3 Tires manufactured on or after September 1, 2007. Each tire 
must comply with S4, S5.5, S5.5.1, S5.5.2, S5.5.3, S5.5.4, S5.5.5, and 
S5.5.6 of this standard.

[67 FR 69627, Nov. 18, 2002, as amended at 68 FR 38150, June 26, 2003; 
69 FR 31319, June 3, 2004; 71 FR 886, Jan. 6, 2006; 72 FR 49211, Aug. 
28, 2007; 73 FR 72358, Nov. 28, 2008]


<R05>
Sec. 571.201  Standard No. 201; Occupant protection in interior impact.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard specifies requirements to 
afford impact protection for occupants.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars and to 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses with a GVWR of 4,536 
kilograms or less, except that the requirements of S6 do not apply to 
buses with a GVWR of more than 3,860 kilograms.
    S3. Definitions.
    A-pillar means any pillar that is entirely forward of a transverse 
vertical plane passing through the seating reference point of the 
driver's seat.
    Ambulance means a motor vehicle designed exclusively for the purpose 
of emergency medical care, as evidenced by the presence of a passenger 
compartment to accommodate emergency medical personnel, one or more 
patients on litters or cots, and equipment and supplies for emergency 
care at a location or during transport.
    B-pillar means the forwardmost pillar on each side of the vehicle 
that is, in whole or in part, rearward of a transverse vertical plane 
passing through the seating reference point of the driver's seat, 
unless:
    (1) There is only one pillar rearward of that plane and it is also a 
rearmost pillar; or
    (2) There is a door frame rearward of the A-pillar and forward of 
any other pillar or rearmost pillar.
    Brace means a fixed diagonal structural member in an open body 
vehicle that is used to brace the roll-bar and that connects the roll-
bar to the main body of the vehicle structure.
    Convertible means a vehicle whose A-pillars are not joined with the 
B-pillars (or rearmost pillars) by a fixed, rigid structural member.
    Convertible roof frame means the frame of a convertible roof.
    Convertible roof linkage mechanism means any anchorage, fastener, or 
device necessary to deploy a convertible roof frame.
    Daylight opening means, for openings on the side of the vehicle, 
other than a door opening, the locus of all points where a horizontal 
line, perpendicular to the vehicle longitudinal centerline, is tangent 
to the periphery of the opening. For openings on the front and rear of 
the vehicle, other than a door opening, daylight opening means the locus 
of all points where a horizontal line, parallel to the vehicle 
longitudinal centerline, is tangent to the periphery of the opening. If 
the horizontal line is tangent to the periphery at more than one point 
at any location, the most inboard point is used to determine the 
daylight opening.
    Door frame means the rearmost perimeter structure, including trim 
but excluding glass, of the forward door and the forwardmost perimeter 
structure, including trim but excluding glass, of the rear door of a 
pair of adjacent side doors that:
    (1) Have opposing hinges;
    (2) Latch together without engaging or contacting an intervening 
pillar;

[[Page 701]]

    (3) Are forward of any pillar other than the A-pillar on the same 
side of the vehicle; and
    (4) Are rearward of the A-pillar.
    Door opening means, for door openings on the side of the vehicle, 
the locus of all points where a horizontal line, perpendicular to the 
vehicle longitudinal centerline, is tangent to the periphery of the side 
door opening. For door openings on the back end of the vehicle, door 
opening means the locus of all points where a horizontal line, parallel 
to the vehicle longitudinal centerline, is tangent to the periphery of 
the back door opening. If the horizontal line is tangent to the 
periphery at more than one point at any location, the most inboard point 
is the door opening.
    Dynamically deployed upper interior head protection system means a 
protective device or devices which are integrated into a vehicle and 
which, when activated by an impact, provide, through means requiring no 
action from occupants, protection against head impacts with upper 
interior structures and components of the vehicle in crashes.
    Forehead impact zone means the part of the free motion headform 
surface area that is determined in accordance with the procedure set 
forth in S8.10.
    Free motion headform means a test device which conforms to the 
specifications of part 572, subpart L of this chapter.
    Interior rear quarter panel means a vehicle interior component 
located between the rear edge of the side door frame, the front edge of 
the rearmost seat back, and the daylight opening.
    Mid-sagittal plane of a dummy means a longitudinal vertical plane 
passing through the seating reference point of a designated seating 
position.
    Other door frame means the rearmost perimeter structure, including 
trim but excluding glass, of the forward door and the forwardmost 
perimeter structure, including trim but excluding glass, of the rear 
door of a pair of adjacent side doors that:
    (1) Have opposing hinges;
    (2) Latch together without engaging or contacting an intervening 
pillar; and
    (3) Are rearward of the B-pillar.
    Other pillar means any pillar which is not an A-pillar, a B-pillar, 
or a rearmost pillar.
    Pillar means any structure, excluding glazing and the vertical 
portion of door window frames, but including accompanying moldings, 
attached components such as safety belt anchorages and coat hooks, 
which:
    (1) Supports either a roof or any other structure (such as a roll-
bar) that is above the driver's head, or
    (2) Is located along the side edge of a window.
    Roll-bar means a fixed overhead structural member, including its 
vertical support structure, that extends from the left to the right side 
of the passenger compartment of any open body vehicles and convertibles. 
It does not include a header.
    Seat belt anchorage means any component involved in transferring 
seat belt loads to the vehicle structure, including, but not limited to, 
the attachment hardware, but excluding webbing or straps, seat frames, 
seat pedestals, and the vehicle structure itself, whose failure causes 
separation of the belt from the vehicle structure.
    Seat belt mounting structure means:
    (a) A vehicle body or frame component, including trim, that 
incorporates an upper seat belt anchorage conforming to the requirements 
of S4.2.1 and S4.3.2 of 49 CFR 571.210, that is located rearward of the 
rearmost outboard designated seating position, and that extends above a 
horizontal plane 660 mm above the seating reference point (SgRP) of that 
seating position; and
    (b) A vehicle body or frame component, including trim, that 
incorporates an upper seat belt anchorage conforming to the requirements 
of S4.2.1 and S4.3.2 of 49 CFR 571.210, that is located forward of the 
rearmost outboard designated seating position, and that extends above a 
horizontal plane 460 mm above the SgRP of that seating position located 
rearward of the anchorage.
    (c) The seat belt mounting structure is not a pillar, roll bar, 
brace or stiffener, side rail, seat, interior rear quarter panel, or 
part of the roof.
    Sliding door track means a track structure along the upper edge of a 
side

[[Page 702]]

door opening that secures the door in the closed position and guides the 
door when moving to and from the open position.
    Stiffener means a fixed overhead structural member that connects one 
roll-bar to another roll-bar or to a header of any open body vehicle or 
convertible.
    Upper roof means the area of the vehicle interior that is determined 
in accordance with the procedure set forth in S8.15.
    Windshield trim means molding of any material between the windshield 
glazing and the exterior roof surface, including material that covers a 
part of either the windshield glazing or exterior roof surface.
    S4 Requirements
    S4.1 Except as provided in S4.2, each vehicle shall comply with 
either:
    (a) The requirements specified in S5, or,
    (b) The requirements specified in S5 and S6.
    S4.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1998 shall 
comply with the requirements of S5 and S6.
    S5 Requirements for instrument panels, seat backs, interior 
compartment doors, sun visors, and armrests. Each vehicle shall comply 
with the requirements specified in S5.1 through S5.5.2.
    S5.1 Instrument panels. Except as provided in S5.1.1, when that area 
of the instrument panel that is within the head impact area is impacted 
in accordance with S5.1.2 by a 6.8 kilogram, 165 mm diameter head form 
at--
    (a) A relative velocity of 24 kilometers per hour for all vehicles 
except those specified in paragraph (b) of this section,
    (b) A relative velocity of 19 kilometers per hour for vehicles that 
meet the occupant crash protection requirements of S5.1 of 49 CFR 
571.208 by means of inflatable restraint systems and meet the 
requirements of S4.1.5.1(a)(3) by means of a Type 2 seat belt assembly 
at the right front designated seating position, the deceleration of the 
head form shall not exceed 80 g continuously for more than 3 
milliseconds.
    S5.1.1 The requirements of S5.1 do not apply to:
    (a) Console assemblies;
    (b) Areas less than 125 mm inboard from the juncture of the 
instrument panel attachment to the body side inner structure;
    (c) Areas closer to the windshield juncture than those statically 
contactable by the head form with the windshield in place;
    (d) Areas outboard of any point of tangency on the instrument panel 
of a 165 mm diameter head form tangent to and inboard of a vertical 
longitudinal plane tangent to the inboard edge of the steering wheel; or
    (e) Areas below any point at which a vertical line is tangent to the 
rearmost surface of the panel.
    S5.1.2 Demonstration procedures. Tests shall be performed as 
described in Society of Automotive Engineers Recommended Practice J921, 
``Instrument Panel Laboratory Impact Test Procedure,'' June 1965, using 
the specified instrumentation or instrumentation that meets the 
performance requirements specified in Society of Automotive Engineers 
Recommended Practice J977, ``Instrumentation for Laboratory Impact 
Tests,'' November 1966, except that:
    (a) The origin of the line tangent to the instrument panel surface 
shall be a point on a transverse horizontal line through a point 125 mm 
horizontally forward of the seating reference point of the front 
outboard passenger designated seating position, displaced vertically an 
amount equal to the rise which results from a 125 mm forward adjustment 
of the seat or 19 mm; and
    (b) Direction of impact shall be either:
    (1) In a vertical plane parallel to the vehicle longitudinal axis; 
or
    (2) In a plane normal to the surface at the point of contact.
    S5.2 Seat Backs. Except as provided in S5.2.1, when that area of the 
seat back that is within the head impact area is impacted in accordance 
with S5.2.2 by a 6.8 kilogram, 165 mm diameter head form at a relative 
velocity of 24 kilometers per hour, the deceleration of the head form 
shall not exceed 80g continuously for more than 3 milliseconds.
    S5.2.1 The requirements of S5.2 do not apply to seats installed in 
school

[[Page 703]]

buses which comply with the requirements of Standard No. 222, School Bus 
Passenger Seating and Occupant Protection (49 CFR 571.222) or to 
rearmost side-facing, back-to-back, folding auxiliary jump, and 
temporary seats.
    S5.2.2 Demonstration procedures. Tests shall be performed as 
described in Society of Automotive Engineers Recommended Practice J921, 
``Instrument Panel Laboratory Impact Test Procedure,'' June 1965, using 
the specified instrumentation or instrumentation that meets the 
performance requirements specified in Society of Automotive Engineers 
Recommended Practice J977, ``Instrumentation for Laboratory Impact 
Tests,'' November 1966, except that:
    (a) The origin of the line tangent to the uppermost seat back frame 
component shall be a point on a transverse horizontal line through the 
seating reference point of the right rear designated seating position, 
with adjustable forward seats in their rearmost design driving position 
and reclinable forward seat backs in their nominal design driving 
position;
    (b) Direction of impact shall be either:
    (1) In a vertical plane parallel to the vehicle longitudinal axis; 
or
    (2) In a plane normal to the surface at the point of contact.
    (c) For seats without head restraints installed, tests shall be 
performed for each individual split or bucket seat back at points within 
100 mm left and right of its centerline, and for each bench seat back 
between points 100 mm outboard of the centerline of each outboard 
designated seating position;
    (d) For seats having head restraints installed, each test shall be 
conducted with the head restraints in place at its lowest adjusted 
position, at a point on the head restraint centerline; and
    (e) For a seat that is installed in more than one body style, tests 
conducted at the fore and aft extremes identified by application of 
subparagraph (a) shall be deemed to have demonstrated all intermediate 
conditions.
    S5.3 Interior compartment doors. Each interior compartment door 
assembly located in an instrument panel, console assembly, seat back, or 
side panel adjacent to a designated seating position shall remain closed 
when tested in accordance with either S5.3.1(a) and S5.3.1(b) or 
S5.3.1(a) and S5.3.1(c). Additionally, any interior compartment door 
located in an instrument panel or seat back shall remain closed when the 
instrument panel or seat back is tested in accordance with S5.1 and 
S5.2. All interior compartment door assemblies with a locking device 
must be tested with the locking device in an unlocked position.
    S5.3.1 Demonstration procedures.
    (a) Subject the interior compartment door latch system to an inertia 
load of 10g in a horizontal transverse direction and an inertia load of 
10g in a vertical direction in accordance with the procedure described 
in section 5 of SAE Recommended Practice J839b, ``Passenger Car Side 
Door Latch Systems,'' May 1965, or an approved equivalent.
    (b) Impact the vehicle perpendicularly into a fixed collision 
barrier at a forward longitudinal velocity of 48 kilometers per hour.
    (c) Subject the interior compartment door latch system to a 
horizontal inertia load of 30g in a longitudinal direction in accordance 
with the procedure described in section 5 of SAE Recommended Practice 
J839b, ``Passenger Car Side Door Latch Systems,'' May 1965, or an 
approved equivalent.
    S5.4 Sun visors.
    S5.4.1 A sun visor that is constructed of or covered with energy-
absorbing material shall be provided for each front outboard designated 
seating position.
    S5.4.2 Each sun visor mounting shall present no rigid material edge 
radius of less than 3.2 mm that is statically contactable by a spherical 
165 mm diameter head form.
    S5.5 Armrests.
    S5.5.1 General. Each installed armrest shall conform to at least one 
of the following:
    (a) It shall be constructed with energy-absorbing material and shall 
deflect or collapse laterally at least 50 mm without permitting contact 
with any underlying rigid material.
    (b) It shall be constructed with energy-absorbing material that 
deflects or collapses to within 32 mm of a rigid test panel surface 
without permitting contact with any rigid material. Any

[[Page 704]]

rigid material between 13 and 32 mm from the panel surface shall have a 
minimum vertical height of not less than 25 mm.
    (c) Along not less than 50 continuous mm of its length, the armrest 
shall, when measured vertically in side elevation, provide at least 50 
mm of coverage within the pelvic impact area.
    S5.5.2 Folding armrests. Each armrest that folds into the seat back 
or between two seat backs shall either:
    (a) Meet the requirements of S5.5.1; or
    (b) Be constructed of or covered with energy-absorbing material.
    S6 Requirements for upper interior components.
    S6.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1998. Except as 
provided in S6.3 and S6.1.4, for vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1998 and before September 1, 2002, a percentage of the 
manufacturer's production, as specified in S6.1.1, S6.1.2, or S6.1.3 
shall conform, at the manufacturer's option, to either S6.1(a) or 
S6.1(b). For vehicles manufactured by final stage manufacturers on or 
after September 1, 1998 and before September 1, 2006, a percentage of 
the manufacturer's production as specified in S6.1.4 shall, except as 
provided in S6.3, conform, to either S6.1(a) or S6.1(b). The 
manufacturer shall select the option by the time it certifies the 
vehicle and may not thereafter select a different option for the 
vehicle.
    (a) When tested under the conditions of S8, comply with the 
requirements specified in S7 at the target locations specified in S10 
when impacted by the free motion headform specified in S8.9 at any speed 
up to and including 24 km/h (15 mph). The requirements do not apply to 
any target that cannot be located using the procedures of S10.
    (b) When equipped with a dynamically deployed upper interior head 
protection system and tested under the conditions of S8, comply with the 
requirements specified in S7 at the target locations specified in S10 as 
follows:
    (1) Targets that are not located over any point inside the area 
measured along the contour of the vehicle surface within 50 mm (2.0 
inch) of the periphery of the stowed system projected perpendicularly 
onto the vehicle interior surface, including mounting and inflation 
components but exclusive of any cover or covers, shall be impacted by 
the free motion headform specified in S8.9 at any speed up to and 
including 24 km/h (15 mph). The requirements do not apply to any targets 
that can not be located by using the procedures of S10.
    (2) Targets that are over any point inside the area measured along 
the contour of the vehicle interior within 50 mm (2.0 inch) of the 
periphery of the stowed system projected perpendicularly onto the 
vehicle interior surface, including mounting and inflation components 
but exclusive of any cover or covers, when the dynamically deployed 
upper interior head protection system is not deployed, shall be impacted 
by the free motion headform specified in S8.9 at any speed up to and 
including 19 km/h (12 mph) with the system undeployed. The requirements 
do not apply to any target that can not be located using the procedures 
of S10.
    (3) Each vehicle shall, when equipped with a dummy test device 
specified in Part 572, subpart M, and tested as specified in S8.16 
through S8.28, comply with the requirements specified in S7 when crashed 
into a fixed, rigid pole of 254 mm in diameter, at any velocity between 
24 kilometers per hour (15 mph) and 29 kilometers per hour (18 mph).
    S6.1.1 Phase-in Schedule #1
    S6.1.1.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1998 and 
before September 1, 1999. Subject to S6.1.5(a), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 1998 and before 
September 1, 1999, the amount of vehicles complying with S7 shall be not 
less than 10 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1996 and before September 1, 1999, 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 1998 and 
before September 1, 1999.
    S6.1.1.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1999 and 
before September 1, 2000. Subject to S6.1.5(b), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 1999 and before 
September 1, 2000, the amount of vehicles complying with S7 shall be not 
less than 25 percent of:

[[Page 705]]

    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1997 and before September 1, 2000, 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 1999 and 
before September 1, 2000.
    S6.1.1.3 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2000 and 
before September 1, 2001. Subject to S6.1.5(c), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2000 and before 
September 1, 2001, the amount of vehicles complying with S7 shall be not 
less than 40 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1998 and before September 1, 2001, 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2000 and 
before September 1, 2001.
    S6.1.1.4 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2001 and 
before September 1, 2002. Subject to S6.1.5(d), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2001 and before 
September 1, 2002, the amount of vehicles complying with S7 shall be not 
less than 70 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1999 and before September 1, 2002, 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2001 and 
before September 1, 2002.
    S6.1.2 Phase-in Schedule #2
    S6.1.2.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1998 and 
before September 1, 1999. Subject to S6.1.5(a), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 1998 and before 
September 1, 1999, the amount of vehicles complying with S7 shall be not 
less than seven percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1996 and before September 1, 1999, 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 1998 and 
before September 1, 1999.
    S6.1.2.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1999 and 
before September 1, 2000. Subject to S6.1.5(b), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 1999 and before 
September 1, 2000, the amount of vehicles complying with S7 shall be not 
less than 31 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1997 and before September 1, 2000, 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 1999 and 
before September 1, 2000.
    S6.1.2.3 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2000 and 
before September 1, 2001. Subject to S6.1.5(c), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2000 and before 
September 1, 2001, the amount of vehicles complying with S7 shall be not 
less than 40 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1998 and before September 1, 2001, 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2000 and 
before September 1, 2001.
    S6.1.2.4 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2001 and 
before September 1, 2002. Subject to S6.1.5(d), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2001 and before 
September 1, 2002, the amount of vehicles complying with S7 shall be not 
less than 70 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1999 and before September 1, 2002, 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2001 and 
before September 1, 2002.
    S6.1.3 Phase-in Schedule #3
    S6.1.3.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1998 and 
before September 1, 1999 are not required to comply with the 
requirements specified in S7.
    S6.1.3.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1999 shall 
comply with the requirements specified in S7.
    S6.1.4 Phase-in Schedule #4 A final stage manufacturer or alterer 
may, at its option, comply with the requirements set forth in S6.1.4.1 
and S6.1.4.2.
    S6.1.4.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1998 and 
before September 1, 2009 are not required to comply with the 
requirements specified in S7.

[[Page 706]]

    S6.1.4.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2009 shall 
comply with the requirements specified in S7.
    S6.1.5 Calculation of complying vehicles.
    (a) For the purposes of complying with S6.1.1.1 or S6.1.2.1, a 
manufacturer may count a vehicle if it is manufactured on or after May 
8, 1997, but before September 1, 1999.
    (b) For the purposes of complying with S6.1.1.2 or S6.1.2.2, a 
manufacturer may count a vehicle if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after May 8, 1997, but before September 1, 
2000, and
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S6.1.1.1 or S6.1.2.1, as 
appropriate.
    (c) For the purposes of complying with S6.1.1.3 or S6.1.2.3, a 
manufacturer may count a vehicle if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after May 8, 1997, but before September 1, 
2001, and
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S6.1.1.1, S6.1.1.2, 
S6.1.2.1, or S6.1.2.2, as appropriate.
    (d) For the purposes of complying with S6.1.1.4 or S6.1.2.4, a 
manufacturer may count a vehicle if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after May 8, 1997, but before September 1, 
2002, and
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S6.1.1.1, S6.1.1.2, 
S6.1.1.3, S6.1.2.1, S6.1.2.2, or S6.1.2.3, as appropriate.
    S6.1.6 Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S6.1.6.1 For the purpose of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer under S6.1.1 through S6.1.4, a vehicle produced by 
more than one manufacturer shall be attributed to a single manufacturer 
as follows, subject to S6.1.6.2.
    (a) A vehicle which is imported shall be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer which markets the vehicle.
    S6.1.6.2 A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer must be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR Part 585, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S6.1.6.1.
    S6.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2002 and 
vehicles built in two or more stages manufactured after September 1, 
2006. Except as provided in S6.1.4 and S6.3, vehicles manufactured on or 
after September 1, 2002 shall, when tested under the conditions of S8, 
conform, at the manufacturer's option, to either S6.2(a) or S6.2(b). 
Vehicles manufactured by final stage manufacturers on or after September 
1, 2006 shall, except as provided in S6.3, when tested under the 
conditions of S8, conform, at the manufacturer's option, to either 
S6.2(a) or S6.2(b). The manufacturer shall select the option by the time 
it certifies the vehicle and may not thereafter select a different 
option for the vehicle.
    (a) When tested under the conditions of S8, comply with the 
requirements specified in S7 at the target locations specified in S10 
when impacted by the free motion headform specified in S8.9 at any speed 
up to and including 24 km/h (15 mph). The requirements do not apply to 
any target that cannot be located using the procedures of S10.
    (b) When equipped with a dynamically deployed upper interior head 
protection system and tested under the conditions of S8, comply with the 
requirements specified in S7 at the target locations specified in S10 as 
follows:
    (1) Targets that are not located over any point inside the area 
measured along the contour of the vehicle surface within 50 mm (2.0 
inch) of the periphery of the stowed system projected perpendicularly 
onto the vehicle interior surface, including mounting and inflation 
components but exclusive of any cover or covers, shall be impacted by 
the free motion headform specified in S8.9 at any speed up to and 
including 24 km/h (15 mph). The requirements do not apply to any targets 
that cannot be located by using the procedures of S10.
    (2) Targets that are over any point inside the area measured along 
the contour of the vehicle interior within 50 mm (2.0 inch) of the 
periphery of the stowed system projected perpendicularly onto the 
vehicle interior surface,

[[Page 707]]

including mounting and inflation components but exclusive of any cover 
or covers, when the dynamically deployed upper interior head protection 
system is not deployed, shall be impacted by the free motion headform 
specified in S8.9 at any speed up to and including 19 km/h (12 mph) with 
the system undeployed. The requirements do not apply to any target that 
cannot be located using the procedures of S10.
    (3) Except as provided in S6.2(b)(4), each vehicle shall, when 
equipped with a dummy test device specified in 49 CFR part 572, subpart 
M, and tested as specified in S8.16 through S8.28, comply with the 
requirements specified in S7 when crashed into a fixed, rigid pole of 
254 mm in diameter, at any velocity between 24 kilometers per hour (15 
mph) and 29 kilometers per hour (18 mph).
    (4) Vehicles certified as complying with the vehicle-to-pole 
requirements of S9 of 49 CFR 571.214, Side Impact Protection, need not 
comply with the pole test requirements specified in S6.2(b)(3) of this 
section.
    S6.3 A vehicle need not meet the requirements of S6.1 through S6.2 
for:
    (a) Any target located on a convertible roof frame or a convertible 
roof linkage mechanism.
    (b) Any target located rearward of a vertical plane 600 mm behind 
the seating reference point of the rearmost designated seating position. 
For altered vehicles and vehicles built in two or more stages, including 
ambulances and motor homes, any target located rearward of a vertical 
plane 300 mm behind the seating reference point of the driver's 
designated seating position (tests for altered vehicles and vehicles 
built in two or more stages do not include, within the time period for 
measuring HIC(d), any free motion headform contact with components 
rearward of this plane). If an altered vehicle or vehicle built in two 
or more stages is equipped with a transverse vertical partition 
positioned between the seating reference point of the driver's 
designated seating position and a vertical plane 300 mm behind the 
seating reference point of the driver's designated seating position, any 
target located rearward of the vertical partition is excluded.
    (c) Any target in a vehicle manufactured in two or more stages that 
is delivered to a final stage manufacturer without an occupant 
compartment. Note: Motor homes, ambulances, and other vehicles 
manufactured using a chassis cab, a cut-away van, or any other 
incomplete vehicle delivered to a final stage manufacturer with a 
furnished front compartment are not excluded under this S6.3(c).
    (d) Any target in a walk-in van-type vehicles.
    (e) Any target located on the seat belt mounting structures, door 
frames and other door frames before December 1, 2005.
    S7 Performance Criterion. The HIC(d) shall not exceed 1000 when 
calculated in accordance with the following formula:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04AU98.002


Where the term a is the resultant head acceleration expressed as a 
multiple of g (the acceleration of gravity), and t1 and t2 are any two 
points in time during the impact which are separated by not more than a 
36 millisecond time interval.
    (a) For the free motion headform; HIC(d)=0.75446 (free motion 
headform HIC)+166.4.
    (b) For the part 572, subpart M, anthropomorphic test dummy; 
HIC(d)=HIC.
    S8 Target location and test conditions. The vehicle shall be tested 
and the targets specified in S10 located under the following conditions.
    S8.1 Vehicle test attitude.
    (a) The vehicle is supported off its suspension at an attitude 
determined in accordance with S8.1(b).
    (b) Directly above each wheel opening, determine the vertical 
distance between a level surface and a standard reference point on the 
test vehicle's body under the conditions of S8.1(b)(1) through 
S8.1(b)(3).
    (1) The vehicle is loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight, plus its 
rated cargo and luggage capacity or 136 kg, whichever is less, secured 
in the luggage area. The load placed in the cargo area is centered over 
the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle.

[[Page 708]]

    (2) The vehicle is filled to 100 percent of all fluid capacities.
    (3) All tires are inflated to the manufacturer's specifications 
listed on the vehicle's tire placard.
    S8.2 Windows and Sunroofs.
    (a) Movable vehicle windows are placed in the fully open position.
    (b) For testing, any window on the opposite side of the longitudinal 
centerline of the vehicle from the target to be impacted may be removed.
    (c) For testing, movable sunroofs are placed in the fully open 
position.
    S8.3 Convertible tops. The top, if any, of convertibles and open-
body type vehicles is in the closed passenger compartment configuration.
    S8.4 Doors.
    (a) Except as provided in S8.4(b) or S8.4(c), doors, including any 
rear hatchback or tailgate, are fully closed and latched but not locked.
    (b) During testing, any side door on the opposite side of the 
longitudinal centerline of the vehicle from the target to be impacted 
may be open or removed.
    (c) During testing, any rear hatchback or tailgate may be open or 
removed for testing any target except targets on the rear header, 
rearmost pillars, or the rearmost other side rail on either side of the 
vehicle.
    S8.5 Sun visors. Each sun visor shall be placed in any position 
where one side of the visor is in contact with the vehicle interior 
surface (windshield, side rail, front header, roof, etc.).
    S8.6 Steering wheel and seats.
    (a) During targeting, the steering wheel and seats may be placed in 
any position intended for use while the vehicle is in motion.
    (b) During testing, the steering wheel and seats may be removed from 
the vehicle.
    S8.7 Seat belt anchorages. If a target is on a seat belt anchorage, 
and if the seat belt anchorage is adjustable, tests are conducted with 
the anchorage adjusted to a point midway between the two extreme 
adjustment positions. If the anchorage has distinct adjustment 
positions, none of which is midway between the two extreme positions, 
tests are conducted with the anchorage adjusted to the nearest position 
above the midpoint of the two extreme positions.
    S8.8 Temperature and humidity.
    (a) The ambient temperature is between 19 degrees C. and 26 degrees 
C., at any relative humidity between 10 percent and 70 percent.
    (b) Tests are not conducted unless the headform specified in S8.9 is 
exposed to the conditions specified in S8.8(a) for a period not less 
than four hours.
    S8.9 Headform. The headform used for testing conforms to the 
specifications of part 572, subpart L of this chapter.
    S8.10 Forehead impact zone. The forehead impact zone of the headform 
is determined according to the procedure specified in (a) through (f).
    (a) Position the headform so that the baseplate of the skull is 
horizontal. The midsagittal plane of the headform is designated as Plane 
S.
    (b) From the center of the threaded hole on top of the headform, 
draw a 69 mm line forward toward the forehead, coincident with Plane S, 
along the contour of the outer skin of the headform. The front end of 
the line is designated as Point P. From Point P, draw a 100 mm line 
forward toward the forehead, coincident with Plane S, along the contour 
of the outer skin of the headform. The front end of the line is 
designated as Point O.
    (c) Draw a 125 mm line which is coincident with a horizontal plane 
along the contour of the outer skin of the forehead from left to right 
through Point O so that the line is bisected at Point O. The end of the 
line on the left side of the headform is designated as Point a and the 
end on the right as Point b.
    (d) Draw another 125 mm line which is coincident with a vertical 
plane along the contour of the outer skin of the forehead through Point 
P so that the line is bisected at Point P. The end of the line on the 
left side of the headform is designated as Point c and the end on the 
right as Point d.
    (e) Draw a line from Point a to Point c along the contour of the 
outer skin of the headform using a flexible steel tape. Using the same 
method, draw a line from Point b to Point d.

[[Page 709]]

    (f) The forehead impact zone is the surface area on the FMH forehead 
bounded by lines a-O-b and c-P-d, and a-c and b-d.
    S8.11 Target circle. The area of the vehicle to be impacted by the 
headform is marked with a solid circle 12.7 mm in diameter, centered on 
the targets specified in S10, using any transferable opaque coloring 
medium.
    S8.12 Location of head center of gravity.
    (a) Location of head center of gravity for front outboard designated 
seating positions (CG-F). For determination of head center of gravity, 
all directions are in reference to the seat orientation.
    (1) Location of rearmost CG-F (CG-F2). For front outboard designated 
seating positions, the head center of gravity with the seat in its 
rearmost normal design driving or riding position (CG-F2) is located 160 
mm rearward and 660 mm upward from the seating reference point.
    (2) Location of forwardmost CG-F (CG-F1). For front outboard 
designated seating positions, the head center of gravity with the seat 
in its forwardmost adjustment position (CG-F1) is located horizontally 
forward of CG-F2 by the distance equal to the fore-aft distance of the 
seat track.
    (b) Location of head center of gravity for rear outboard designated 
seating positions (CG-R). For rear outboard designated seating 
positions, the head center of gravity (CG-R) is located 160 mm rearward, 
relative to the seat orientation, and 660 mm upward from the seating 
reference point.
    S8.13 Impact configuration.
    S8.13.1 The headform is launched from any location inside the 
vehicle which meets the conditions of S8.13.4. At the time of launch, 
the midsagittal plane of the headform is vertical and the headform is 
upright.
    S8.13.2 The headform travels freely through the air, along a 
velocity vector that is perpendicular to the headform's skull cap plate, 
not less than 25 mm before making any contact with the vehicle.
    S8.13.3 At the time of initial contact between the headform and the 
vehicle interior surface, some portion of the forehead impact zone of 
the headform must contact some portion of the target circle.
    S8.13.4 Approach angles. The headform launching angle is as 
specified in Table 1. For components for which Table 1 specifies a range 
of angles, the headform launching angle is within the limits determined 
using the procedures specified in S8.13.4.1 and S8.13.4.2, and within 
the range specified in Table 1, using the orthogonal reference system 
specified in S9.

               Table 1--Approach Angle Limits (in Degrees)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Target component           Horizontal Angle     Vertical angle
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Front Header...................  180................  0-50
Rear Header....................  0 or 360...........  0-50
Left Side Rail.................  270................  0-50
Right Side Rail................  90.................  0-50
Left Sliding Door Track........  270................  0-50
Right Sliding Door Track.......  90.................  0-50
Left A-Pillar..................  195-255............  -5-50
Right A-Pillar.................  105-165............  -5-50
Left B-Pillar..................  195-345............  -10-50
Right B-Pillar.................  15-165.............  -10-50
Left Door Frame................  195-345............  -10-50
Right Door Frame...............  15-165.............  -10-50
Other Left Pillars.............  270................  -10-50
Other Right Pillars............  90.................  -10-50
Other Left Door Frame..........  270................  -10-50
Other Right Door Frame.........  90.................  -10-50
Left Rearmost Pillar...........  270-345............  -10-50
Right Rearmost Pillar..........  15-90..............  -10-50
Upper Roof.....................  Any................  0-50
Overhead Rollbar...............  0 or 180...........  0-50
Brace or Stiffener.............  90 or 270..........  0-50
Left Seat Belt Mounting          195-345............  -10-50
 Structure.
Right Seat Belt Mounting         15-165.............  -10-50
 Structure.
Seat Belt Anchorages...........  Any................  0-50
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 710]]

    S8.13.4.1 Horizontal Approach Angles for Headform Impacts.
    (a) Left A-Pillar Horizontal Approach Angles.
    (1) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-F1 for the left seat and the right A-pillar. The maximum horizontal 
approach angle for the left A-pillar equals 360 degrees minus the angle 
formed by that line and the X-axis of the vehicle, measured 
counterclockwise.
    (2) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-F2 for the left seat and the left A-pillar. The minimum horizontal 
approach angle for the left A-pillar impact equals the angle formed by 
that line and the X-axis of the vehicle, measured counterclockwise.
    (b) Right A-Pillar Horizontal Approach Angles.
    (1) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-F1 for the right seat and the left A-pillar. The minimum horizontal 
approach angle for the right A-pillar equals 360 degrees minus the angle 
formed by that line and the X-axis of the vehicle, measured 
counterclockwise.
    (2) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-F2 for the right seat and the right A-pillar. The maximum horizontal 
approach angle for the right A-pillar impact equals the angle formed by 
that line and the X-axis of the vehicle measured counterclockwise.
    (c) Left B-Pillar Horizontal Approach Angles.
    (1) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-F2 for the left seat and the left B-pillar. The maximum horizontal 
approach angle for the left B-pillar equals the angle formed by that 
line and the X-axis of the vehicle measured counterclockwise, or 270 
degrees, whichever is greater.
    (2) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-R for the left seat and the left B-pillar. The minimum horizontal 
approach angle for the left B-pillar equals the angle formed by that 
line and the X-axis of the vehicle measured counterclockwise.
    (d) Right B-Pillar Horizontal Approach Angles.
    (1) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-F2 for the right seat and the right B-pillar. The minimum horizontal 
approach angle for the right B-pillar equals the angle formed by that 
line and the X-axis of the vehicle measured counterclockwise, or 90 
degrees, whichever is less.
    (2) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-R for the right seat and the right B-pillar. The maximum horizontal 
approach angle for the right B-pillar equals the angle between that line 
and the X-axis of the vehicle measured counterclockwise.
    (e) Left door frame horizontal approach angles.
    (1) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-F2 for the left seat and the left door frame. The maximum horizontal 
approach angle for the left door frame equals the angle formed by that 
line and the X-axis of the vehicle measured counterclockwise, or 270 
degrees, whichever is greater.
    (2) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-R for the left seat and the left door frame. The minimum horizontal 
approach angle for the left door frame equals the angle formed by that 
line and the X-axis of the vehicle measured counterclockwise.
    (f) Right door frame horizontal approach angles.
    (1) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-F2 for the right seat and the right door frame. The minimum 
horizontal approach angle for the right door frame equals the angle 
formed by that line and the X-axis of the vehicle measured 
counterclockwise, or 90 degrees, whichever is less.
    (2) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-R for the right seat and the right door frame. The maximum horizontal 
approach angle for the right door frame equals the angle formed by that 
line and the X-axis of the vehicle measured counterclockwise
    (g) Left seat belt mounting structure horizontal approach angles.
    (1) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-F2

[[Page 711]]

for the left seat and the left seat belt mounting structure. If the seat 
belt mounting structure is below a horizontal plane passing through CG-
F2 for the left seat, locate the point 200 mm directly below CG-F2 and 
locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between that 
point and the left seat belt mounting structure. The maximum horizontal 
approach angle for the left seat belt mounting structure equals the 
angle formed by that line and the X-axis of the vehicle measured 
counterclockwise, or 270 degrees, whichever is greater.
    (2) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-R for the left seat and the left seat belt mounting structure. If the 
seat belt mounting structure is below a horizontal plane passing through 
CG-R for the left seat, locate the point 200 mm directly below CG-R and 
locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between that 
point and the left seat belt mounting structure. The minimum horizontal 
approach angle for the left seat belt mounting structure equals the 
angle formed by that line and the X-axis of the vehicle measured 
counterclockwise. If the CG-R does not exist, or is forward of the seat 
belt mounting structure, the maximum horizontal approach angle is 270 
degrees.
    (h) Right seat belt mounting structure horizontal approach angles.
    (1) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-F2 for the right seat and the right seat belt mounting structure. If 
the seat belt mounting structure is below a horizontal plane passing 
through CG-F2 for the right seat, locate the point 200 mm directly below 
that CG-F2 and locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance 
between that point and the right seat belt mounting structure. The 
minimum horizontal approach angle for the right seat belt mounting 
structure equals the angle formed by that line and the X-axis of the 
vehicle measured counterclockwise, or 90 degrees, whichever is less.
    (2) Locate a line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between 
CG-R for the right seat and the right seat belt mounting structure. If 
the seat belt mounting structure is below a horizontal plane passing 
through CG-R, locate the point 200 mm directly below CG-R and locate a 
line formed by the shortest horizontal distance between that point and 
the right seat belt mounting structure. The maximum horizontal approach 
angle for the right seat belt mounting structure equals the angle formed 
by that line and the X-axis of the vehicle measured counterclockwise. If 
the CG-R does not exist, or is forward of the seat belt mounting 
structure, the maximum horizontal approach angle is 90 degrees.
    S8.13.4.2 Vertical Approach Angles
    (a) Position the forehead impact zone in contact with the selected 
target at the prescribed horizontal approach angle. If a range of 
horizontal approach angles is prescribed, position the forehead impact 
zone in contact with the selected target at any horizontal approach 
angle within the range which may be used for testing.
    (b) Keeping the forehead impact zone in contact with the target, 
rotate the FMH upward until the lip, chin or other part of the FMH 
contacts the component or other portion of the vehicle interior.
    (1) Except as provided in S8.13.4.2(b)(2), keeping the forehead 
impact zone in contact with the target, rotate the FMH downward by 5 
degrees for each target to determine the maximum vertical angle.
    (2) For all pillars, except A-pillars, and all door frames and seat 
belt mounting structures, keeping the forehead impact zone in contact 
with the target, rotate the FMH downward by 10 degrees for each target 
to determine the maximum vertical angle.
    S8.14 Multiple impacts.
    (a) A vehicle being tested may be impacted multiple times, subject 
to the limitations in S8.14(b), (c), (d) and (e).
    (b) As measured as provided in S8.14(d), impacts within 300 mm of 
each other may not occur less than 30 minutes apart.
    (c) As measured as provided in S8.14(d), no impact may occur within 
150 mm of any other impact.
    (d) For S8.14(b) and S8.14(c), the distance between impacts is the 
distance between the center of the target circle specified in S8.11 for 
each impact, measured along the vehicle interior.

[[Page 712]]

    (e) No impact may occur within the ``exclusion zone'' of any pillar 
target specified in S10.1 through S10.4, door frame target specified in 
S10.14 and S10.15, upper roof target specified in S10.9, or seat belt 
mounting structure target specified in S10.16. The ``exclusion zone'' is 
determined according to the procedure in S8.14(f) through S8.14(k).
    (f) Locate the point, Point X, at the center of the target circle 
specified in S8.11 for the tested target.
    (g) Determine two spheres centered on Point X. Radii of these 
spheres are 150 mm and 200 mm, respectively.
    (h) Locate a horizontal plane passing through Point X. Determine the 
intersection points, if they exist, of the small sphere surface, the 
horizontal plane, and the vehicle interior surface. Relative to Point X, 
the point on the left is Point L and the point on the right is Point R.
    (i) Locate a vertical plane, Plane Z, passing through Point X and 
coincident (within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5[deg]) with the horizontal 
approach angle used or intended for use in testing the target centered 
on Point X.
    (j) If either Point L or Point R does not exist, extend Line LX and/
or Line RX, as appropriate, perpendicular to Plane Z beyond Point X by 
150 mm. The end of the line is designated as Point L or Point R, as 
appropriate.
    (k) Locate a vertical plane, Plane ZL, passing through Point L and 
parallel to Plane Z. Locate another vertical plane, Plane ZR, passing 
through Point R and parallel to Plane Z. The ``exclusion zone'' is the 
vehicle interior surface area between Plane ZL and Plane ZR below the 
upper boundary of the smaller sphere and above the lower boundary of the 
larger sphere. Points on the intersection of the vehicle interior 
surface and the large sphere below the target, the small sphere above 
the target, Plane ZL and Plane ZR are not included in the ``exclusion 
zone.''
    S8.15 Upper Roof. The upper roof of a vehicle is determined 
according to the procedure specified in S8.15 (a) through (h).
    (a) Locate the transverse vertical plane A at the forwardmost point 
where it contacts the interior roof (including trim) at the vehicle 
centerline.
    (b) Locate the transverse vertical plane B at the rearmost point 
where it contacts the interior roof (including trim) at the vehicle 
centerline.
    (c) Measure the horizontal distance (D1) between Plane A and Plane 
B.
    (d) Locate the vertical longitudinal plane C at the leftmost point 
at which a vertical transverse plane, located 300 mm rearward of the A-
pillar reference point described in S10.1(a), contacts the interior roof 
(including trim).
    (e) Locate the vertical longitudinal plane D at the rightmost point 
at which a vertical transverse plane, located 300 mm rearward of the A-
pillar reference point described in S10.1(a), contacts the interior roof 
(including trim).
    (f) Measure the horizontal distance (D2) between Plane C and Plane 
D.
    (g) Locate a point (Point M) on the interior roof surface, midway 
between Plane A and Plane B along the vehicle longitudinal centerline.
    (h) The upper roof zone is the area of the vehicle upper interior 
surface bounded by the four planes described in S8.15(h)(1) and 
S8.15(h)(2):
    (1) A transverse vertical plane E located at a distance of (.35 D1) 
forward of Point M and a transverse vertical plane F located at a 
distance of (.35 D1) rearward of Point M, measured horizontally.
    (2) A longitudinal vertical plane G located at a distance of (.35 
D2) to the left of Point M and a longitudinal vertical plane H located 
at a distance of (.35 D2) to the right of Point M, measured 
horizontally.
    S8.16 Test weight--vehicle to pole test. Each vehicle shall be 
loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight, plus 136 kilograms (300 pounds) 
or its rated cargo and luggage capacity (whichever is less), secured in 
the luggage or load-carrying area, plus the weight of the necessary 
anthropomorphic test dummy. Any added test equipment shall be located 
away from impact areas in secure places in the vehicle.
    S8.17 Vehicle test attitude--vehicle to pole test. Determine the 
distance between a level surface and a standard reference point on the 
test vehicle's body, directly above each wheel opening, when the vehicle 
is in its ``as delivered'' condition. The ``as delivered''

[[Page 713]]

condition is the vehicle as received at the test site, filled to 100 
percent of all fluid capacities and with all tires inflated to the 
manufacturer's specifications listed on the vehicle's tire placard. 
Determine the distance between the same level surface and the same 
standard reference points in the vehicle's ``fully loaded condition.'' 
The ``fully loaded condition'' is the test vehicle loaded in accordance 
with S8.16. The load placed in the cargo area shall be centered over the 
longitudinal centerline of the vehicle. The pretest vehicle attitude 
shall be the same as either the ``as delivered'' or ``fully loaded'' 
attitude or is between the ``as delivered'' attitude and the ``fully 
loaded'' attitude. If the test configuration requires that the vehicle 
be elevated off the ground, the pretest vehicle attitude must be 
maintained.
    S8.18 Adjustable seats--vehicle to pole test. Initially, adjustable 
seats shall be adjusted as specified in S8.3.2.1 of Standard 214 (49 CFR 
571.214).
    S8.19 Adjustable seat back placement--vehicle to pole test. 
Initially, position adjustable seat backs in the manner specified in 
S8.3.2.2 of Standard 214 (49 CFR 571.214).
    S8.20 Adjustable steering wheels--vehicle to pole test. Adjustable 
steering controls shall be adjusted so that the steering wheel hub is at 
the geometric center of the locus it describes when it is moved through 
its full range of driving positions.
    S8.21 Windows and sunroof--vehicle to pole test. Movable windows and 
vents shall be placed in the fully open position. Any sunroof shall be 
placed in the fully closed position.
    S8.22 Convertible tops--vehicle to pole test. The top, if any, of 
convertibles and open-body type vehicles shall be in the closed 
passenger compartment configuration.
    S8.23 Doors--vehicle to pole test. Doors, including any rear 
hatchback or tailgate, shall be fully closed and latched but not locked.
    S8.24 Impact reference line--vehicle to pole test. On the striking 
side of the vehicle, place an impact reference line at the intersection 
of the vehicle exterior and a transverse vertical plane passing through 
the center of gravity of the head of the dummy seated in accordance with 
S8.28, in the front outboard designated seating position.
    S8.25 Rigid Pole--vehicle to pole test. The rigid pole is a vertical 
metal structure beginning no more than 102 millimeters (4 inches) above 
the lowest point of the tires on the striking side of the test vehicle 
when the vehicle is loaded as specified in S8.16 and extending above the 
highest point of the roof of the test vehicle. The pole is 254 mm <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3 mm (10 inches) in diameter and set off from any 
mounting surface, such as a barrier or other structure, so that the test 
vehicle will not contact such a mount or support at any time within 100 
milliseconds of the initiation of vehicle to pole contact.
    S8.26 Impact configuration--vehicle to pole test. The rigid pole 
shall be stationary. The test vehicle shall be propelled sideways so 
that its line of forward motion forms an angle of 90 degrees ( <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3 degrees) with the vehicle's longitudinal center line. 
The impact reference line shall be aligned with the center line of the 
rigid pole so that, when the vehicle-to-pole contact occurs, the center 
line of the pole contacts the vehicle area bounded by two transverse 
vertical planes 38 mm (1.5 inches) forward and aft of the impact 
reference line.
    S8.27 Anthropomorphic test dummy--vehicle to pole test.
    S8.27.1 The anthropomorphic test dummy used for evaluation of a 
vehicle's head impact protection shall conform to the requirements of 
subpart M of part 572 of this chapter (49 CFR part 572, subpart M). In a 
test in which the test vehicle is striking its left side, the dummy is 
to be configured and instrumented to strike on its left side, in 
accordance with subpart M of part 572. In a test in which the test 
vehicle is striking its right side, the dummy is to be configured and 
instrumented to strike its right side, in accordance with subpart M of 
part 572.
    S8.27.2 The part 572, subpart M, test dummy specified is clothed in 
form fitting cotton stretch garments with short sleeves and midcalf 
length pants. Each foot of the test dummy is equipped with a size 11EEE 
shoe, which meets the configuration size, sole, and heel thickness 
specifications of MIL-S-

[[Page 714]]

13192 (1976) and weighs 0.57 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.09 kilograms (1.25 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 pounds).
    S8.27.3 Limb joints shall be set at between 1 and 2 g's. Leg joints 
are adjusted with the torso in the supine position.
    S8.27.4 The stabilized temperature of the test dummy at the time of 
the side impact test shall be at any temperature between 20.6 degrees C. 
and 22.2 degrees C.
    S8.27.5 The acceleration data from the accelerometers installed 
inside the skull cavity of the test dummy are processed according to the 
practices set forth in SAE Recommended Practice J211, March 1995, 
``Instrumentation for Impact Tests,'' Class 1000.
    S8.28 Positioning procedure for the Part 572 Subpart M test dummy--
vehicle to pole test. The part 572, subpart M, test dummy is initially 
positioned in the front outboard seating position on the struck side of 
the vehicle in accordance with the provisions of S12.1 of Standard 214 
(49 CFR 571.214), and the vehicle seat is positioned as specified in 
S8.3.2.1 and S8.3.2.2 of that standard. The position of the dummy is 
then measured as follows. Locate the horizontal plane passing through 
the dummy head center of gravity. Identify the rearmost point on the 
dummy head in that plane. Construct a line in the plane that contains 
the rearward point of the front door daylight opening and is 
perpendicular to the longitudinal vehicle centerline. Measure the 
longitudinal distance between the rearmost point on the dummy head and 
this line. If this distance is less than 50 mm (2 inches) or the point 
is not forward of the line, then the seat and/or dummy positions is 
adjusted as follows. First, the seat back angle is adjusted, a maximum 
of 5 degrees, until a 50 mm (2 inches) distance is achieved. If this is 
not sufficient to produce the 50 mm (2 inches) distance, the seat is 
moved forward until the 50 mm (2 inches) distance is achieved or until 
the knees of the dummy contact the dashboard or knee bolster, whichever 
comes first. If the required distance cannot be achieved through 
movement of the seat, the seat back angle is adjusted even further 
forward until the 50 mm (2 inches) distance is obtained or until the 
seat back is in its fully upright locking position.
    S9. Orthogonal Reference System. The approach angles specified in 
S8.13.4 are determined using the reference system specified in S9.1 
through S9.4.
    S9.1 An orthogonal reference system consisting of a longitudinal X 
axis and a transverse Y axis in the same horizontal plane and a vertical 
Z axis through the intersection of X and Y is used to define the 
horizontal direction of approach of the headform. The X-Z plane is the 
vertical longitudinal zero plane and is parallel to the longitudinal 
centerline of the vehicle. The X-Y plane is the horizontal zero plane 
parallel to the ground. The Y-Z plane is the vertical transverse zero 
plane that is perpendicular to the X-Y and X-Z planes. The X coordinate 
is negative forward of the Y-Z plane and positive to the rear. The Y 
coordinate is negative to the left of the X-Z plane and positive to the 
right. The Z coordinate is negative below the X-Y plane and positive 
above it. (See Figure 1.)
    S9.2 The origin of the reference system is the center of gravity of 
the headform at the time immediately prior to launch for each test.
    S9.3 The horizontal approach angle is the angle between the X axis 
and the headform impact velocity vector projected onto the horizontal 
zero plane, measured in the horizontal zero plane in the counter-
clockwise direction. A 0 degree horizontal vector and a 360 degree 
horizontal vector point in the positive X direction; a 90 degree 
horizontal vector points in the positive Y direction; a 180 degree 
horizontal vector points in the negative X direction; and a 270 
horizontal degree vector points in the negative Y direction. (See Figure 
2.)
    S9.4 The vertical approach angle is the angle between the horizontal 
plane and the velocity vector, measured in the midsagittal plane of the 
headform. A 0 degree vertical vector in Table I coincides with the 
horizontal plane and a vertical vector of greater than 0 degrees in 
Table I makes an upward angle of the same number of degrees with that 
plane.
    S10 Target Locations.
    (a) The target locations specified in S10.1 through S10.16 are 
located on

[[Page 715]]

both sides of the vehicle and, except as specified in S10(b), are 
determined using the procedures specified in those paragraphs.
    (b) Except as specified in S10(c), if there is no combination of 
horizontal and vertical angles specified in S8.13.4 at which the 
forehead impact zone of the free motion headform can contact one of the 
targets located using the procedures in S10.1 through S10.16, the center 
of that target is moved to any location within a sphere with a radius of 
25 mm, centered on the center of the original target, which the forehead 
impact zone can contact at one or more combination of angles.
    (c) If there is no point within the sphere specified in S10(b) which 
the forehead impact zone of the free motion headform can contact at one 
or more combination of horizontal and vertical angles specified in 
S8.13.4, the radius of the sphere is increased by 25 mm increments until 
the sphere contains at least one point that can be contacted at one or 
more combination of angles.
    S10.1 A-pillar targets
    (a) A-pillar reference point and target AP1. On the vehicle 
exterior, locate a transverse vertical plane (Plane 1) which contacts 
the rearmost point of the windshield trim. The intersection of Plane 1 
and the vehicle exterior surface is Line 1. Measuring along the vehicle 
exterior surface, locate a point (Point 1) on Line 1 that is 125 mm 
inboard of the intersection of Line 1 and a vertical plane tangent to 
the vehicle at the outboardmost point on Line 1 with the vehicle side 
door open. Measuring along the vehicle exterior surface in a 
longitudinal vertical plane (Plane 2) passing through Point 1, locate a 
point (Point 2) 50 mm rearward of Point 1. Locate the A-pillar reference 
point (Point APR) at the intersection of the interior roof surface and a 
line that is perpendicular to the vehicle exterior surface at Point 2. 
Target AP1 is located at point APR.
    (b) Target AP2. Locate the horizontal plane (Plane 3) which 
intersects point APR. Locate the horizontal plane (Plane 4) which is 88 
mm below Plane 3. Target AP2 is the point in Plane 4 and on the A-pillar 
which is closest to CG-F2 for the nearest seating position.
    (c) Target AP3. Locate the horizontal plane (Plane 5) containing the 
highest point at the intersection of the dashboard and the A-pillar. 
Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 6) half-way between Plane 3 and Plane 
5. Target AP3 is the point on Plane 6 and the A-pillar which is closest 
to CG-F1 for the nearest seating position.
    S10.2 B-pillar targets.
    (a) B-pillar reference point and target BP1. Locate the point (Point 
3) on the vehicle interior at the intersection of the horizontal plane 
passing through the highest point of the forwardmost door opening and 
the centerline of the width of the B-pillar, as viewed laterally. Locate 
a transverse vertical plane (Plane 7) which passes through Point 3. 
Locate the point (Point 4) at the intersection of the interior roof 
surface, Plane 7, and the plane, described in S8.15(h), defining the 
nearest edge of the upper roof. The B-pillar reference point (Point BPR) 
is the point located at the middle of the line from Point 3 to Point 4 
in Plane 7, measured along the vehicle interior surface. Target BP1 is 
located at Point BPR.
    (b) Target BP2. If a seat belt anchorage is located on the B-pillar, 
Target BP2 is located at any point on the anchorage.
    (c) Target BP3. Target BP3 is located in accordance with this 
paragraph. Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 8) which intersects Point 
BPR. Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 9) which passes through the lowest 
point of the daylight opening forward of the pillar. Locate a horizontal 
plane (Plane 10) half-way between Plane 8 and Plane 9. Target BP3 is the 
point located in Plane 10 and on the interior surface of the B-pillar, 
which is closest to CG-F(2) for the nearest seating position.
    (d) Target BP4. Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 11) half-way 
between Plane 9 and Plane 10. Target BP4 is the point located in Plane 
11 and on the interior surface of the B-pillar which is closest to CG-R 
for the nearest seating position.
    S10.3 Other pillar targets.
    (a) Target OP1.
    (1) Except as provided in S10.3(a)(2), target OP1 is located in 
accordance with this paragraph. Locate the point (Point 5), on the 
vehicle interior, at the

[[Page 716]]

intersection of the horizontal plane through the highest point of the 
highest adjacent door opening or daylight opening (if no adjacent door 
opening) and the centerline of the width of the other pillar, as viewed 
laterally. Locate a transverse vertical plane (Plane 12) passing through 
Point 5. Locate the point (Point 6) at the intersection of the interior 
roof surface, Plane 12 and the plane, described in S8.15(h), defining 
the nearest edge of the upper roof. The other pillar reference point 
(Point OPR) is the point located at the middle of the line between Point 
5 and Point 6 in Plane 12, measured along the vehicle interior surface. 
Target OP1 is located at Point OPR.
    (2) If a seat belt anchorage is located on the pillar, Target OP1 is 
any point on the anchorage.
    (b) Target OP2. Locate the horizontal plane (Plane 13) intersecting 
Point OPR. Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 14) passing through the 
lowest point of the daylight opening forward of the pillar. Locate a 
horizontal plane (Plane 15) half-way between Plane 13 and Plane 14. 
Target OP2 is the point located on the interior surface of the pillar at 
the intersection of Plane 15 and the centerline of the width of the 
pillar, as viewed laterally.
    S10.4 Rearmost pillar targets
    (a) Rearmost pillar reference point and target RP1. Locate the point 
(Point 7) at the corner of the upper roof nearest to the pillar. The 
distance between Point M, as described in S8.15(g), and Point 7, as 
measured along the vehicle interior surface, is D. Extend the line from 
Point M to Point 7 along the vehicle interior surface in the same 
vertical plane by (3*D/7) beyond Point 7 or until the edge of a daylight 
opening, whichever comes first, to locate Point 8. The rearmost pillar 
reference point (Point RPR) is at the midpoint of the line between Point 
7 and Point 8, measured along the vehicle interior. Target RP1 is 
located at Point RPR.
    (b) Target RP2.
    (1) Except as provided in S10.4(b)(2), target RP2 is located in 
accordance with this paragraph. Locate the horizontal plane (Plane 16) 
through Point RPR. Locate the horizontal plane (Plane 17) 150 mm below 
Plane 16. Target RP2 is located in Plane 17 and on the pillar at the 
location closest to CG-R for the nearest designated seating position.
    (2) If a seat belt anchorage is located on the pillar, Target RP2 is 
any point on the anchorage.
    S10.5 Front header targets.
    (a) Target FH1. Locate the contour line (Line 2) on the vehicle 
interior trim which passes through the APR and is parallel to the 
contour line (Line 3) at the upper edge of the windshield on the vehicle 
interior. Locate the point (Point 9) on Line 2 that is 125 mm inboard of 
the APR, measured along that line. Locate a longitudinal vertical plane 
(Plane 18) that passes through Point 9. Target FH1 is located at the 
intersection of Plane 18 and the upper vehicle interior, halfway between 
a transverse vertical plane (Plane 19) through Point 9 and a transverse 
vertical plane (Plane 20) through the intersection of Plane 18 and Line 
3.
    (b) Target FH2.
    (1) Except as provided in S10.5(b)(2), target FH2 is located in 
accordance with this paragraph. Locate a point (Point 10) 275 mm inboard 
of Point APR, along Line 2. Locate a longitudinal vertical plane (Plane 
21) that passes through Point 10. Target FH2 is located at the 
intersection of Plane 21 and the upper vehicle interior, halfway between 
a transverse vertical plane (Plane 22) through Point 10 and a transverse 
vertical plane (Plane 23) through the intersection of Plane 21 and Line 
3.
    (2) If a sun roof opening is located forward of the front edge of 
the upper roof and intersects the mid-sagittal plane of a dummy seated 
in either front outboard seating position, target FH2 is the nearest 
point that is forward of a transverse vertical plane (Plane 24) through 
CG-F(2) and on the intersection of the mid-sagittal plane and the 
interior sunroof opening.
    S10.6 Targets on the side rail between the A-pillar and the B-pillar 
or rearmost pillar in vehicles with only two pillars on each side of the 
vehicle.
    (a) Target SR1. Locate a transverse vertical plane (Plane 25) 150 mm 
rearward of Point APR. Locate the point (Point 11) at the intersection 
of Plane 25 and the upper edge of the forwardmost door opening. Locate 
the point (Point 12) at the intersection of

[[Page 717]]

the interior roof surface, Plane 25 and the plane, described in 
S8.15(h), defining the nearest edge of the upper roof. Target SR1 is 
located at the middle of the line between Point 11 and Point 12 in Plane 
25, measured along the vehicle interior.
    (b) Target SR2. Locate a transverse vertical plane (Plane 26) 300 mm 
rearward of the APR or 300 mm forward of the BPR (or the RPR in vehicles 
with no B-pillar). Locate the point (Point 13) at the intersection of 
Plane 26 and the upper edge of the forwardmost door opening. Locate the 
point (Point 14) at the intersection of the interior roof surface, Plane 
26 and the plane, described in S8.15(h), defining the nearest edge of 
the upper roof. Target SR2 is located at the middle of the line between 
Point 13 and Point 14 in Plane 26, measured along the vehicle interior.
    S10.7 Other side rail target (target SR3).
    (a) Except as provided in S10.7(b), target SR3 is located in 
accordance with this paragraph. Locate a transverse vertical plane 
(Plane 27) 150 mm rearward of either Point BPR or Point OPR. Locate the 
point (Point 15) as provided in either S10.7(a)(1) or S10.7(a)(2), as 
appropriate. Locate the point (Point 16) at the intersection of the 
interior roof surface, Plane 27 and the plane, described in S8.15(h), 
defining the nearest edge of the upper roof. Target SR3 is located at 
the middle of the line between Point 15 and Point 16 in Plane 27, 
measured along the vehicle interior surface.
    (1) If Plane 27 intersects a door or daylight opening, the Point 15 
is located at the intersection of Plane 27 and the upper edge of the 
door opening or daylight opening.
    (2) If Plane 27 does not intersect a door or daylight opening, the 
Point 15 is located on the vehicle interior at the intersection of Plane 
27 and the horizontal plane through the highest point of the door or 
daylight opening nearest Plane 27. If the adjacent door(s) or daylight 
opening(s) are equidistant to Plane 27, Point 15 is located on the 
vehicle interior at the intersection of Plane 27 and either horizontal 
plane through the highest point of each door or daylight opening.
    (b) Except as provided in S10.7(c), if a grab handle is located on 
the side rail, target SR3 is located at any point on the anchorage of 
the grab-handle. Folding grab-handles are in their stowed position for 
testing.
    (c) If a seat belt anchorage is located on the side rail, target SR3 
is located at any point on the anchorage.
    S10.8 Rear header target (target RH). Locate the point (Point 17) at 
the intersection of the surface of the upper vehicle interior, the mid-
sagittal plane (Plane 28) of the outboard rearmost dummy and the plane, 
described in S8.15(h), defining the rear edge of the upper roof. Locate 
the point (Point 18) as provided in S10.8(a) or S10.8(b), as 
appropriate. Except as provided in S10.8(c), Target RH is located at the 
mid-point of the line that is between Point 17 and Point 18 and is in 
Plane 28, as measured along the surface of the vehicle interior.
    (a) If Plane 28 intersects a rear door opening or daylight opening, 
then Point 18 is located at the intersection of Plane 28 and the upper 
edge of the door opening or the daylight opening (if no door opening).
    (b) If Plane 28 does not intersect a rear door opening or daylight 
opening, then Point 18 is located on the vehicle interior at the 
intersection of Plane 28 and a horizontal plane through the highest 
point of the door or daylight opening nearest to Plane 28. If the 
adjacent door(s) or daylight opening(s) are equidistant to Plane 28, 
Point 18 is located on the vehicle interior at the intersection of Plane 
28 and either horizontal plane through the highest point of each door or 
daylight opening.
    (c) If Target RH is more than 112 mm from Point 18 on the line that 
is between Point 17 and Point 18 and is in Plane 28, as measured along 
the surface of the vehicle interior, then Target RH is the point on that 
line which is 112 mm from Point 18.
    S10.9 Upper roof target (target UR). Target UR is any point on the 
upper roof.
    S10.10 Sliding door track target (target SD). Locate the transverse 
vertical plane (Plane 29) passing through the middle of the widest 
opening of the sliding door, measured horizontally and parallel to the 
vehicle longitudinal

[[Page 718]]

centerline. Locate the point (Point 19) at the intersection of the 
surface of the upper vehicle interior, Plane 29 and the plane, described 
in S8.15(h), defining the nearest edge of the upper roof. Locate the 
point (Point 20) at the intersection of Plane 29 and the upper edge of 
the sliding door opening. Target SD is located at the middle of the line 
between Point 19 and Point 20 in Plane 29, measured along the vehicle 
interior.
    S10.11 Roll-bar targets.
    (a) Target RB1. Locate a longitudinal vertical plane (Plane 30) at 
the mid-sagittal plane of a dummy seated in any outboard designated 
seating position. Target RB1 is located on the roll-bar and in Plane 30 
at the location closest to either CG-F2 or CG-R, as appropriate, for the 
same dummy.
    (b) Target RB2. If a seat belt anchorage is located on the roll-bar, 
Target RB2 is any point on the anchorage.
    S10.12 Stiffener targets.
    (a) Target ST1. Locate a transverse vertical plane (Plane 31) 
containing either CG-F2 or CG-R, as appropriate, for any outboard 
designated seating position. Target ST1 is located on the stiffener and 
in Plane 31 at the location closest to either CG-F2 or CG-R, as 
appropriate.
    (b) Target ST2. If a seat belt anchorage is located on the 
stiffener, Target ST2 is any point on the anchorage.
    S10.13 Brace target (target BT) Target BT is any point on the width 
of the brace as viewed laterally from inside the passenger compartment.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP97.008


[[Page 719]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP97.009

    S10.14 Door frame targets.
    (a) Target DF 1. Locate the point (Point 21) on the vehicle interior 
at the intersection of the horizontal plane passing through the highest 
point of the forward door opening and a transverse vertical plane (Plane 
32 ) tangent to the rearmost edge of the forward door, as viewed 
laterally with the adjacent door open. Locate the point (Point 22) at 
the intersection of the interior roof surface, Plane 32, and the plane, 
described in S8.15(h), defining the nearest edge of the upper roof. The 
door frame reference point (Point DFR) is the point located at the 
middle of the line from Point 21 to Point 22 in Plane 32, measured along 
the vehicle interior surface. Target DF1 is located at Point DFR.
    (b) Target DF2. If a seat belt anchorage is located on the door 
frame, Target DF2 is located at any point on the anchorage.
    (c) Target DF3. Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 33) which 
intersects Point

[[Page 720]]

DFR. Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 34) that passes through the lowest 
point of the adjacent daylight opening forward of the door frame. Locate 
a horizontal plane (Plane 35) half-way between Plane 33 and Plane 34. 
Target DF3 is the point located in Plane 35 and on the interior surface 
of the door frame, which is closest to CG-F2 for the nearest seating 
position.
    (d) Target DF4. Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 36) half-way 
between Plane 34 and Plane 35. Target DF4 is the point located in Plane 
36 and on the interior surface of the door frame that is closest to CG-R 
for the nearest seating position.
    S10.15 Other door frame targets.
    (a) Target OD1.
    (1) Except as provided in S10.15(a)(2), target OD1 is located in 
accordance with this paragraph. Locate the point (Point 23) on the 
vehicle interior, at the intersection of the horizontal plane through 
the highest point of the highest adjacent door opening or daylight 
opening (if there is no adjacent door opening) and the center line of 
the width of the other door frame, as viewed laterally with the doors in 
the closed position. Locate a transverse vertical plane (Plane 37) 
passing through Point 23. Locate the point (Point 24) at the 
intersection of the interior roof surface, Plane 37 and the plane, 
described in S8.15(h), defining the nearest edge of the upper roof. The 
other door frame reference point (Point ODR) is the point located at the 
middle of the line between Point 23 and Point 24 in Plane 37, measured 
along the vehicle interior surface. Target OD1 is located at Point ODR.
    (2) If a seat belt anchorage is located on the door frame, Target 
OD1 is any point on the anchorage.
    (b) Target OD2. Locate the horizontal plane (Plane 38) intersecting 
Point ODR. Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 39) passing through the 
lowest point of the daylight opening forward of the door frame. Locate a 
horizontal plane (Plane 40) half-way between Plane 38 and Plane 39. 
Target OD2 is the point located on the interior surface of the door 
frame at the intersection of Plane 40 and the center line of the width 
of the door frames, as viewed laterally, with the doors in the closed 
position.
    S10.16 Seat belt mounting structure targets.
    (a) Target SB1. Target SB1 is located at any point on the seat belt 
anchorage mounted on the seat belt mounting structure.
    (b) Target SB2. Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 41), containing 
either CG-F2 or CG-R, as appropriate, for any outboard designated 
seating position whose seating reference point, SgRP, is forward of and 
closest to, the vertical center line of the width of the seat belt 
mounting structure as viewed laterally. Target SB2 is located on the 
seat belt mounting structure and in Plane 41 at the location closest to 
either CG-F2 or CG-R, as appropriate.
    (c) Target SB3. Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 42), containing CG-
R for any outboard designated seating position rearward of the 
forwardmost designated seating position or positions whose seating 
reference point, SgRP, is rearward of and closest to, the vertical 
center line of the width of the seat belt mounting structure, as viewed 
laterally. Locate a horizontal plane (Plane 43) 200 mm below Plane 42. 
Target SB3 is located on the seat belt mounting structure and in Plane 
43 at the location closest to CG-R, as appropriate.

[62 FR 16725, Apr. 8, 1997]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.201 see the List of CFR Sections Affected which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.


<R05>
Sec. 571.202  Standard No. 202; Head restraints; Applicable at the 

manufacturers option until September 1, 2009.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard specifies requirements for head 
restraints to reduce the frequency and severity of neck injury in rear-
end and other collisions.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, and to 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses with a GVWR of 4,536 
kg or less, manufactured before September 1, 2009. Until September 1, 
2009, manufacturers may comply with the standard in this Sec. 571.202, 
with the European regulations referenced in S4.3 of this Sec. 571.202, 
or

[[Page 721]]

with the standard in Sec. 571.202a. For vehicles manufactured on or 
after September 1, 2009 and before September 1, 2010, manufacturers may 
comply with the standard in this Sec. 571.202 or with the European 
regulations referenced in S4.3 of this Sec. 571.202, instead of the 
standard in Sec. 571.202a, only to the extent consistent with phase-in 
specified in Sec. 571.202a.
    S3. Definitions.
    Head restraint means a device that limits rearward displacement of a 
seated occupant's head relative to the occupant's torso.
    Height means, when used in reference to a head restraint, the 
distance from the H-point, measured parallel to the torso reference line 
defined by the three dimensional SAE J826 (rev. Jul 95) manikin, to a 
plane normal to the torso reference line.
    Top of the head restraint means the point on the head restraint with 
the greatest height.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1 Each passenger car, and multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck 
and bus with a GVWR of 4,536 kg or less, must comply with, at the 
manufacturer's option, S4.2, S4.4 or S4.5 of this section.
    S4.2 Except for school buses, a head restraint that conforms to 
either S4.2 (a) or (b) of this section must be provided at each outboard 
front designated seating position. For school buses, a head restraint 
that conforms to either S4.2 (a) or (b) of this section must be provided 
at the driver's seating position.
    (a) When tested in accordance with S5.1 of this section, limit 
rearward angular displacement of the head reference line to 45 degrees 
from the torso reference line; or
    (b) When adjusted to its fully extended design position, conform to 
each of the following:
    (1) When measured parallel to the torso line, the top of the head 
restraint must not be less than 700 mm above the seating reference 
point;
    (2) When measured either 64 mm below the top of the head restraint 
or 635 mm above the seating reference point, the lateral width of the 
head restraint must be not less than:
    (i) 254 mm for use with bench-type seats; and
    (ii) 170 mm for use with individual seats;
    (3) When tested in accordance with S5.2 of this section, any portion 
of the head form in contact with the head restraint must not be 
displaced to more than 102 mm perpendicularly rearward of the displaced 
extended torso reference line during the application of the load 
specified in S5.2 (c) of this section; and
    (4) When tested in accordance with S5.2 of this section, the head 
restraint must withstand an increasing load until one of the following 
occurs:
    (i) Failure of the seat or seat back; or,
    (ii) Application of a load of 890N.
    S4.3 Incorporation by reference.
    The English language version of the Economic Commission for Europe 
(ECE) Regulation 17: ``Uniform Provisions Concerning the Approval of 
Vehicles with Regard to the Seats, their Anchorages and any Head 
Restraints'' ECE 17 Rev. 1/Add. 16/Rev. 4 (31 July 2002) is incorporated 
by reference in S4.4(a) of this section. The Director of the Federal 
Register has approved the incorporation by reference of this material in 
accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR Part 51. A copy of ECE 17 Rev. 
1/Add. 16/Rev. 4 (31 July 2002) may be obtained from the ECE Internet 
site: http://www.unece.org/trans/main/wp29/wp29regs/r017r4e.pdf, or by 
writing to: United Nations, Conference Services Division, Distribution 
and Sales Section, Office C.115-1, Palais des Nations, CH-1211, Geneva 
10, Switzerland. A copy of ECE 17 Rev. 1/Add. 16/Rev. 4 (31 July 2002) 
may be inspected at NHTSA's Technical Information Services, 400 Seventh 
Street, SW., Plaza Level, Room 403, Washington, DC, or at the National 
Archives and Records Administration (NARA). For information on the 
availability of this material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: 
http://www.archives.gov/federal--register/code--of--federal--
regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    S4.4. Except for school buses, a head restraint that conforms to 
S4.4 (a) and (b) of this section must be provided at each outboard front 
designated seating

[[Page 722]]

position. For school buses, a head restraint that conforms to S4.4 (a) 
and (b) of this section must be provided at the driver's seating 
position.
    (a) The head restraint must comply with Paragraphs 5.1.1, 5.1.3, 
5.3.1, 5.5 through 5.13, 6.1.1, 6.1.3, and 6.4 through 6.8 of the 
English language version of the Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) 
Regulation 17: ECE 17 Rev. 1/Add. 16/Rev. 4 (31 July 2002).
    (b) The head restraint must meet the width requirements specified in 
S4.2(b)(2) of this section.
    S4.5 Except for school buses, head restraints that conform to the 
requirements of Sec. 571.202a must be provided at each front outboard 
designated seating position. If a rear head restraint (as defined in 
Sec. 571.202a) is provided at a rear outboard designated seating 
position, it must conform to the requirements of Sec. 571.202a 
applicable to rear head restraints. For school buses, a head restraint 
that conforms to the requirements of Sec. 571.202a must be installed at 
the driver's seating position.
    S4.6 Where manufacturer options are specified in this section or 
Sec. 571.202a, the manufacturer must select an option by the time it 
certifies the vehicle and may not thereafter select a different option 
for that vehicle. The manufacturer may select different compliance 
options for different designated seating positions to which the 
requirements of this section are applicable. Each manufacturer must, 
upon request from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
provide information regarding which of the compliance options it has 
selected for a particular vehicle or make/model.
    S5. Demonstration procedures.
    S5.1 Compliance with S4.2(a) of this section is demonstrated in 
accordance with the following with the head restraint in its fully 
extended design position:
    (a) On the exterior profile of the head and torso of a dummy having 
the weight and seated height of a 95th percentile adult male with an 
approved representation of a human, articulated neck structure, or an 
approved equivalent test device, establish reference lines by the 
following method:
    (1) Position the dummy's back on a horizontal flat surface with the 
lumbar joints in a straight line.
    (2) Rotate the head of the dummy rearward until the back of the head 
contacts the flat horizontal surface specified in S5.1(a)(1) of this 
section.
    (3) Position the SAE J-826 two-dimensional manikin's back against 
the flat surface specified in S5.1(a)(1) of this section, alongside the 
dummy with the H-point of the manikin aligned with the H-point of the 
dummy.
    (4) Establish the torso line of the manikin as defined in SAE 
Aerospace-Automotive Drawing Standards, sec. 2.3.6, P.E1.01, September 
1963.
    (5) Establish the dummy torso reference line by superimposing the 
torso line of the manikin on the torso of the dummy.
    (6) Establish the head reference line by extending the dummy torso 
reference line onto the head.
    (b) At each designated seating position having a head restraint, 
place the dummy, snugly restrained by Type 2 seat belt, in the 
manufacturer's recommended design seating position.
    (c) During forward acceleration applied to the structure supporting 
the seat as described in this paragraph, measure the maximum rearward 
angular displacement between the dummy torso reference line and head 
reference line. When graphically depicted, the magnitude of the 
acceleration curve shall not be less than that of a half-sine wave 
having the amplitude of 78 m/s\2\ and a duration of 80 milliseconds and 
not more than that of a half-sine wave curve having an amplitude of 94 
m/s\2\ and a duration of 96 milliseconds.
    S5.2 Compliance with S4.2(b) of this section is demonstrated in 
accordance with the following with the head restraint in its fully 
extended design position:
    (a) Place a test device, having the back plan dimensions and torso 
line (centerline of the head room probe in full back position), of the 
three dimensional SAE J826 manikin, at the manufacturer's recommended 
design seated position.
    (b) Establish the displaced torso reference line by applying a 
rearward moment of 373 Nm about the seating reference point to the seat 
back through

[[Page 723]]

the test device back pan specified in S5.2(a) of this section.
    (c) After removing the back pan, using a 165 mm diameter spherical 
head form or cylindrical head form having a 165 mm diameter in plan view 
and a 152 mm height in profile view, apply, perpendicular to the 
displaced torso reference line, a rearward initial load 64 mm below the 
top of the head restraint that will produce a 373 Nm moment about the 
seating reference point.
    (d) Gradually increase this initial load to 890 N or until the seat 
or seat back fails, whichever occurs first.

[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971, as amended at 54 FR 39187, Sept. 25, 1989; 
61 FR 27025, May 30, 1996; 63 FR 28935, May 27, 1998; 69 FR 74883, Dec. 
14, 2005; 72 FR 25514, May 4, 2007]


<R05>
Sec. 571.202a  Standard No. 202a; Head restraints; Mandatory applicability 

begins on September 1, 2009.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard specifies requirements for head 
restraints to reduce the frequency and severity of neck injury in rear-
end and other collisions.
    S2. Application & incorporation by reference.
    S2.1 Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, and to 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses with a GVWR of 4,536 
kg or less, manufactured on or after September 1, 2009. However, the 
standard's requirements for rear head restraints do not apply to 
vehicles manufactured before September 1, 2010, and, for vehicles 
manufactured between September 1, 2010 and August 31, 2011, the 
requirements for rear head restraints apply only to the extent provided 
in S7. Until September 1, 2009, manufacturers may comply with the 
standard in this Sec. 571.202a, with the standard in Sec. 571.202, or 
with the European regulations referenced in S4.3(a) of Sec. 571.202. 
For vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2009 and before 
September 1, 2010, manufacturers may comply with the standard in Sec. 
571.202 or with the European regulations referenced in S4.3(a) of Sec. 
571.202, instead of the standard in this Sec. 571.202a, only to the 
extent consistent with the phase-in specified in this Sec. 571.202a.
    S2.2 Incorporation by reference.
    (a) Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Recommended Practice J211/
1 rev. Mar 95, ``Instrumentation for Impact Test--Part 1--Electronic 
Instrumentation,'' SAE J211/1 (rev. Mar 95) is incorporated by reference 
in S5.2.5(b), S5.3.8, S5.3.9, and 5.3.10 of this section. The Director 
of the Federal Register has approved the incorporation by reference of 
this material in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. A 
copy of SAE J211/1 (rev. Mar 95) may be obtained from SAE at the Society 
of Automotive Engineers, Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 
15096. A copy of SAE J211/1 (rev. Mar 95) may be inspected at NHTSA's 
Technical Information Services, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Plaza Level, 
Room 403, Washington, DC, or at the National Archives and Records 
Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this 
material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/
federal--register/code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    (b) Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Standard J826 ``Devices 
for Use in Defining and Measuring Vehicle Seating Accommodation,'' SAE 
J826 (rev. Jul 95) is incorporated by reference in S3, S5, S5.1, S5.1.1, 
S5.2, S5.2.1, S5.2.2, and S5.2.7 of this section. The Director of the 
Federal Register has approved the incorporation by reference of this 
material in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. A copy of 
SAE J826 (rev. Jul 95) may be obtained from SAE at the Society of 
Automotive Engineers, Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 
15096. A copy of SAE J826 (rev. Jul 95) may be inspected at NHTSA's 
Technical Information Services, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Plaza Level, 
Room 403, Washington, DC or at the National Archives and Records 
Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this 
material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/
federal--register/code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    S3. Definitions.
    Backset means the minimum horizontal distance between the rear of a 
representation of the head of a seated 50th percentile male occupant and 
the

[[Page 724]]

head restraint, as measured by the head restraint measurement device.
    Head restraint means a device that limits rearward displacement of a 
seated occupant's head relative to the occupant's torso.
    Head restraint measurement device (HRMD) means the Society of 
Automotive Engineers (SAE) (July 1995) J826 three-dimensional manikin 
with a head form attached, representing the head position of a seated 
50th percentile male, with sliding scale at the back of the head for the 
purpose of measuring backset. The head form is designed by and available 
from the ICBC, 151 West Esplanade, North Vancouver, BC V7M 3H9, Canada 
(www.icbc.com).
    Height means, when used in reference to a head restraint, the 
distance from the H-point, measured parallel to the torso reference line 
defined by the three dimensional SAE J826 (July 1995) manikin, to a 
plane normal to the torso reference line.
    Intended for occupant use means, when used in reference to the 
adjustment of a seat, positions other than that intended solely for the 
purpose of allowing ease of ingress and egress of occupants and access 
to cargo storage areas of a vehicle.
    Rear head restraint means, at any rear outboard designated seating 
position, a rear seat back, or any independently adjustable seat 
component attached to or adjacent to a seat back, that has a height 
equal to or greater than 700 mm, in any position of backset and height 
adjustment, as measured in accordance with S5.1.1.
    Top of the head restraint means the point on the head restraint with 
the greatest height.
    S4. Requirements. Except as provided in S4.4, S4.2.1(a)(2) and 
S4.2.1(b)(2) of this section, each vehicle must comply with S4.1 of this 
section with the seat adjusted as intended for occupant use. Whenever a 
range of measurements is specified, the head restraint must meet the 
requirement at any position of adjustment within the specified range.
    S4.1 Performance levels. In each vehicle other than a school bus, a 
head restraint that conforms to either S4.2 or S4.3 of this section must 
be provided at each front outboard designated seating position. In each 
equipped with rear outboard head restraints, the rear head restraint 
must conform to either S4.2 or S4.3 of this section. In each school bus, 
a head restraint that conforms to either S4.2 or S4.3 of this section 
must be provided for the driver's seating position. At each designated 
seating position incapable of seating a 50th percentile male Hybrid III 
test dummy specified in 49 CFR part 572, subpart E, the applicable head 
restraint must conform to S4.2 of this section.
    S4.2 Dimensional and static performance. Each head restraint located 
in the front outboard designated seating position and each head 
restraint located in the rear outboard designated seating position must 
conform to paragraphs S4.2.1 through S4.2.7 of this section. Compliance 
is determined for the height requirements of S4.2.1 and the backset 
requirements of S4.2.3 of this section by taking the arithmetic average 
of three measurements.
    S4.2.1 Minimum height.
    (a) Front outboard designated seating positions. (1) Except as 
provided in S4.2.1(a)(2) of this section, when measured in accordance 
with S5.2.1(a)(1) of this section, the top of a head restraint located 
in a front outboard designated seating position must have a height not 
less than 800 mm in at least one position of adjustment.
    (2) Exception. The requirements of S4.2.1(a)(1) do not apply if the 
interior surface of the vehicle at the roofline physically prevents a 
head restraint, located in the front outboard designated seating 
position, from attaining the required height. In those instances in 
which this head restraint cannot attain the required height, when 
measured in accordance with S5.2.1(a)(2), the maximum vertical distance 
between the top of the head restraint and the interior surface of the 
vehicle at the roofline must not exceed 50 mm for convertibles and 25 mm 
for all other vehicles. Notwithstanding this exception, when measured in 
accordance with S5.2.1(a)(2), the top of a head restraint located in a 
front outboard designated seating position must have a height not less 
than 700 mm in the lowest position of adjustment.
    (b) All outboard designated seating positions equipped with head 
restraints.

[[Page 725]]

    (1) Except as provided in S4.2.1(b)(2) of this section, when 
measured in accordance with S5.2.1(b)(1) of this section, the top of a 
head restraint located in an outboard designated seating position must 
have a height not less than 750 mm in any position of adjustment.
    (2) Exception. The requirements of S4.2.1(b)(1) do not apply if the 
interior surface of the vehicle at the roofline or the interior surface 
of the backlight physically prevent a head restraint, located in the 
rear outboard designated seating position, from attaining the required 
height. In those instances in which this head restraint cannot attain 
the required height, when measured in accordance with S5.2.1(b)(2), the 
maximum vertical distance between the top of the head restraint and the 
interior surface of the vehicle at the roofline or the interior surface 
of the backlight must not exceed 50 mm for convertibles and 25 mm for 
all other vehicles.
    S4.2.2 Width. When measured in accordance with S5.2.2 of this 
section, 65 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 3 mm below the top of the head 
restraint, the lateral width of a head restraint must be not less than 
170 mm, except the lateral width of the head restraint for front 
outboard designated seating positions in a vehicle with a front center 
designated seating position, must be not less than 254 mm.
    S4.2.3 Front Outboard Designated Seating Position Backset. When 
measured in accordance with S5.2.3 of this section, the backset must not 
be more than 55 mm, when the seat is adjusted in accordance with S5.1. 
For adjustable restraints, the requirements of this section must be met 
with the top of the head restraint in any height position of adjustment 
between 750 mm and 800 mm, inclusive. If the top of the head restraint, 
in its lowest position of adjustment, is above 800 mm, the requirements 
of this section must be met at that position. If the head restraint 
position is independent of the seat back inclination position, the head 
restraint must not be adjusted such that backset is more than 55 mm when 
the seat back inclination is positioned closer to vertical than the 
position specified in S5.1.
    S4.2.4 Gaps.
    All head restraints must meet limits for gaps in the head restraint 
specified in S4.2.4.1. For gaps between the seat and head restraint, 
adjustable head restraints must meet either the limits specified in 
S4.2.4.1 or S4.2.4.2.
    S4.2.4.1 Gaps within the head restraint and between the head 
restraint and seat using a 165 mm sphere. When measured in accordance 
with S5.2.4.1 of this section using the head form specified in that 
paragraph, there must not be any gap greater than 60 mm within or 
between the anterior surface of the head restraint and anterior surface 
of the seat, with the head restraint adjusted to its lowest height 
position and any backset position, except as allowed by S4.4.
    S4.2.4.2 Gaps between the head restraint and seat using a 25 mm 
cylinder. The following option is only available to head restraints that 
can move with respect to the seat. When measured in accordance with 
S5.2.4.2 of this section using the 25 mm cylinder specified in that 
paragraph, there must not be any gap greater than 25 mm between the 
anterior surface of the head restraint and anterior surface of the seat, 
with the head restraint adjusted to its lowest height position and any 
backset position, except as allowed by S4.4.
    S4.2.5 Energy absorption. When the anterior surface of the head 
restraint is impacted in accordance with S5.2.5 of this section by the 
head form specified in that paragraph at any velocity up to and 
including 24.1 km/h, the deceleration of the head form must not exceed 
785 m/s\2\ (80 g) continuously for more than 3 milliseconds.
    S4.2.6 Height retention. When tested in accordance with S5.2.6 of 
this section, the cylindrical test device specified in S5.2.6(b) must 
return to within 13 mm of its initial reference position after 
application of at least a 500 N load and subsequent reduction of the 
load to 50 N <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 1 N. During application of the 
initial 50 N reference load, as specified in S5.2.6(b)(2) of this 
section, the cylindrical test device must not move downward more than 25 
mm.
    S4.2.7 Backset retention, displacement, and strength.
    (a) Backset retention and displacement. When tested in accordance 
with S5.2.7

[[Page 726]]

of this section, the described head form must:
    (1) Not be displaced more than 25 mm during the application of the 
initial reference moment of 37 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.7 Nm;
    (2) Not be displaced more than 102 mm perpendicularly and posterior 
of the displaced extended torso reference line during the application of 
a 373 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 7.5 Nm moment about the H-point; and
    (3) Return to within 13 mm of its initial reference position after 
the application of a 373 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 7.5 Nm moment about the 
H-point and reduction of the moment to 37 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.7 Nm.
    (b) Strength. When the head restraint is tested in accordance with 
S5.2.7(b) of this section with the test device specified in that 
paragraph, the load applied to the head restraint must reach 890 N and 
remain at 890 N for a period of 5 seconds.
    S4.3 Dynamic performance and width. At each forward-facing outboard 
designated seating position equipped with a head restraint, the head 
restraint adjusted midway between the lowest and the highest position of 
adjustment, and at any position of backset adjustment, must conform to 
the following:
    S4.3.1 Injury criteria. When tested in accordance with S5.3 of this 
section, during a forward acceleration of the dynamic test platform 
described in S5.3.1, the head restraint must:
    (a) Angular rotation. Limit posterior angular rotation between the 
head and torso of the 50th percentile male Hybrid III test dummy 
specified in 49 CFR part 572, subpart E, fitted with sensors to measure 
rotation between the head and torso, to 12 degrees for the dummy in all 
outboard designated seating positions;
    (b) Head injury criteria. Limit the maximum HIC<INF>15</INF> value 
to 500. HIC<INF>15</INF> is calculated as follows--
    For any two points in time, t<INF>1</INF> and t<INF>2</INF>, during 
the event which are separated by not more than a 15 millisecond time 
interval and where t<INF>1</INF> is less than t<INF>2</INF>, the head 
injury criterion (HIC<INF>15</INF>) is determined using the resultant 
head acceleration at the center of gravity of the dummy head, a 
<INF>r</INF>, expressed as a multiple of g (the acceleration of gravity) 
and is calculated using the expression:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04MY07.164

    4.3.2 Width. The head restraint must have the lateral width 
specified in S4.2.2 of this section.
    S4.4 Folding or retracting rear head restraints non-use positions. A 
rear head restraint may be adjusted to a position at which its height 
does not comply with the requirements of S4.2.1 of this section. 
However, in any such position, the head restraint must meet either 
S4.4(a), (b) or (c) of this section.
    (a) The head restraint must automatically return to a position in 
which its minimum height is not less than that specified in S4.2.1(b) of 
this section when a test dummy representing a 5th percentile female 
Hybrid III test dummy specified in 49 CFR part 572, subpart O is 
positioned according to S5.4(a); or
    (b) The head restraint must, when tested in accordance with S5.4(b) 
of this section, be capable of manually rotating forward or rearward by 
not less than 60 degrees from any position of adjustment in which its 
minimum height is not less than that specified in S4.2.1(b) of this 
section.
    (c) The head restraint must, when tested in accordance with S5.4(b) 
of this section, cause the torso reference line angle to be at least 10 
degrees closer to vertical than when the head restraint is in any 
position of adjustment in which its height is not less than that 
specified in S4.2.1(b)(1) of this section.
    S4.5 Removability of head restraints. The head restraint must not be 
removable without a deliberate action distinct from any act necessary 
for upward adjustment.
    S4.6 Compliance option selection. Where manufacturer options are 
specified in this section, the manufacturer must select an option by the 
time it certifies the vehicle and may not thereafter select a different 
option for that vehicle. The manufacturer may select different 
compliance options for different designated seating positions to which 
the requirements of this section are applicable. Each manufacturer must, 
upon request from the National

[[Page 727]]

Highway Traffic Safety Administration, provide information regarding 
which of the compliance options it has selected for a particular vehicle 
or make/model.
    S4.7 Information in owner's manual.
    S4.7.1 The owner's manual for each vehicle must emphasize that all 
occupants, including the driver, should not operate a vehicle or sit in 
a vehicle's seat until the head restraints are placed in their proper 
positions in order to minimize the risk of neck injury in the event of a 
crash.
    S4.7.2 The owner's manual for each vehicle must--
    (a) Include an accurate description of the vehicle's head restraint 
system in an easily understandable format. The owner's manual must 
clearly identify which seats are equipped with head restraints;
    (b) If the head restraints are removable, the owner's manual must 
provide instructions on how to remove the head restraint by a deliberate 
action distinct from any act necessary for upward adjustment, and how to 
reinstall head restraints;
    (c) Warn that all head restraints must be reinstalled to properly 
protect vehicle occupants.
    (d) Describe in an easily understandable format the adjustment of 
the head restraints and/or seat back to achieve appropriate head 
restraint position relative to the occupant's head. This discussion must 
include, at a minimum, accurate information on the following topics:
    (1) A presentation and explanation of the main components of the 
vehicle's head restraints.
    (2) The basic requirements for proper head restraint operation, 
including an explanation of the actions that may affect the proper 
functioning of the head restraints.
    (3) The basic requirements for proper positioning of a head 
restraint in relation to an occupant's head position, including 
information regarding the proper positioning of the center of gravity of 
an occupant's head or some other anatomical landmark in relation to the 
head restraint.
    S5 Procedures. Demonstrate compliance with S4.2 through S4.4 of this 
section as follows. The positions of seat adjustment specified in S5 and 
S5.1 are conditions to be met concurrently and are not a sequential list 
of adjustments. Any adjustable lumbar support is adjusted to its most 
posterior nominal design position. If the seat cushion adjusts 
independently of the seat back, position the seat cushion such that the 
highest H-point position is achieved with respect to the seat back, as 
measured by SAE J826 (July 1995) manikin, with leg length specified in 
S10.4.2.1 of Sec. 571.208 of this part. If the specified position of 
the H-point can be achieved with a range of seat cushion inclination 
angles, adjust the seat inclination such that the most forward part of 
the seat cushion is at its lowest position with respect to the most 
rearward part. All tests specified by this standard are conducted with 
the ambient temperature between 18 degrees C. and 28 degrees C.
    S5.1 Except as specified in S5.2.3 and S5.3 of this section, if the 
seat back is adjustable, it is set at an initial inclination position 
closest to the manufacturer's design seat back angle, as measured by SAE 
J826 manikin. If there is more than one inclination position closest to 
the design angle, set the seat back inclination to the position closest 
to and rearward of the design angle.
    S5.1.1 Procedure for determining presence of head restraints in rear 
outboard seats. Measure the height of the top of a rear seat back or the 
top of any independently adjustable seat component attached to or 
adjacent to the rear seat back in its highest position of adjustment 
using the scale incorporated into the SAE J826 (July 1995) manikin or an 
equivalent scale, which is positioned laterally within 15 mm of the 
centerline of the rear seat back or any independently adjustable seat 
component attached to or adjacent to the rear seat back.
    S5.2 Dimensional and static performance procedures. Demonstrate 
compliance with S4.2 of this section in accordance with S5.2.1 through 
S5.2.7 of this section. Position the SAE J826 (July 1995) manikin 
according to the seating procedure found in SAE J826 (July 1995).
    S5.2.1 Procedure for height measurement. Demonstrate compliance with 
S4.2.1 of this section in accordance

[[Page 728]]

with S5.2.1 (a) and (b) of this section, using the headroom probe scale 
incorporated into the SAE J826 (July 1995) manikin with the appropriate 
offset for the H-point position or an equivalent scale, which is 
positioned laterally within 15 mm of the head restraint centerline. If 
the head restraint position is independent of the seat back inclination 
position, compliance is determined at a seat back inclination position 
closest to the design seat back angle, and each seat back inclination 
position less than the design seat back angle.
    (a)(1) For head restraints in front outboard designated seating 
positions, adjust the top of the head restraint to the highest position 
and measure the height.
    (2) For head restraints located in the front outboard designated 
seating positions that are prevented by the interior surface of the 
vehicle at the roofline from meeting the required height as specified in 
S4.2.1(a)(1), measure the clearance between the top of the head 
restraint and the interior surface of the vehicle at the roofline, with 
the seat adjusted to its lowest vertical position intended for occupant 
use, by attempting to pass a 25 mm sphere between them. Adjust the top 
of the head restraint to the lowest position and measure the height.
    (b)(1) For head restraints in all outboard designated seating 
positions equipped with head restraints, adjust the top of the head 
restraint to the lowest position other than allowed by S4.4 and measure 
the height.
    (2) For head restraints located in rear outboard designated seating 
positions that are prevented by the interior surface of the vehicle at 
the roofline or the interior surface of the rear backlight from meeting 
the required height as specified in S4.2.1(b)(1), measure the clearance 
between the top of the head restraint or the seat back and the interior 
surface of the vehicle at the roofline or the interior surface of the 
rear backlight, with the seat adjusted to its lowest vertical position 
intended for occupant use, by attempting to pass a 25 mm sphere between 
them.
    S5.2.2 Procedure for width measurement. Demonstrate compliance with 
S4.2.2 of this section using calipers to measure the maximum dimension 
perpendicular to the vehicle vertical longitudinal plane of the 
intersection of the head restraint with a plane that is normal to the 
torso reference line of SAE J826 (July 1995) manikin and 65 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 3 mm below the top of the head restraint.
    S5.2.3 Procedure for backset measurement. Demonstrate compliance 
with S4.2.3 of this section using the HRMD positioned laterally within 
15 mm of the head restraint centerline. Adjust the front head restraint 
so that its top is at any height between and inclusive of 750 mm and 800 
mm and its backset is in the maximum position other than allowed by 
S4.4. If the lowest position of adjustment is above 800 mm, adjust the 
head restraint to that position. If the head restraint position is 
independent of the seat back inclination position, compliance is 
determined at each seat back inclination position closest to and less 
than the design seat back angle.
    S5.2.4 Procedures for gap measurement.
    S5.2.4.1 Procedure using a 165 mm sphere.
    Demonstrate compliance with S4.2.4.1 of this section in accordance 
with the procedures of S5.2.4.1 (a) through (c) of this section, with 
the head restraint adjusted to its lowest height position and any 
backset position, except as allowed by S4.4.
    (a) The area of measurement is anywhere on the anterior surface of 
the head restraint or seat with a height greater than 540 mm and within 
the following distances from the centerline of the seat--
    (1) 127 mm for seats required to have 254 mm minimum head restraint 
width; and
    (2) 85 mm for seats required to have a 170 mm head restraint width.
    (b) Applying a load of no more than 5 N against the area of 
measurement specified in subparagraph (a), place a 165 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 2 mm diameter spherical head form against any gap such 
that at least two points of contact are made within the area. The 
surface roughness of the head form is less than 1.6 [micro]m, root mean 
square.

[[Page 729]]

    (c) Determine the gap dimension by measuring the vertical straight 
line distance between the inner edges of the two furthest contact 
points, as shown in Figures 2, 3 and 4.
    S5.2.4.2 Procedure using a 25 mm cylinder.
    Demonstrate compliance with S4.2.4.2 of this section in accordance 
with the procedures of S5.2.4.2 (a) through (c) of this section, with 
the head restraint adjusted to its lowest height position and any 
backset position, except as allowed by S4.4.
    (a) The area of measurement is between the anterior surface of the 
head restraint and seat with a height greater than 540 mm and within the 
following distances from the centerline of the seat--
    (1) 127 mm for seats required to have 254 mm minimum head restraint 
width; and
    (2) 85 mm for seats required to have a 170 mm head restraint width.
    (b) Orient a 25 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 1 mm diameter cylinder such 
that its long axis is perpendicular to the seat back angle and in a 
vertical longitudinal vehicle plane. Applying a load of no more than 5 N 
along the axis of the cylinder, place the cylinder against any gap 
within the area of measurement specified in subparagraph (a). The 
surface roughness of the cylinder is less than 1.6 [micro]m, root mean 
square.
    (c) Determine if at least 125 mm of the cylinder can completely pass 
through the gap. If 125 mm or more of the cylinder can completely pass 
through the gap, the gap is not in compliance.
    S5.2.5 Procedures for energy absorption. Demonstrate compliance with 
S4.2.5 of this section in accordance with S5.2.5 (a) through (e) of this 
section, with adjustable head restraints in any height and backset 
position of adjustment.
    (a) Use an impactor with a semispherical head form with a 165 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 2 mm diameter and a surface roughness of less than 1.6 
[micro]m, root mean square. The head form and associated base have a 
combined mass of 6.8 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.05 kg.
    (b) Instrument the impactor with an acceleration sensing device 
whose output is recorded in a data channel that conforms to the 
requirements for a 600 Hz channel class as specified in SAE Recommended 
Practice J211/1 (March 1995). The axis of the acceleration-sensing 
device coincides with the geometric center of the head form and the 
direction of impact.
    (c) Propel the impactor toward the head restraint. At the time of 
launch, the longitudinal axis of the impactor is within 2 degrees of 
being horizontal and parallel to the vehicle longitudinal axis. The 
direction of travel is posteriorly.
    (d) Constrain the movement of the head form so that it travels 
linearly along the path described in S5.2.5(c) of this section for not 
less than 25 mm before making contact with the head restraint.
    (e) Impact the anterior surface of the seat or head restraint at any 
point with a height greater than 635 mm and within a distance of the 
head restraint vertical centerline of 70 mm.
    S5.2.6 Procedures for height retention. Demonstrate compliance with 
S4.2.6 of this section in accordance with S5.2.6(a) through (e) of this 
section. For head restraints that move with respect to the seat when 
occupant loading is applied to the seat back, S5.2.6(a) through (e) may 
be performed with the head restraint fixed in a position corresponding 
to the position when the seat is unoccupied.
    (a) Adjust the adjustable head restraint so that its top is at any 
of the following height positions at any backset position--
    (1) For front outboard designated seating positions--
    (i) The highest position; and
    (ii) Not less than, but closest to 800 mm; and
    (2) For rear outboard designated seating positions equipped with 
head restraints--
    (i) The highest position; and
    (ii) Not less than, but closest to 750 mm.
    (b)(1) Orient a cylindrical test device having a 165 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 2 mm diameter in plan view (perpendicular to the axis 
of revolution), and a 152 mm length in profile (through the axis of 
revolution) with a surface roughness of less than 1.6 [micro]m, root 
mean square, such that the axis of the revolution is horizontal and in 
the longitudinal vertical plane through the

[[Page 730]]

longitudinal centerline of the head restraint. Position the midpoint of 
the bottom surface of the cylinder in contact with the head restraint.
    (2) Establish initial reference position by applying a vertical 
downward load of 50 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 1 N at the rate of 250 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 50 N/minute. Determine the reference position after 5.5 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 seconds at this load.
    (c) Increase the load at the rate of 250 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 50 
N/minute to at least 500 N and maintain this load for 5.5 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 seconds.
    (d) Reduce the load at the rate of 250 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 50 N/
minute until the load is completely removed. Maintain this condition for 
two minutes <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 seconds.
    (e) Increase the load at the rate of 250 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 50 
N/minute to 50 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 1 N and, after 5.5 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 seconds at this load, determine the position of the 
cylindrical device with respect to its initial reference position.
    S5.2.7 Procedures for backset retention, displacement, and strength. 
Demonstrate compliance with S4.2.7 of this section in accordance with 
S5.2.7(a) and (b) of this section. The load vectors that generate moment 
on the head restraint are initially contained in a vertical plane 
parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline.
    (a)Backset retention and displacement. For head restraints that move 
with respect to the seat when occupant loading is applied to the seat 
back, S5.2.7(a)(1) through (8) may be performed with the head restraint 
fixed in a position corresponding to the position when the seat is 
unoccupied. This fixation is applied to the member(s) that first 
transmit(s) the seat back loading from the occupant to the head 
restraint.
    (1) Adjust the head restraint so that its top is at a height closest 
to and not less than:
    (i) 800 mm for front outboard designated seating positions (or the 
highest position of adjustment for head restraints subject to 
S4.2.1(a)(2)); and
    (ii) 750 mm for rear outboard designated seating positions equipped 
with head restraints (or the highest position of adjustment for rear 
head restraints subject to S4.2.1(b)(2)).
    (2) Adjust the head restraint to any backset position.
    (3) In the seat, place a test device having the back pan dimensions 
and torso reference line (vertical center line), when viewed laterally, 
with the head room probe in the full back position, of the three 
dimensional SAE J826 (July 1995) manikin;
    (4) Establish the displaced torso reference line by creating a 
posterior moment of 373 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 7.5 Nm about the H-point 
by applying a force to the seat back through the back pan at the rate of 
187 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 37 Nm/minute. The initial location on the 
back pan of the moment generating force vector has a height of 290 mm 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 13 mm. Apply the force vector normal to the torso 
reference line and maintain it within 2 degrees of a vertical plane 
parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline. Constrain the back pan 
to rotate about the H-point. Rotate the force vector direction with the 
back pan.
    (5) Maintain the position of the back pan as established in 
S5.2.7(a)(4) of this section. Using a 165 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2 mm 
diameter spherical head form with a surface roughness of less than 1.6 
[micro]m, root mean square, establish the head form initial reference 
position by aligning the centerline of the head form perpendicular to 
the displaced torso reference line, on the seat centerline, and at a 
height 65 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 3 mm below the top of the head 
restraint. Apply a posterior initial load that will produce a 37 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.7 Nm moment about the H-point. After maintaining this 
moment for 5.5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 seconds, measure the posterior 
displacement of the head form during the application of the load.
    (6) Increase the initial load at the rate of 187 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 37 Nm/minute until a 373 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 7.5 Nm 
moment about the H-point is produced. Maintain the load level producing 
that moment for 5.5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 seconds and then measure 
the posterior displacement of the head form relative to the displaced 
torso reference line.
    (7) Reduce the load at the rate of 187 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 37 Nm/
minute until it is completely removed. Maintain this condition for two 
minutes <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 seconds.
    (8) Increase the load at the rate of 187 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 37 
Nm/minute until a 37 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.7 Nm moment about the H-
point is produced.

[[Page 731]]

After maintaining the load level producing that moment for 5.5 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 seconds, measure the posterior displacement of the 
head form position with respect to its initial reference position; and
    (b) Strength. Increase the load specified in S5.2.7(a)(7) of this 
section at the rate of 250 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 50 N/minute to at 
least 890 N and maintain this load level for 5.5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 
0.5 seconds.
    S5.3 Procedures for dynamic performance. Demonstrate compliance with 
S4.3 of this section in accordance with S5.3.1 though S5.3.9 of this 
section with a 50th percentile male Hybrid III test dummy specified in 
49 CFR part 572 subpart E, fitted with sensors to measure head to torso 
rotation. The dummy with all sensors is to continue to meet all 
specifications in 49 CFR part 572 subpart E. The restraint is positioned 
midway between the lowest and the highest position of adjustment, and at 
any position of backset.
    S5.3.1 Mount the vehicle on a dynamic test platform at the vehicle 
altitude set forth in S13.3 of Sec. 571.208 of this part, so that the 
longitudinal centerline of the vehicle is parallel to the direction of 
the test platform travel and so that movement between the base of the 
vehicle and the test platform is prevented. Instrument the platform with 
an accelerometer and data processing system. Position the accelerometer 
sensitive axis parallel to the direction of test platform travel.
    S5.3.2 Remove the tires, wheels, fluids, and all unsecured 
components. Remove or rigidly secure the engine, transmission, axles, 
exhaust, vehicle frame and any other vehicle component necessary to 
assure that all points on the acceleration vs. time plot measured by an 
accelerometer on the dynamic test platform fall within the corridor 
described in Figure 1 and Table 1.
    S5.3.3 Place any moveable windows in the fully open position.
    S5.3.4 Seat Adjustment. The following seat adjustments specify 
conditions to be met concurrently and are not a sequential list of 
adjustments. At each outboard designated seating position, using any 
control that primarily moves the entire seat vertically, place the seat 
in the lowest position. Using any control that primarily moves the 
entire seat in the fore and aft directions, place the seat midway 
between the forwardmost and rearmost position. If an adjustment position 
does not exist midway between the forwardmost and rearmost positions, 
the closest adjustment position to the rear of the midpoint is used. 
Adjust the seat cushion and seat back as required by S5 of this section. 
If the seat back is adjustable, it is set at an inclination position 
closest to 25 degrees from the vertical, as measured by SAE J826 (July 
1995) manikin. If there is more than one inclination position closest to 
25 degrees from the vertical, set the seat back inclination to the 
position closest to and rearward of 25 degrees. If the head restraint is 
adjustable, adjust the top of the head restraint to a position midway 
between the lowest position of adjustment and the highest position of 
adjustment. If an adjustment position midway between the lowest and the 
highest position does not exist, adjust the head restraint to a position 
below and nearest to midway between the lowest position of adjustment 
and the highest position of adjustment.
    S5.3.5 Seat Belt Adjustment. Prior to placing the Type 2 seat belt 
around the test dummy, fully extend the webbing from the seat belt 
retractor(s) and release it three times to remove slack. If an 
adjustable seat belt D-ring anchorage exists, place it in the adjustment 
position closest to the mid-position. If an adjustment position does not 
exist midway between the highest and lowest position, the closest 
adjustment position above the midpoint is used.
    S5.3.6 Dress and adjust each test dummy as specified in S8.1.8.2 
through S8.1.8.3 of Sec. 571.208 of this part. The stabilized test 
temperature of the test dummy is at any temperature level between 69 
degrees F and 72 degrees F, inclusive.
    S5.3.7 Test dummy positioning procedure. Place a test dummy at each 
outboard designated seating position equipped with a head restraint.
    S5.3.7.1 Head. The transverse instrumentation platform of the head 
is level within \1/2\ degree. To level the head of the test dummy, the 
following sequence is followed. First, adjust the position of the H-
point within the limits set forth in S10.4.2.1 of Sec. 571.208 to level

[[Page 732]]

the transverse instrumentation platform of the head of the test dummy. 
If the transverse instrumentation platform of the head is still not 
level, then adjust the pelvic angle of the test dummy. If the transverse 
instrumentation platform of the head is still not level, then adjust the 
neck bracket of the dummy the minimum amount necessary from the non-
adjusted ``0'' setting to ensure that the transverse instrumentation 
platform of the head is horizontal within \1/2\ degree. The test dummy 
remains within the limits specified in S10.4.2.1 of Sec. 571.208 after 
any adjustment of the neck bracket.
    S5.3.7.2 Upper arms and hands. Position each test dummy as specified 
in S10.2 and S10.3 of Sec. 571.208 of this part.
    S5.3.7.3 Torso. Position each test dummy as specified in S10.4.1.1, 
S10.4.1.2, and S10.4.2.1 of Sec. 571.208 of this Part, except that the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy is aligned within 15 mm of the head 
restraint centerline. If the midsagittal plane of the dummy cannot be 
aligned within 15 mm of the head restraint centerline then align the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy as close as possible to the head 
restraint centerline.
    S5.3.7.4 Legs. Position each test dummy as specified in S10.5 of 
Sec. 571.208 of this part, except that final adjustment to accommodate 
placement of the feet in accordance with S5.3.7.5 of this section is 
permitted.
    S5.3.7.5 Feet. Position each test dummy as specified in S10.6 of 
Sec. 571.208 of this part, except that for rear outboard designated 
seating positions the feet of the test dummy are placed flat on the 
floorpan and beneath the front seat as far forward as possible without 
front seat interference. For rear outboard designated seating positions, 
if necessary, the distance between the knees can be changed in order to 
place the feet beneath the seat.
    S5.3.8 Accelerate the dynamic test platform to 17.3 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.6 km/h. All of the points on the acceleration vs. 
time curve fall within the corridor described in Figure 1 and Table 1 
when filtered to channel class 60, as specified in the SAE Recommended 
Practice J211/1 (March 1995). Measure the maximum posterior angular 
displacement.
    S5.3.9 Calculate the angular displacement from the output of 
instrumentation placed in the torso and head of the test dummy and an 
algorithm capable of determining the relative angular displacement to 
within one degree and conforming to the requirements of a 600 Hz channel 
class, as specified in SAE Recommended Practice J211/1, March 1995. No 
data generated after 200 ms from the beginning of the forward 
acceleration are used in determining angular displacement of the head 
with respect to the torso.
    S5.3.10 Calculate the HIC<INF>15</INF> from the output of 
instrumentation placed in the head of the test dummy, using the equation 
in S4.3.1(b) of this section and conforming to the requirements for a 
1000 Hz channel class as specified in SAE Recommended Practice J211/1 
(March 1995). No data generated after 200 ms from the beginning of the 
forward acceleration are used in determining HIC.
    S5.4 Procedures for folding or retracting head restraints for 
unoccupied rear outboard designated seating positions.
    (a) Demonstrate compliance with S4.4 (a) of this section, using a 
5th percentile female Hybrid III test dummy specified in 49 CFR part 
572, subpart O, in accordance with the following procedure--
    (1) Position the test dummy in the seat such that the dummy's 
midsaggital plane is aligned within the 15 mm of the head restraint 
centerline and is parallel to a vertical plane parallel to the vehicle 
longitudinal centerline.
    (2) Hold the dummy's thighs down and push rearward on the upper 
torso to maximize the dummy's pelvic angle.
    (3) Place the legs as close as possible to 90 degrees to the thighs. 
Push rearward on the dummy's knees to force the pelvis into the seat so 
there is no gap between the pelvis and the seat back or until contact 
occurs between the back of the dummy's calves and the front of the seat 
cushion such that the angle between the dummy's thighs and legs begins 
to change.
    (4) Note the position of the head restraint. Remove the dummy from 
the seat. If the head restraint returns to a retracted position upon 
removal of the

[[Page 733]]

dummy, manually place it in the noted position. Determine compliance 
with the height requirements of S4.2.1 of this section by using the test 
procedures of S5.2.1 of this section.
    (b) Demonstrate compliance with S4.4 (b) of this section in 
accordance with the following procedure:
    (1) Place the rear head restraint in any position meeting the 
requirements of S4.2 of this section;
    (2) Strike a line on the head restraint. Measure the angle or range 
of angles of the head restraint reference line as projected onto a 
vertical longitudinal vehicle plane. Alternatively, measure the torso 
reference line angle with the SAE J826 (July 1995) manikin;
    (3) Fold or retract the head restraint to a position in which its 
minimum height is less than that specified in S4.2.1 (b) of this 
section;
    (4) Determine the minimum change in the head restraint reference 
line angle as projected onto a vertical longitudinal vehicle plane from 
the angle or range of angles measured in 5.4(b)(2). Alternatively, 
determine the change in the torso reference line angle with the SAE J826 
(July 1995) manikin.
    S6 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2009, and before 
September 1, 2010 (Phase-in of Sec. 571.202a).
    (a) For vehicles manufactured for sale in the United States on or 
after September 1, 2009, and before September 1, 2010, a percentage of 
the manufacturer's production, as specified in S6.1, shall meet the 
requirements specified in this Sec. 571.202a without regard to any 
option to comply with the standard in Sec. 571.202 or with the European 
regulations referenced in S4.3(a) of Sec. 571.202. So long as this 
percentage requirement is met, a vehicle may comply with the standard in 
this Sec. 571.202a, with the standard in Sec. 571.202, or with the 
European regulations referenced in S4.3(a) of Sec. 571.202.
    (b) Notwithstanding S6(a), vehicles that are manufactured in two or 
more stages or that are altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) 
after having previously been certified in accordance with part 567 of 
this chapter may comply with the standard in this Sec. 571.202a, with 
the standard in Sec. 571.202, or with the European regulations 
referenced in S4.3(a) of Sec. 571.202.
    S6.1 Phase-in percentage. For vehicles manufactured by a 
manufacturer on or after September 1, 2009, and before September 1, 
2010, the amount of vehicles complying with S6(a) shall be not less than 
80 percent of:
    (a) If the manufacturer has manufactured vehicles for sale in the 
United States during both of the two production years prior to September 
1, 2009, the manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2007, and before September 1, 
2010, or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2009, and 
before September 1, 2010.
    S6.2 Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S6.2.1 For the purpose of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer under S6.1, a vehicle produced by more than one 
manufacturer shall be attributed to a single manufacturer as follows, 
subject to S6.2.2.
    (a) A vehicle that is imported shall be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    S6.2.2 A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer shall be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR part 585, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S6.2.1.
    S7. Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2010, and before 
September 1, 2011 (Phase-in of rear seat requirements of Sec. 
571.202a).
    (a) For vehicles manufactured for sale in the United States on or 
after September 1, 2010, and before September 1, 2011 a percentage of 
the manufacturer's production of vehicles equipped with rear outboard 
head restraints, as specified in S7.1, shall meet the requirements 
specified in this Sec. 571.202a for rear head restraints.
    (b) Vehicles that are manufactured in two or more stages or that are 
altered

[[Page 734]]

(within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) after having previously been 
certified in accordance with part 567 of this chapter are not subject to 
the requirement specified in S7(a).
    S7.1 Phase-in percentage. For vehicles manufactured by a 
manufacturer on or after September 1, 2010, and before September 1, 
2011, the amount of vehicles equipped with rear outboard head restraints 
complying with S7(a) shall be not less than 80 percent of:
    (a) If the manufacturer has manufactured vehicles for sale in the 
United States during both of the two production years prior to September 
1, 2010, the manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
equipped with rear outboard head restraints manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2008, and before September 1, 2011, or
    (b) The manufacturer's production of vehicles equipped with rear 
outboard head restraints on or after September 1, 2010, and before 
September 1, 2011.
    S7.2 Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S7.2.1 For the purpose of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer under S6.1, a vehicle produced by more than one 
manufacturer shall be attributed to a single manufacturer as follows, 
subject to S7.2.2.
    (a) A vehicle that is imported shall be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    S7.2.2 A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer shall be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR part 585, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S7.2.1.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04MY07.159


[[Page 735]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04MY07.160


[[Page 736]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04MY07.161


[[Page 737]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04MY07.162


[[Page 738]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04MY07.163


[72 FR 25514, May 4, 2007, as amended at 75 FR 67246, Nov. 2, 2010]


<R05>
Sec. 571.203  Standard No. 203; Impact protection for the driver from the 

steering control system.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard specifies requirements for 
steering control systems that will minimize chest, neck, and facial 
injuries to the driver as a result of impact.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars and to 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses with a gross vehicle 
weight rating of 4,536 kg or less. However, it does not apply to 
vehicles that conform to the frontal barrier crash requirements (S5.1) 
of Standard No. 208 (49 CFR 571.208) by means of other than seat belt 
assemblies. It also does not apply to walk-in vans.
    S3. Definitions. Steering control system means the basic steering 
mechanism

[[Page 739]]

and its associated trim hardware, including any portion of a steering 
column assembly that provides energy absorption upon impact.
    S4. Requirements. Each passenger car and each multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, truck and bus with a gross vehicle weight rating of 4,536 kg or 
less manufactured on or after September 1, 1981 shall meet the 
requirements of S5.1 and S5.2.
    S5. Impact protection requirements.
    S5.1 Except as provided in this paragraph, the steering control 
system of any vehicle to which this standard applies shall be impacted 
in accordance with S5.1(a). However, the steering control system of any 
such vehicle manufactured on or before August 31, 1996, may be impacted 
in accordance with S5.1(b).
    (a) When the steering control system is impacted by a body block in 
accordance with SAE Recommended Practice J944 JUN80 Steering Control 
System--Passenger Car--Laboratory Test Procedure, at a relative velocity 
of 24 km/h, the impact force developed on the chest of the body block 
transmitted to the steering control system shall not exceed 11,120 N, 
except for intervals whose cumulative duration is not more than 3 
milliseconds.
    (b) When the steering control system is impacted in accordance with 
Society of Automotive Engineers Recommended Practice J944, ``Steering 
Wheel Assembly Laboratory Test Procedure,'' December 1965, or an 
approved equivalent, at a relative velocity of 24 km/h, the impact force 
developed on the chest of the body block transmitted to the steering 
control system shall not exceed 11,120 N, except for intervals whose 
cumulative duration is not more than 3 milliseconds.
    S5.2 The steering control system shall be so constructed that no 
components or attachments, including horn actuating mechanisms and trim 
hardware, can catch the driver's clothing or jewelry during normal 
driving maneuvers.
    Note: The term jewelry refers to watches, rings, and bracelets 
without loosely attached or dangling members.

[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971, as amended at 44 FR 68475, Nov. 29, 1979; 47 
FR 47842, Oct. 28, 1982; 58 FR 26527, May 4, 1993; 58 FR 63304, Dec. 1, 
1993; 63 FR 28935, May 27, 1998; 63 FR 51003, Sept. 24, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 571.204  Standard No. 204; Steering control rearward displacement.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard specifies requirements limiting 
the rearward displacement of the steering control into the passenger 
compartment to reduce the likelihood of chest, neck, or head injury.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars and to 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses. However, it does not 
apply to walk-in vans.
    S3. Definitions.
    Steering column means a structural housing that surrounds a steering 
shaft.
    Steering shaft means a component that transmits steering torque from 
the steering wheel to the steering gear.
    S4 Requirements.
    S4.1 Vehicles manufactured before September 1, 1991. When a 
passenger car or a truck, bus, or multipurpose passenger vehicle with a 
gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less and an unloaded 
vehicle weight of 4,000 pounds or less is tested under the conditions of 
S5 in a 30 mile per hour perpendicular impact into a fixed collision 
barrier, the upper end of the steering column and shaft in the vehicle 
shall not be displaced more than 5 inches in a horizontal rearward 
direction parallel to the longitudinal axis of the vehicle. The amount 
of displacement shall be measured relative to an undisturbed point on 
the vehicle and shall represent the maximum dynamic movement of the 
upper end of the steering column and shaft during the crash test.
    S4.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1991. When a 
passenger car or a truck, bus or multipurpose passenger vehicle with a 
gross vehicle weight rating of 4,536 kg or less and an unloaded vehicle 
weight of 2,495 kg or less is tested under the conditions of S5 in a 48 
km/h perpendicular impact into a fixed collision barrier, the upper end

[[Page 740]]

of the steering column and shaft in the vehicle shall not be displaced 
more than 127 mm in a horizontal rearward direction parallel to the 
longitudinal axis of the vehicle. The amount of displacement shall be 
measured relative to an undisturbed point on the vehicle and shall 
represent the maximum dynamic movement of the upper end of the steering 
column and shaft during the crash test.
    S5. Test conditions. The requirements of S4 shall be met when the 
vehicle is tested in accordance with the following conditions.
    S5.1 The vehicle, including test devices and instrumentation, is 
loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight.
    S5.2 Adjustable steering controls are adjusted so that a tilting 
steering wheel hub is at the geometric center of the locus it describes 
when it is moved through its full range of driving positions. A 
telescoping steering control is set at the adjustment position midway 
between the forwardmost and rearwardmost position.
    S5.3 Convertibles and open-body type vehicles have the top, if any, 
in place in the closed passenger compartment configuration.
    S5.4 Doors are fully closed and latched but not locked.
    S5.5 The fuel tank is filled to any level from 90 to 95 percent of 
capacity.
    S5.6 The parking brake is disengaged and the transmission is in 
neutral.
    S5.7 Tires are inflated to the vehicle manufacturer's 
specifications.

[52 FR 44897, Nov. 23, 1987, as amended at 63 FR 28935, May 27, 1998; 63 
FR 51003, Sept. 24, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 571.205  Standard No. 205, Glazing materials.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for glazing 
materials for use in motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce injuries 
resulting from impact to glazing surfaces, to ensure a necessary degree 
of transparency in motor vehicle windows for driver visibility, and to 
minimize the possibility of occupants being thrown through the vehicle 
windows in collisions.
    S3. Application and Incorporation by Reference.
    S3.1 Application.
    (a) This standard applies to passenger cars, multipurpose passenger 
vehicles, trucks, buses, motorcycles, slide-in campers, pickup covers 
designed to carry persons while in motion and low speed vehicles, and to 
glazing materials for use in those vehicles.
    (b) For glazing materials manufactured before September 1, 2006, and 
for motor vehicles, slide-in campers and pickup covers designed to carry 
persons while in motion, manufactured before November 1, 2006, the 
manufacturer may, at its option, comply with 49 CFR 571.205(a) of this 
section.
    S3.2 Incorporation by Reference.
    (a) ``American National Standard for Safety Glazing Materials for 
Glazing Motor Vehicles and Motor Vehicle Equipment Operating on Land 
Highways-Safety Standard'' ANSI/SAE Z26.1-1996, Approved by American 
National Standards Institute August 11, 1997 (ANSI/SAE Z26.1-1996) is 
incorporated by reference in Section 5.1 and is hereby made part of this 
Standard. The Director of the Federal Register approved the material 
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR 
part 51 (see Sec. 571.5 of this part). A copy of ANSI/SAE Z26.1-1996 
may be obtained from the Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc., 400 
Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096-0007. A copy of ANSI/SAE Z26.1-
1996 may be inspected at NHTSA's technical reference library, 400 
Seventh Street, SW., Room 5109, Washington, DC or at the Office of the 
Federal Register, 900 North Capitol Street, NW., Suite 700, Washington, 
DC.
    (b) The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Recommended Practice 
J673, revised April 1993, ``Automotive Safety Glasses'' (SAE J673, rev. 
April 93) is incorporated by reference in Section S5.1, and is hereby 
made part of this Standard. The Director of the Federal Register 
approved the material incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 
U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51 (see Sec. 571.5 of this part). A copy 
of SAE J673, rev. April 93 may be obtained from SAE at the Society of 
Automotive Engineers, Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 
15096. A

[[Page 741]]

copy of SAE J673, rev. April 93 may be inspected at NHTSA's technical 
reference library, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Room 5109, Washington, DC, 
or at the Office of the Federal Register, 900 North Capitol Street, NW., 
Suite 700, Washington, DC.
    (c) The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Recommended Practice 
J100, revised June 1995, ``Class `A' Vehicle Glazing Shade Bands'' (SAE 
J100, rev. June 95) is incorporated by reference in Section S5.3, and is 
hereby made part of this Standard. The Director of the Federal Register 
approved the material incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 
U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51 (see Sec. 571.5 of this part). A copy 
of SAE J100, rev. June 95 may be obtained from SAE at the Society of 
Automotive Engineers, Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 
15096. A copy of SAE J100, rev. 95 may be inspected at NHTSA's technical 
reference library, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Room 5109, Washington, DC, 
or at the Office of the Federal Register, 900 North Capitol Street, NW., 
Suite 700, Washington, DC.
    S4. Definitions.
    Bullet resistant shield means a shield or barrier that is installed 
completely inside a motor vehicle behind and separate from glazing 
materials that independently comply with the requirements of this 
standard.
    Camper means a structure designed to be mounted in the cargo area of 
a truck, or attached to an incomplete vehicle with motive power, for the 
purpose of providing shelter for persons.
    Glass-plastic glazing material means a laminate of one or more 
layers of glass and one or more layers of plastic in which a plastic 
surface of the glazing faces inward when the glazing is installed in a 
vehicle.
    Pickup cover means a camper having a roof and sides but without a 
floor, designed to be mounted on and removable from the cargo area of a 
truck by the user.
    Prime glazing manufacturer means a manufacturer that fabricates, 
laminates, or tempers glazing materials.
    Slide-in camper means a camper having a roof, floor, and sides, 
designed to be mounted on and removable from the cargo area of a truck 
by the user.
    S5. Requirements.
    S5.1 Glazing materials for use in motor vehicles must conform to 
ANSI/SAE Z26.1-1996 unless this standard provides otherwise.
    S5.1.1 Multipurpose passenger vehicles. Except as otherwise 
specifically provided by this standard, glazing for use in multipurpose 
passenger vehicles shall conform to the requirements for glazing for use 
in trucks as specified in ANSI/SAE Z26.1-1996.
    S5.1.2 Aftermarket replacement glazing. Glazing intended for 
aftermarket replacement is required to meet the requirements of this 
standard or the requirements of 49 CFR 571.205(a) applicable to the 
glazing being replaced.
    S5.1.3 Location of arrow within ``AS'' markings. In ANSI/SAE Z26.1-
1996 (August 11, 1997) Section 7. ``Marking of Safety Glazing 
Materials,'' on page 33, in the right column, in the first complete 
sentence, the example markings 
``AS><r-d-d-arr><u-arrow><h-dar/uar><h-dar/uar><1'', 
``AS><r-d-d-arr><u-arrow><h-dar/uar><h-dar/uar><14'' and 
``AS><rm-bond><u-arrow><h-dar/uar><h-dar/uar><2'' are corrected to read 
``A><r-d-d-arr><u-arrow><h-dar/uar><h-dar/uar><S1'', 
``A><r-d-d-arr><u-arrow><h-dar/uar><h-dar/uar><S14'' and 
``A><rm-bond><u-arrow><h-dar/uar><h-dar/uar><S2''. Note that the arrow 
indicating the portion of the material that complies with Test 2 is 
placed with its base adjacent to a horizontal line.
    S5.2 Each of the test specimens described in ANSI/SAE Z26.1-1996 
Section 5.7 (fracture test) must meet the fracture test requirements of 
that section when tested in accordance with the test procedure set forth 
in that section.
    S5.3 Shade Bands. Shade band areas for windshields shall comply with 
the requirements of either S5.3.1 or S5.3.2.
    S5.3.1 Shade bands for windshields shall comply with SAE J100 JUNE 
1995.
    S5.3.2 Except as provided in S5.3.2.1, the lower boundary of shade 
bands for windshields shall be a plane inclined upwards from the X axis 
of the vehicle at 7 degrees, passing through point V<INF>1</INF>, and 
parallel to the Y axis. The coordinate system and point V<INF>1</INF> 
shall be as specified in Annexes 18 and 19 of European Commission for 
Europe (ECE) Regulation No. 43 Revision 2--Amendment 1.
    S5.3.2.1 In the area 300 mm wide centered on the intersection of the 
windshield surface and longitudinal vertical median plane of the 
vehicle, the lower boundary of shade bands for windshields shall be a 
plane inclined upwards from the X axis of the vehicle at

[[Page 742]]

3 degrees, passing through point V<INF>1</INF>, and parallel to the Y 
axis.
    S5.4 Low speed vehicles. Windshields of low speed vehicles must meet 
the ANSI/SAE Z26.1-1996 specifications for either AS-1 or AS-4 glazing.
    S5.5 Item 4A Glazing. Item 4A glazing may be used in all areas in 
which Item 4 safety glazing may be used, and also for side windows 
rearward of the ``C'' pillar. I.e., Item 4A glazing may be used under 
Item 4A paragraph (b) of ANSI/SAE Z26.1-1996 only in side windows 
rearward of the ``C'' pillar.
    S6. Certification and marking.
    S6.1 A prime glazing material manufacturer must certify, in 
accordance with 49 U.S.C. 30115, each piece of glazing material to which 
this standard applies that is designed--
    (a) As a component of any specific motor vehicle or camper; or
    (b) To be cut into components for use in motor vehicles or items of 
motor vehicle equipment.
    S6.2 A prime glazing manufacturer certifies its glazing by adding to 
the marks required by section 7 of ANSI/SAE Z26.1-1996, in letters and 
numerals of the same size, the symbol ``DOT'' and a manufacturer's code 
mark that NHTSA assigns to the manufacturer. NHTSA will assign a code 
mark to a manufacturer after the manufacturer submits a written request 
to the Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance, National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590. 
The request must include the company name, address, and a statement from 
the manufacturer certifying its status as a prime glazing manufacturer 
as defined in S4.
    S6.3 A manufacturer or distributor who cuts a section of glazing 
material to which this standard applies, for use in a motor vehicle or 
camper, must--
    (a) Mark that material in accordance with section 7 of ANSI/SAE 
Z26.1-1996; and
    (b) Certify that its product complies with this standard in 
accordance with 49 U.S.C. 30115.

[37 FR 12239, June 21, 1972]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.205 see the List of CFR Sections Affected which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.


<R05>
Sec. 571.205(a)  Glazing equipment manufactured before September 1, 2006 and 

glazing materials used in vehicles manufactured before November 1, 2006.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for glazing 
equipment manufactured before September 1, 2006 for use in motor 
vehicles and motor vehicle equipment, and specifies requirements for 
motor vehicles manufactured before November 1, 2006 and for replacement 
glazing for those vehicles. A manufacturer may, at its option, comply 
with 49 CFR 571.205 instead of this standard.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce injuries 
resulting from impact to glazing surfaces, to ensure a necessary degree 
of transparency in motor vehicle windows for driver visibility, and to 
minimize the possibility of occupants being thrown through the vehicle 
windows in collisions.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to glazing equipment 
manufactured before September 1, 2006 for use in motor vehicles and 
motor vehicle equipment. In addition, this standard applies to the 
following vehicles manufactured before November 1, 2006: passenger cars, 
low speed vehicles, multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, buses, and 
motorcycles. This standard also applies to slide-in campers, and pickup 
covers designed to carry persons while in motion, manufactured before 
November 1, 2006.
    S4. Definitions
    Bullet resistant shield means a shield or barrier that is installed 
completely inside a motor vehicle behind and separate from glazing 
materials that independently comply with the requirements of this 
standard.
    Camper means a structure designed to be mounted in the cargo area of 
a truck, or attached to an incomplete vehicle with motive power, for the 
purpose of providing shelter for persons.
    Glass-plastic glazing material means a laminate of one or more 
layers of glass and one or more layers of plastic in which a plastic 
surface of the glazing faces inward when the glazing is installed in a 
vehicle.

[[Page 743]]

    Motor home means a multipurpose passenger vehicle that provides 
living accommodations for persons.
    Pickup cover means a camper having a roof and sides but without a 
floor, designed to be mounted on and removable from the cargo area of a 
truck by the user.
    Slide-in camper means a camper having a roof, floor, and sides, 
designed to be mounted on and removable from the cargo area of a truck 
by the user.
    S5. Requirements
    S5.1. Materials
    S5.1.1 Glazing materials for use in motor vehicles, except as 
otherwise provided in this standard shall conform to the American 
National Standard ``Safety Code for Safety Glazing Materials for Glazing 
Motor Vehicles Operating on Land Highways'' Z-26.1-1977, January 26, 
1977, as supplemented by Z26.1a, July 3, 1980 (hereinafter referred to 
as ``ANS Z26''). However, Item 11B glazing as specified in that standard 
may not be used in motor vehicles at levels requisite for driving 
visibility, and Item 11B glazing is not required to pass Tests Nos. 17, 
30, and 31.
    S5.1.1.1 The chemicals specified for testing chemical resistance in 
Tests Nos. 19 and 20 of ANS Z26 shall be:
    (a) One percent solution of nonabrasive soap.
    (b) Kerosene.
    (c) Undiluted denatured alcohol, Formula SD No. 30 (1 part 100-
percent methyl alcohol in 10 parts 190-proof ethyl alcohol by volume).
    (d) Gasoline, ASTM Reference Fuel C, which is composed of Isooctane 
50 volume percentage and Toluene 50 volume percentage. Isooctane must 
conform to A2.7 in Annex 2 of the Motor Fuels Section of the 1985 Annual 
Book of ASTM Standards, Vol. 05.04, and Toluene must conform to ASTM 
Specification D362-84, Standard Specification for Industrial Grade 
Toluene. ASTM Reference Fuel C must be used as specified in:
    (1) Paragraph A2.3.2 and A2.3.3 of Annex 2 of Motor Fuels, Section 1 
in the 1985 Annual Book of ASTM Standards; and
    (2) OSHA Standard 29 CFR 1910.106--``Handling Storage and Use of 
Flammable Combustible Liquids.'' This incorporation by reference was 
approved by the Director of the Federal Register in accordance with 5 
U.S.C. 552(a) and in 1 CFR part 51. Copies may be inspected at the 
Technical Reference Library, NHTSA, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Room 5108, 
Washington, DC 20590, or at the Office of the Federal Register, 800 
North Capitol Street, NW., Suite 700, Washington, DC 20408.
    S5.1.1.2 The following locations are added to the lists specified in 
ANS Z26 in which item 4, item 5, item 8, and item 9 safety glazing my be 
used:
    (a)-(i) [Reserved]
    (j) Windows and doors in motor homes, except for the windshield and 
windows to the immediate right or left of the driver.
    (k) Windows and doors in slide-in campers and pickup covers.
    (l) Windows and doors in buses except for the windshield, windows to 
the immediate right or left of the driver, and rearmost windows if used 
for driving visibility.
    (m) For Item 5 safety glazing only: Motorcycle windscreens below the 
intersection of a horizontal plane 380 millimeters vertically above the 
lowest seating position.
    S5.1.1.3 The following locations are added to the lists specified in 
ANS Z26 in which item 6 and item 7 safety glazing may be used:
    (a)-(i) [Reserved]
    (j) Windows and doors in motor homes, except for the windshield, 
forward-facing windows, and windows to the immediate right or left of 
the driver.
    (k) Windows, except forward-facing windows, and doors in slide-in 
campers and pickup covers.
    (l) For item 7 safety glazing only:
    (1) Standee windows in buses.
    (2) Interior partitions.
    (3) Openings in the roof.
    S5.1.1.4 The following locations are added to the lists specified in 
ANS Z26 in which item 8 and item 9 safety glazing may be used:
    (a)-(e) [Reserved]
    (f) Windows and doors in motor homes, except for the windshield and 
windows to the immediate right or left of the driver.
    (g) Windows and doors in slide-in campers and pickup covers.
    S5.1.1.5 The phrase ``readily removable'' windows as defined in ANS 
Z26,

[[Page 744]]

for the purposes of this standard, in buses having a GVWR of more than 
4536 kilograms (10,000 pounds), shall include pushout windows and 
windows mounted in emergency exits that can be manually pushed out of 
their location in the vehicle without the use of tools, regardless of 
whether such windows remain hinged at one side to the vehicle.
    S5.1.1.6 Multipurpose passenger vehicles. Except as otherwise 
specifically provided by this standard, glazing for use in multipurpose 
passenger vehicles shall conform to the requirements for glazing for use 
in trucks as specified in ANS Z26.
    S5.1.1.7 Test No. 17 is deleted from the list of tests specified in 
ANS Z26 for Item 5 glazing material and Test No. 18 is deleted from the 
lists of tests specified in ANS Z26 for Item 3 and Item 9 glazing 
material.
    S5.1.2 In addition to the glazing materials specified in ANS Z26, 
materials conforming to S5.1.2.1, S5.1.2.2, S5.1.2.3, S5.1.2.4, 
S5.1.2.5, S5.1.2.6, S5.1.2.7, S5.1.2.8, and S5.1.2.11 may be used in the 
locations of motor vehicles specified in those sections.
    S5.1.2.1 Item 11C--Safety Glazing Material for Use in Bullet 
Resistant Shields. Bullet resistant glazing that complies with Tests 
Nos. 2, 17, 19, 20, 21, 24, 27, 28, 29, 30 and 32 of ANS Z26 and the 
labeling requirements of S5.1.2.5 may be used only in bullet resistant 
shields that can be removed from the motor vehicle easily for cleaning 
and maintenance. A bullet resistant shield may be used in areas 
requisite for driving visibility only if the combined parallel luminous 
transmittance with perpendicular incidence through both the shield and 
the permanent vehicle glazing is at least 60 percent.
    S5.1.2.2 Item 12--Rigid Plastics. Safety plastics materials that 
comply with Tests Nos. 10, 13, 16, 19, 20, 21,and 24 of ANS Z26, with 
the exception of the test for resistance to undiluted denatured alcohol 
Formula SD No. 30, and that comply with the labeling requirements of 
S5.1.2.5, may be used in a motor vehicle only in the following specified 
locations at levels not requisite for driving visibility.
    (a) Window and doors in slide-in campers and pickup covers.
    (b) Motorcycle windscreens below the intersection of a horizontal 
plane 380 millimeters vertically above the lowest seating position.
    (c) Standee windows in buses.
    (d) Interior partitions.
    (e) Openings in the roof.
    (f) Flexible curtains or readily removable windows or in ventilators 
used in conjunction with readily removable windows.
    (g) Windows and doors in motor homes, except for the windshield and 
windows to the immediate right or left of the driver.
    (h) Windows and doors in buses, except for the windshield and window 
to the immediate right and left of the driver.
    S5.1.2.3 Item 13--Flexible plastics. Safety plastic materials that 
comply with Tests Nos. 16, 19, 20, 22, and 23 or 24 of ANS Z26, with the 
exception of the test for resistance to undiluted denatured alcohol 
Formula SD No. 30, and that comply with the labeling requirements of 
S5.1.2.5 may be used in the following specific locations at levels not 
requisite for driving visibility.
    (a) Windows, except forward-facing windows, and doors in slide-in 
campers and pickup covers.
    (b) Motorcycle windscreens below the intersection of a horizontal 
plane 380 millimeters vertically above the lowest standing position.
    (c) Standee windows in buses.
    (d) Interior partitions.
    (e) Openings in the roof.
    (f) Flexible curtains or readily removable windows or in ventilators 
used in conjunction with readily removable windows.
    (g) Windows and doors in motor homes, except for the windshield, 
forward-facing windows, and windows to the immediate right or left of 
the driver.
    S5.1.2.4 Item 14--Glass Plastics. Glass-plastic glazing materials 
that comply with the labeling requirements of S5.1.2.10 and Tests Nos. 
1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 24, 26, and 28, as those tests 
are modified in S5.1.2.9, Test Procedures for Glass-Plastics, may be 
used anywhere in a motor vehicle, except that it may not be used in 
windshields of any of the following vehicles: convertibles, vehicles 
that have

[[Page 745]]

no roof, vehicles whose roofs are completely removable.
    S5.1.2.5 Item 15A--Annealed Glass-Plastic for Use in All Positions 
in a Vehicle Except the Windshield. Glass-plastic glazing materials that 
comply with Tests Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 12, 16, 17, 18, 19, 24, and 28, as 
those tests are modified in S5.1.2.9 Test Procedures for Glass-Plastics, 
may be used anywhere in a motor vehicle except the windshield.
    S5.1.2.6 Item 15B--Tempered Glass-Plastic for Use in All Positions 
in a Vehicle Except the Windshield. Glass-plastic glazing materials that 
comply with Tests Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 16, 17, 18, 19, 24, and 28, 
as those tests are modified in S5.1.2.9 Test Procedures for Glass-
Plastics, may be used anywhere in a motor vehicle except the windshield.
    S5.1.2.7 Item 16A--Annealed Glass-Plastic for Use in All Positions 
in a Vehicle Not Requisite for Driving Visibility. Glass-plastic glazing 
materials that comply with Tests Nos. 3, 4, 9, 12, 16, 19, 24, and 28, 
as those tests are modified in S5.1.2.9 Test Procedures for Glass-
Plastics, may be used in a motor vehicle in all locations not requisite 
for driving visibility.
    S5.1.2.8 Item 16B--Tempered Glass-Plastic for Use in All Positions 
in a Vehicle Not Requisite for Driving Visibility. Glass-plastic glazing 
materials that comply with Tests Nos. 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 16, 19, 24, and 28, 
as those tests are modified in S5.1.2.9 Test Procedures for Glass-
Plastics, may be used in a motor vehicle in all locations not requisite 
for driving visibility.
    S5.1.2.9--Test Procedures for Glass-Plastics. (a) Tests Nos. 6, 7, 
8, 9, 12, 16, and 18, shall be conducted on the glass side of the 
specimen, i.e., the surface which would face the exterior of the 
vehicle. Tests Nos. 17, 19, 24, and 26 shall be conducted on the plastic 
side of the specimen, i.e., the surface which would face the interior of 
the vehicle. Test No. 15 should be conducted with the glass side of the 
glazing facing the illuminated box and the screen, respectively. For 
Test No. 19, add the following to the specified list: an aquaeous 
solution of isopropanol and glycol ether solvents in concentration no 
greater than ten percent or less than five percent by weight and 
ammonium hydroxide no greater than five percent or less than one percent 
by weight, simulating typical commercial windshield cleaner.
    (b) Glass-plastic specimens shall be exposed to an ambient air 
temperature of -40 degrees Celsius (plus or minus 5 degrees Celsius), 
for a period of 6 hours at the commencement of Test No. 28, rather than 
at the initial temperature specified in that test. After testing, the 
glass-plastic specimens shall show no evidence of cracking, clouding, 
delaminating, or other evidence of deterioration.
    (c) Glass-plastic specimens tested in accordance with Test No. 17 
shall be carefully rinsed with distilled water following the abrasion 
procedure and wiped dry with lens paper. After this procedure, the 
arithmetic means of the percentage of light scattered by the three 
specimens as a result of abrasion shall not exceed 4.0 percent.
    (d) Data obtained from Test No. 1 should be used when conducting 
Test No. 2.
    (e)(1) Except as provided in S5.1.2.9(e)(2), glass-plastic glazing 
specimens tested in accordance with Tests Nos. 9, 12, and 26 shall be 
clamped in the test fixture in Figure 1 of this standard in the manner 
shown in that figure. The clamping gasket shall be made of rubber 3 
millimeters (mm) thick of hardness 50 IRHD (International Rubber 
Hardness Degrees), plus or minus five degrees. Movement of the test 
specimen, measured after the test, shall not exceed 2 mm at any point 
along the inside periphery of the fixture. Movement of the test specimen 
beyond the 2 mm limit shall be considered an incomplete test, not a test 
failure. A specimen used in such an incomplete test shall not be 
retested.
    (2) At the option of the manufacturer, glass-plastic glazing 
specimens tested in accordance with Tests Nos. 9 and 12 may be tested 
unclamped. Such specimens shall be tested using the fixture in Figure 1 
of the standard, including the upper frame (unclamped) which holds the 
specimen in place.
    S5.1.2.10 Cleaning Instructions. (a) Each manufacturer of glazing 
materials designed to meet the requirements of S5.1.2.1., S5.1.2.2, 
S5.1.2.3,

[[Page 746]]

S5.1.2.4, S5.1.2.5, S5.1.2.6, S5.1.2.7, S5.1.2.8, or S5.1.2.11 shall 
affix a label, removable by hand without tools, to each item of glazing 
materials. The label shall identify the product involved, specify 
instructions and agents for cleaning the material that will minimize the 
loss of transparency, and instructions for removing frost and ice, and, 
at the option of the manufacturer, refer owners to the vehicle's Owners 
Manual for more specific cleaning and other instructions.
    (b) Each manufacturer of glazing materials designed to meet the 
requirements of paragraphs S5.1.2.4, S5.1.2.5, S5.1.2.6, S5.1.2.7, or 
S5.1.2.8 may permanently and indelibly mark the lower center of each 
item of such glazing material, in letters not less than 4.5 millimeters 
nor more than 6 millimeters high, the following words, GLASS PLASTIC 
MATERIAL--SEE OWNER'S MANUAL FOR CARE INSTRUCTIONS.
    S5.1.2.11 Test Procedures for Item 4A--Rigid Plastic for Use in Side 
Windows Rearward of the C'' Pillar. (a) Glazing materials that comply 
with Tests Nos. 2, 10, 13, 16, 17, as that test is modified in 
S5.1.2.9(c) (on the interior side only), 17, as that test is modified in 
paragraph (b) of this section (on the exterior side only), 19, 20, 21, 
and 24 of ANS Z26.1, may be used in the following specific locations:
    (1) All areas in which item 4 safety glazing may be used.
    (2) Any side window that meets the criteria in S5.1.2.11(a)(2)(i) 
and (ii):
    (i) Is in a vehicle whose rearmost designated seating position is 
forward-facing and cannot be adjusted so that it is side or rear-facing; 
and
    (ii) The forwardmost point on its visible interior surface is 
rearward of the vertical transverse plane that passes through the 
shoulder reference point (as described in Figure 1 of Section 571.210 
Seat belt assembly anchorages) of that rearmost seating position.
    (b)(1) The initial maximum haze level shall not exceed 1.0 percent. 
The specimens are subjected to abrasion for 100 cycles and then 
carefully wiped with dry lens paper (or its equivalent). The light 
scattered by the abraded track is measured in accordance with Test 17. 
The arithmetic mean of the percentages of light scattered by the three 
specimens shall not exceed 4.0 percent after being subjected to abrasion 
for 100 cycles.
    (2) The specimen is remounted on the specimen holder so that it 
rotates substantially in a plane and subjected to abrasion for an 
additional 400 cycles on the same track already abraded for 100 cycles. 
Specimens are carefully wiped after abrasion with dry lens paper (or its 
equivalent). The light scattered by the abraded track is then measured 
as specified in Test 17. The arithmetic mean of the percentages of light 
scattered by the three specimens shall not exceed 10.0 percent after 
being subjected to abrasion for 500 cycles.
    S5.2 Edges. In vehicles except schoolbuses, exposed edges shall be 
treated in accordance with SEA Recommended Practice J673a, ``Automotive 
Glazing,'' August 1967. In schoolbuses, exposed edges shall be banded.
    S6. Certification and Marking.
    S6.1 Each prime glazing material manufacturer, except as specified 
below, shall mark the glazing materials it manufactures in accordance 
with section 6 of ANS Z26. The materials specified in S5.1.2.1, 
S5.1.2.2, S5.1.2.3, S5.1.2.4, S5.1.2.5, S5.1.2.6, S5.1.2.7, S5.1.2.8, 
and S5.1.2.11 shall be identified by the marks ``AS 11C'', ``AS 12'', 
``AS 13'', ``AS 14'', ``AS 15A'', ``AS 15B'', ``AS 16A'', ``AS 16B'', 
and ``AS 4'', respectively. A prime glazing material manufacturer is one 
which fabricates, laminates, or tempers the glazing material.
    S6.2 Each prime glazing material manufacturer shall certify each 
piece of glazing material to which this standard applies that is 
designed as a component of any specific motor vehicle or camper, 
pursuant to section 114 of the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety 
Act of 1966 (49 U.S.C. Sec. 30115), by adding to the mark required by 
S6.1 in letters and numerals of the size specified in section 6 of ANS 
Z26, the symbol ``DOT'' and a manufacturer's code mark, which will be 
assigned by NHTSA on the written request of the manufacturer.
    S6.3 Each prime glazing material manufacturer shall certify each 
piece of glazing material to which this standard applies that is 
designed to be cut

[[Page 747]]

into components for use in motor vehicles or items of motor vehicle 
equipment, pursuant to section 114 of the National Traffic and Motor 
Vehicle Safety Act (49 U.S.C. Sec. 30115).
    S6.4 Each manufacturer or distributor who cuts a section of glazing 
material to which this standard applies, for use in a motor vehicle or 
camper, shall mark that material in accordance with section 6 of ANS 
Z26.
    S6.5 Each manufacturer or distributor who cuts a section of glazing 
material to which this standard applies, for use in a motor vehicle or 
camper, shall certify that his product complies with this standard in 
accordance with section 114 of the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle 
Safety Act (49 U.S.C. 30115).

[[Page 748]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12JY05.000


[70 FR 39966, July 12, 2005]


<R05>
Sec. 571.206  Standard No. 206; Door locks and door retention components.

    S1. Scope and Purpose. This standard specifies requirements for 
vehicle door locks and door retention components, including latches, 
hinges, and other supporting means, to minimize the likelihood of 
occupants being ejected from a vehicle as a result of impact.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, and trucks, and buses with a gross 
vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 4,536 kg or less.
    S3. Definitions.

[[Page 749]]

    Auxiliary Door Latch is a latch equipped with a fully latched 
position, with or without a secondary latched position, and fitted to a 
door or door system equipped with a primary door latch system.
    Auxiliary Door Latch System consists of door latches and strikers 
other than those associated with the primary door latch system.
    Back Door is a door or door system on the back end of a motor 
vehicle through which passengers can enter or depart the vehicle or 
cargo can be loaded or unloaded. It does not include:
    (a) A trunk lid; or
    (b) A door or window composed entirely of glazing material and whose 
latches and/or hinge systems are attached directly to the glazing 
material.
    Body Member is that portion of the hinge normally affixed to the 
body structure.
    Door Closure Warning System is a system that will activate a visual 
signal when a door latch system is not in its fully latched position and 
the vehicle ignition is activated.
    Door Hinge System is one or more hinges used to support a door.
    Door Latch System consists of latches and strikers installed on a 
door system.
    Door Member is that portion of the hinge normally affixed to the 
door structure and constituting the swinging member.
    Door System is the door, latch, striker, hinges, sliding track 
combinations and other door retention components on a door and its 
surrounding doorframe. The door system of a double door includes both 
doors.
    Double Door is a system of two doors where the front door or wing 
door opens first and connects to the rear door or bolted door, which 
opens second.
    Folding Door is a movable barrier, which will close off an 
entranceway to a bus, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck, 
consisting of two or more hinge panels that swing, slide, or rotate; 
does not have a striker and latch assembly.
    Fork-bolt is the part of the latch that engages and retains the 
striker when in a latched position.
    Fork-bolt Opening Direction is the direction opposite to that in 
which the striker enters the latch to engage the fork-bolt.
    Fully Latched Position is the coupling condition of the latch that 
retains the door in a completely closed position.
    Hinge is a device system used to position the door relative to the 
body structure and control the path of the door swing for passenger 
ingress and egress.
    Hinge Pin is that portion of the hinge normally interconnecting the 
body and door members and establishing the swing axis.
    Latch is a device employed to maintain the door in a closed position 
relative to the vehicle body with provisions for deliberate release (or 
operation).
    Primary Door Latch is a latch equipped with both a fully latched 
position and a secondary latched position and is designated as a 
``primary door latch'' by the manufacturer.
    Primary Door Latch System consists of a primary door latch(s) and a 
striker(s).
    Secondary Latched Position refers to the coupling condition of the 
latch that retains the door in a partially closed position.
    Side Front Door is a door that, in a side view, has 50 percent or 
more of its opening area forward of the rearmost point on the driver's 
seat back, when the seat back is adjusted to its most vertical and 
rearward position.
    Side Rear Door is a door that, in a side view, has 50 percent or 
more of its opening area to the rear of the rearmost point on the 
driver's seat back, when the driver's seat is adjusted to its most 
vertical and rearward position.
    Striker is a device with which the latch engages to maintain the 
door in the fully latched or secondary latched position.
    Trunk Lid is a movable body panel that provides access from outside 
the vehicle to a space wholly partitioned from the occupant compartment 
by a permanently attached partition or fixed or fold-down seat back.
    S4. Requirements. The requirements apply to all side and back doors, 
that lead directly into a compartment that

[[Page 750]]

contains one or more seating accommodations and the associated door 
components, except for those on folding doors, roll-up doors, detachable 
doors, bus doors used only for emergency egress purposes and labeled 
accordingly and on bus doors to accommodate a permanently attached 
wheelchair lift system that when the device is in the retracted 
position, the lift platform retracts to a vertical orientation parallel 
to and in close proximity with the interior surface of the lift door and 
in that position, the platform completely covers the doorway opening, 
has fixed attachments to the vehicle and provides a barricade to the 
doorway. The bus wheelchair lift door must be linked to an alarm system 
consisting of either a flashing visible signal located in the driver's 
compartment or an alarm audible to the driver that is activated when the 
door is not fully closed and the vehicle ignition is activated.

                            S4.1 Hinged Doors

    S4.1.1 Primary and Auxiliary Door Latch Systems. Each hinged door 
system shall be equipped with at least one primary door latch system. By 
the time a vehicle is certified a manufacturer shall designate the door 
latch system(s) that is the ``primary door latch system(s).'' Upon 
certification, a manufacturer may not thereafter alter the designation 
of a primary door latch system. Each manufacturer shall, upon request 
from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, provide 
information regarding such designation.
    S4.1.1.1 Load Test One.
    (a) Each primary door latch system and auxiliary door latch system, 
when in the fully latched position, shall not separate when a load of 
11,000 N is applied in the direction perpendicular to the face of the 
latch such that the latch and the striker anchorage are not compressed 
against each other, when tested in accordance with S5.1.1.1.
    (b) When in the secondary latched position, the primary door latch 
system shall not separate when a load of 4,500 N is applied in the same 
direction specified in paragraph (a) of this section when tested in 
accordance with S5.1.1.1.
    S4.1.1.2 Load Test Two.
    (a) Each primary door latch system and auxiliary door latch system, 
when in the fully latched position, shall not separate when a load of 
9,000 N is applied in the fork-bolt opening direction and parallel to 
the face of the latch, when tested in accordance with S5.1.1.2.
    (b) When in the secondary latched position, the primary door latch 
system shall not separate when a load of 4,500 N is applied in the same 
direction specified in paragraph (a) of this section when tested in 
accordance with S5.1.1.2.
    S4.1.1.3 Load Test Three. (Applicable only to back doors that open 
in a vertical direction). Each primary door latch system on back doors, 
when in the fully latched position, shall not separate when a load of 
9,000 N is applied in a direction orthogonal to the directions specified 
in S4.1.1.1 and S4.1.1.2 when tested in accordance with S5.1.1.3.
    S4.1.1.4 Inertial Load. Each primary door latch system and auxiliary 
door latch system shall meet either the dynamic requirements specified 
in paragraphs (a) and (b) of S4.1.1.4 or the calculation of inertial 
load resistance specified in paragraph (c) of S4.1.1.4.
    (a) Each primary door latch and auxiliary door latch on each hinged 
door shall not disengage from the fully latched position when an inertia 
load is applied to the door latch system, including the latch and its 
activation device, in the directions parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal and transverse axes with the locking device disengaged, 
when tested as specified in S5.1.1.4(b).
    (b) Each primary door latch and auxiliary door latch on each hinged 
back door shall also not disengage from the fully latched position when 
an inertia load is applied to the door latch system, including the latch 
and its activation device, in the direction parallel to the vehicle's 
vertical axis with the locking device disengaged, when tested as 
specified in S5.1.1.4(b).
    (c) Each component or subassembly is calculated for its minimum 
inertial load resistance in a particular direction. The combined 
resistance to the unlatching operation must assure that

[[Page 751]]

the door latch system, when properly assembled in the vehicle door, will 
remain latched when subjected to an inertial load of 30 g in the vehicle 
directions specified in paragraph (a) of this section or paragraph (b) 
of this section, as applicable, when calculated in accordance with 
S5.1.1.4 (a).
    S4.1.2 Door Hinges.
    S4.1.2.1 When tested in accordance with S5.1.2, each door hinge 
system shall:
    (a) Support the door,
    (b) Not separate when a longitudinal load of 11,000 N is applied,
    (c) Not separate when a transverse load of 9,000 N is applied, and
    (d) For back doors,
    (1) Not separate when a load of 11,000 N is applied perpendicular to 
the hinge face plate (longitudinal load test) such that the hinge plates 
are not compressed against each other (Load Test One).
    (2) Not separate when a load of 9,000 N is applied perpendicular to 
the axis of the hinge pin and parallel to the hinge face plate 
(transverse load test) such that the hinge plates are not compressed 
against each other (Load Test Two).
    (3) Not separate when a load of 9,000 N is applied in the direction 
of the axis of the hinge pin (Load Test Three--only for back doors that 
open in a vertical direction).
    S4.1.2.2 If a single hinge within the hinge system is tested instead 
of the entire hinge system, the hinge must bear a load proportional to 
the total number of hinges in the hinge system. (For example, an 
individual hinge in a two-hinge system must be capable of withstanding 
50% of the load requirements of the total system.)
    S4.1.2.3 On side doors with rear mounted hinges that can be operated 
independently of other doors,
    (a) The interior door handle shall be inoperative when the speed of 
the vehicle is greater than or equal to 4 km/h, and
    (b) A door closure warning system shall be provided for those doors. 
The door closure warning system shall be located where it can be clearly 
seen by the driver.
    S4.1.3.2 Side Rear Door Locks. In passenger cars and multipurpose 
passenger vehicles, when the locking mechanism is engaged both the 
outside and inside door handles or other latch release controls shall be 
inoperative.
    S4.2 Sliding Side Doors.
    S4.2.1 Latch System. Each sliding door system shall be equipped with 
either:
    (a) At least one primary door latch system, or
    (b) A door latch system with a fully latched position and a door 
closure warning system. The door closure warning system shall be located 
where it can be clearly seen by the driver. Upon certification a 
manufacturer may not thereafter alter the designation of a primary 
latch. Each manufacturer shall, upon request from the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, provide information regarding such 
designation.
    S4.2.1.1 Load Test One.
    (a) At least one door latch system, when in the fully latched 
position, shall not separate when a load of 11,000 N is applied in the 
direction perpendicular to the face of the latch such that the latch and 
the striker anchorage are not compressed against each other, when tested 
in accordance with S5.2.1.1.
    (b) In the case of a primary door latch system, when in the 
secondary latched position, the door latch system shall not separate 
when a load of 4,500 N is applied in the same direction specified in 
paragraph (a) of this section when tested in accordance with S5.2.1.1.
    S4.2.1.2 Load Test Two.
    (a) At least one door latch system, when in the fully latched 
position, shall not separate when a load of 9,000 N is applied in the 
fork-bolt opening direction and parallel to the face of the latch when 
tested in accordance with S5.2.1.2.
    (b) In the case of a primary door latch system, when in the 
secondary latched position, the door latch system shall not separate 
when a load of 4,500 N is applied in the same direction specified in 
paragraph (a) of this section when tested in accordance with S5.2.1.2.
    S4.2.1.3 Inertial Load. Each door latch system certified as meeting 
the requirements of S4.2.1.1 and S4.2.1.2

[[Page 752]]

shall meet either the dynamic requirements specified in paragraph (a) of 
this section or the calculation of inertial load resistance specified in 
paragraph (b) of this section.
    (a) The door latch system shall not disengage from the fully latched 
position when an inertial load is applied to the door latch system, 
including the latch and its activation mechanism, in the directions 
parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal and transversal axes with the 
locking mechanism disengaged, and when tested in accordance with 
S5.1.1.4(b).
    (b) The minimum inertial load resistance can be calculated for each 
component or subassembly. Their combined resistance to the unlatching 
operation must assure that the door latch system, when properly 
assembled in the vehicle door, will remain latched when subjected to an 
inertia load of 30 g in the vehicle directions specified in paragraph 
(a) of this section, when calculated in accordance with S5.1.1.4(a).
    S4.2.2 Door System.
    S4.2.2.1 The track and slide combination or other supporting means 
for each sliding door, while in the closed fully latched position, shall 
not separate from the door frame when a total force of 18,000 N along 
the vehicle transverse axis is applied to the door as specified in 
S5.2.2.
    S4.3 Door Locks. Each door shall be equipped with at least one 
locking device which, when engaged, shall prevent operation of the 
exterior door handle or other exterior latch release control and which 
has an operating means and a lock release/engagement device located 
within the interior of the vehicle.
    S4.2.2.2 When a sliding door system is tested in accordance with 
S5.2.2, the following conditions shall not occur:
    (a) A separation which permits a sphere with a diameter of 100 mm to 
pass unobstructed between the exterior of the vehicle to the interior of 
the vehicle, while the required force is maintained as shown in Figure 
1.
    (b) Either force application device reaches a total displacement of 
300 mm.
    S4.2.2.3 This S4.2.2 applies to vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2010.
    S4.3 Door Locks. Each door shall be equipped with at least one 
locking device which, when engaged, shall prevent operation of the 
exterior door handle or other exterior latch release control and which 
has an operating means and a lock release/engagement device located 
within the interior of the vehicle.
    S4.3.1 Rear side doors. Each rear side door shall be equipped with 
at least one locking device which has a lock release/engagement 
mechanism located within the interior of the vehicle and readily 
accessible to the driver of the vehicle or an occupant seated adjacent 
to the door, and which, when engaged, prevents operation of the interior 
door handle or other interior latch release control and requires 
separate actions to unlock the door and operate the interior door handle 
or other interior latch release control.
    S4.3.2 Back doors. Each back door equipped with an interior door 
handle or other interior latch release control, shall be equipped with 
at least one locking device that meets the requirements of S4.3.1.
    S5 Test Procedures.
    S5.1 Hinged Doors.
    S5.1.1 Primary and Auxiliary Door Latches.
    S5.1.1.1 Load Test One Force Application. The test procedures for 
S4.1.1.1 and S4.2.1.1 are as follows:
    (a) Fully latched position.
    (1) Attach the test fixture shown in Figure 2 to the mounting 
provisions of the latch and striker. Align the direction of engagement 
parallel to the linkage of the fixture. Mount the fixture with latch and 
striker in the fully latched position in the test machine so as to apply 
a load perpendicular to the face of the latch.
    (2) Locate weights so as to apply a 900 N load tending to separate 
the latch and striker in the direction of the latch opening.
    (3) Apply the test load, in the direction specified in S4.1.1.1 and 
Figure 5, at a rate not to exceed 5 mm/min until the required load has 
been achieved. Record the maximum load achieved.
    (b) Secondary Latched Position.
    (1) Attach the test fixture shown in Figure 2 to the mounting 
provisions of

[[Page 753]]

the latch and striker. Align the direction of engagement parallel to the 
linkage of the fixture. Mount the fixture with latch and striker in the 
secondary position in the test machine so as to apply a load 
perpendicular to the face of the latch.
    (2) Locate weights so as to apply a 900 N load tending to separate 
the latch and striker in the direction of the latch opening.
    (3) Apply the test load, in the direction specified in S4.1.1.1 and 
Figure 5, at a rate not to exceed 5 mm/min until the required load has 
been achieved. Record maximum load achieved.
    (4) The test plate to which the door latch is mounted will have a 
striker cut-out configuration similar to the environment in which the 
door latch will be mounted on normal vehicle doors.
    S5.1.1.2 Load Test Two Force Application. The test procedures for 
S4.1.1.2 and S4.2.1.2 are as follows:
    (a) Fully Latched Position.
    (1) Adapt the test fixture shown in Figure 3 to the mounting 
provisions of the latch and striker. Mount the fixture with latch and 
striker in the fully latched position in the test machine so to apply a 
load in the direction of latch opening.
    (2) Apply the test load, in the direction specified in S4.1.1.2 and 
Figure 5, at a rate not to exceed 5 mm/min until the required load has 
been achieved. Record the maximum load achieved.
    (b) Secondary Latched Position.
    (1) Adapt the test fixture shown in Figure 3 to the mounting 
provisions of the latch and striker. Mount the fixture with latch and 
striker in the secondary latched position in the test machine so as to 
apply a load in the direction of latch opening.
    (2) Apply the test load, in the direction specified in S4.1.1.2 and 
Figure 5, at a rate not to exceed 5 mm/min until the required load has 
been achieved. Record the maximum load achieved.
    S5.1.1.3 Load Test Three Force Application. The test procedures for 
S4.1.1.3 are as follows:
    (a) Adapt the test fixture shown in Figure 4 to the mounting 
provisions of the latch and striker. Mount the fixture with latch and 
striker in the fully latched position in the test machine so as to apply 
a load in the direction specified in S4.1.1.3 and Figure 5.
    (b) Apply the test load, in the direction specified in S4.1.1.3 and 
Figure 5, at a rate not to exceed 5 mm/min until the required load has 
been achieved. Record the maximum load required.
    S5.1.1.4 Inertial Force Application. The test procedures for 
S4.1.1.4 and S4.2.1.3 are as follows:
    (a) Calculation. The calculation is performed in accordance with 
paragraph 6 of Society of Automotive Engineers Recommended Practice 
J839, Passenger Car Side Door Latch Systems, June 1991.
    (b) Dynamic Test. The dynamic inertial force application is tested 
according to the setup specified in paragraph (1) or (2) of this 
section.
    (1) Test Setup and Directions for Full Vehicle Test.
    (i) Test Setup.
    (A) Rigidly secure the full vehicle to an acceleration device that, 
when accelerated together, will assure that all points on the crash 
pulse curve are within the corridor defined in Table 1 and Figure 6.
    (B) Install the equipment used to record door opening (doors may be 
tethered to avoid damaging the recording equipment).
    (C) Close the door(s) to be tested and ensure that the door 
latch(es) is in the fully-latched position, that the door(s) is 
unlocked, and that all windows, if provided, on the door(s) are closed.
    (ii) Test Directions. (See Figure 7)
    (A) Longitudinal Setup 1. Orient the vehicle so that its 
longitudinal axis is aligned with the axis of the acceleration device, 
simulating a frontal impact.
    (B) Longitudinal Setup 2. Orient the vehicle so that its 
longitudinal axis is aligned with the axis of the acceleration device, 
simulating a rear impact.
    (C) Transverse Setup 1. Orient the vehicle so that its transverse 
axis is aligned with the axis of the acceleration device, simulating a 
driver-side impact.
    (D) Transverse Setup 2. (Only for vehicles having different door 
arrangements on each side.) Orient the vehicle so that its transverse 
axis is aligned with the axis of the acceleration device, simulating a 
side impact in the

[[Page 754]]

direction opposite to that described in b(1)(ii)(C) of this paragraph.
    (2) Test Setup and Directions for Door Test.
    (i) Test Setup.
    (A) Mount the door assemblies, consisting of at least the door 
latch(es), exterior door handle(s) with mechanical latch operation, 
interior door opening lever(s), and locking device(s), either separately 
or combined to a test fixture. Each door and striker is mounted to the 
test fixture to correspond to its orientation on the vehicle and to the 
directions specified in b(1)(ii) of this paragraph.
    (B) Mount the test fixture to the acceleration device, and install 
the equipment used to record door opening.
    (C) Ensure that the door latch is in the fully-latched position, 
that the door is unlocked (doors may be tethered to avoid damaging the 
recording equipment), and that any windows, if provided, are closed.
    (ii) Test Directions. (See Figure 7)
    (A) Longitudinal Setup 1. Orient the door subsystem(s) on the 
acceleration device in the direction of a frontal impact.
    (B) Longitudinal Setup 2. Orient the door subsystem(s) on the 
acceleration device in the direction of a rear impact.
    (C) Transverse Setup 1. Orient the door subsystem(s) on the 
acceleration device in the direction of a driver-side impact.
    (D) Transverse Setup 2. Orient the door subsystem(s) on the 
acceleration device in the direction opposite to that described in 
(b)(2)(ii)(C) of this paragraph.
    (E) Vertical Setup 1 (applicable only to back doors that open in a 
vertical direction). Orient the door subsystem(s) on the acceleration 
device so that its vertical axis (when mounted in the vehicle) is 
aligned with the axis of the acceleration device, simulating a rollover 
impact where the force is applied in the direction from the top to the 
bottom of the door (when mounted in a vehicle).
    (F) Vertical Setup 2 (applicable only to back doors that open in a 
vertical direction). Orient the door subsystem(s) on the acceleration 
device so that its vertical axis (when mounted in the vehicle) is 
aligned with the axis of the acceleration device, simulating a rollover 
impact where the force is applied in the direction opposite to that 
described in (b)(2)(ii)(E) of this paragraph.
    (3) Test Operation.
    (i) The acceleration device platform shall be instrumented with an 
accelerometer and data processing system that conforms to the 
requirements specified in Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) 
Recommended Practice J211 December 2003, ``Instrumentation for Impact 
Test--Part 1--Electronic Instrumentation'', Channel Class 60. The 
accelerometer sensitive axis is parallel to the direction of test 
platform travel.
    (ii) Maintaining a minimum acceleration level of 30 g for a period 
of at least 30 ms, while keeping the recorded acceleration within the 
pulse corridor defined in Table 1 and Figure 6, accelerate the 
acceleration device in the following directions:
    (A) For Full Vehicle Tests, in the directions specified in 
S5.1.1.4(b)(1)(ii)(A) through S5.1.1.4(b)(1)(ii)(D).
    (B) For Door Tests, in the directions specified in 
S5.1.1.4(b)(2)(ii)(A) through S5.1.1.4(b)(2)(ii)(F).
    (iii) Check recording device for door opening and/or closure during 
the test.
    (iv) If at any point in time, the pulse exceeds 36 g and the test 
specifications are met, the test shall be considered valid.
    S5.1.2 Door Hinges. The test procedures for S4.1.2 are as follows:
    S5.1.2.1 Multiple Hinge Evaluation;
    S5.1.2.1 Multiple Hinge Evaluation;
    S5.1.2.1.1 Longitudinal Load Test.
    (a) Attach the test fixture illustrated in Figure 8 to the mounting 
provisions of the hinge system. Hinge attitude is configured to simulate 
vehicle position (door fully closed) relative to the hinge centerline. 
For test purposes, the distance between the extreme end of one hinge in 
the system to the extreme end of another hinge in the system is to be 
set at 406 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 4 mm. The load is to be applied 
equidistant between the linear center of the engaged portions of the 
hinge pins and through the centerline of the hinge pin in the 
longitudinal vehicle direction (see Figure 8).
    (b) Apply the test load at a rate not to exceed 5 mm/min until the 
required

[[Page 755]]

load has been achieved. Record maximum load achieved.
    S5.1.2.1.2 Transverse Load Test
    (a) Attach the test fixture shown in Figure 8 to the mounting 
provisions of the hinge system. Hinge attitude is configured to simulate 
vehicle position (door fully closed) relative to the hinge centerline. 
For test purposes, the distance between the extreme end of one hinge in 
the system to the extreme opposite end of another hinge in the system is 
to be set at 406 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 4 mm. The load is to be 
applied equidistant between the linear center of the engaged portions of 
the hinge pins and through the centerline of the hinge pin in the 
transverse vehicle direction (see Figure 8).
    (b) Apply the test load at a rate not to exceed 5 mm/min until the 
required load has been achieved. Record maximum load achieved.
    S5.1.2.2 Back Door Hinge Load Test
    (a) Load Test One
    (1) Attach the test fixture illustrated in Figure 8 to the mounting 
provisions of the hinge system. Hinge attitude is configured to simulate 
vehicle position (door fully closed) relative to the hinge centerline. 
For test purposes, the distance between the extreme end of one hinge 
system in the system to the extreme opposite end of another hinge system 
is to be set at 406 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 4 mm. The load is to be 
applied equidistant between the linear center of the engaged portions of 
the hinge pins and through the centerline of the hinge pin, and as 
specified in S4.1.2.1(d)(1). (See Figure 9).
    (2) Apply the test load at a rate not to exceed 5 mm/min until the 
required load has been achieved. Failure consists of a separation of 
either hinge. Record the maximum load achieved.
    (b) Load Test Two
    (1) Attach the test fixture illustrated in Figure 8 to the mounting 
provisions of the hinge system. Hinge attitude is configured to simulate 
vehicle position (door fully closed) relative to the hinge centerline. 
For test purposes, the distance between the extreme end of one hinge 
system in the system to the extreme opposite end of another hinge system 
is to be set at 406 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 4 mm. The load is to be 
applied equidistant between the linear center of the engaged portions of 
the hinge pins and through the centerline of the hinge pin, and as 
specified in S4.1.2.1(d)(2). (See Figure 9).
    (2) Apply the test load at a rate not to exceed 5 mm/min until the 
required load has been achieved. Failure consists of a separation of 
either hinge. Record the maximum load achieved.
    (c) Load Test Three
    (1) Attach the test fixture illustrated in Figure 8 to the mounting 
provisions of the hinge system. Hinge attitude is configured to simulate 
vehicle position (door fully closed) relative to the hinge centerline. 
For test purposes, the distance between the extreme end of one hinge 
system in the system to the extreme opposite end of another hinge system 
is to be set at 406 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 4 mm. The load is to be 
applied through the centerline of the hinge pin, and as specified in 
S4.1.2.1(d)(3). (See Figure 9).
    (2) Apply the test load at a rate not to exceed 5 mm/min until the 
required load has been achieved. Failure consists of a separation of 
either hinge. Record the maximum load achieved.
    S5.1.2.3 Single Hinge Evaluation. Individual hinges of a hinge 
system are tested in accordance with the procedures below:
    (a) Longitudinal Load. Attach the test fixture illustrated in Figure 
8 to the mounting provisions of the hinge. Hinge attitude is configured 
to simulate the vehicle position (door fully closed) relative to the 
hinge centerline. For test purposes, the load is to be applied 
equidistant between the linear center of the engaged portions of the 
hinge pin and through the centerline of the hinge pin in the 
longitudinal vehicle direction. Apply the test load at a rate not to 
exceed 5 mm/min until the required load has been achieved. Failure 
consists of a separation of either hinge. Record maximum load achieved.
    (b) Transverse Load. Attach the test fixture illustrated in Figure 8 
to the mounting provisions of the hinge. Hinge attitude is configured to 
simulate the vehicle position (door fully closed) relative to the hinge 
centerline. For test purposes, the load is to be applied equidistant 
between the linear center of the engaged portions of the hinge pin and 
through the centerline of the hinge pin in the transverse vehicle

[[Page 756]]

direction. Apply the test load at a rate not to exceed 5 mm/min until 
the required load has been achieved. Failure consists of a separation of 
either hinge. Record maximum load achieved.
    (c) Back Door Hinge Load Tests.
    (1) Load Test One. Attach the test fixture illustrated in Figure 8 
to the mounting provisions of the hinge. Hinge attitude is configured to 
simulate the vehicle position (door fully closed) relative to the hinge 
centerline. For test purposes, the load is to be applied equidistant 
between the linear center of the engaged portions of the hinge pin and 
through the centerline of the hinge pin, and as specified in 
S4.1.2.1(d)(1). (See Figure 9). Apply the test load at a rate not to 
exceed 5 mm/min until the required load has been achieved. Failure 
consists of a separation of either hinge. Record maximum load achieved.
    (2) Load Test Two. Attach the test fixture illustrated in Figure 8 
to the mounting provisions of the hinge. Hinge attitude is configured to 
simulate the vehicle position (door fully closed) relative to the hinge 
centerline. For test purposes, the load is to be applied equidistant 
between the linear center of the engaged portions of the hinge pin and 
through the centerline of the hinge pin, and as specified in 
S4.1.2.1(d)(2). (See Figure 9). Apply the test load at a rate not to 
exceed 5 mm/min until the required load has been achieved. Failure 
consists of a separation of either hinge. Record maximum load achieved.
    (3) Load Test Three. Attach the test fixture illustrated in Figure 8 
to the mounting provisions of the hinge. Hinge attitude is configured to 
simulate the vehicle position (door fully closed) relative to the hinge 
centerline. For test purposes, the load is to be applied through the 
centerline of the hinge pin, and as specified in S4.1.2.1(d)(3). (See 
Figure 9). Apply the test load at a rate not to exceed 5 mm/min until 
the required load has been achieved. Failure consists of a separation of 
either hinge. Record maximum load achieved.
    S5.1.2.4 For piano-type hinges, the hinge spacing requirements are 
not applicable and arrangement of the test fixture is altered so that 
the test forces are applied to the complete hinge.
    S5.2 Sliding Side Doors.
    S5.2.1 Door Latches.
    S5.2.1.1 Load Test One Force Application. The requirements of 
S4.2.1.1 are tested in accordance with the procedures specified in 
S5.1.1.1.
    S5.2.1.2 Load Test Two Force Application. The requirements of 
S4.2.1.2 are tested in accordance with the procedures specified in 
S5.1.1.2.
    S5.2.1.3 [Reserved]
    S5.2.1.4 [Reserved]
    S5.2.2 Door System. The test procedures for S4.2.2 are as follows:
    S5.2.2.1 Tests are conducted using a full vehicle with the sliding 
door and its retention components.
    S5.2.2.1 Tests are conducted using a full vehicle with the sliding 
door and its retention components.
    S5.2.2.2 The test is conducted using two force application devices 
capable of applying the outward transverse forces specified in S5.2.2.4. 
The test setup is shown in Figure 10. The force application system shall 
include the following:
    (a) Two force application plates, (b) Two force application devices 
capable of applying the outward transverse load requirements for a 
minimum displacement of 300 mm.
    (c) Two load cells of sufficient capacity to measure the applied 
loads specified in S5.2.2.4.
    (d) Two linear displacement measurement devices required for 
measuring force application device displacement during the test.
    (e) Equipment to measure for a 100 mm separation as specified in 
S4.2.2.2(a), while respecting all relevant safety and health 
requirements.
    S5.2.2.3 Test Setup.
    (a) Remove all interior trim and decorative components from the 
sliding door assembly.
    (b) Remove seats and any interior components that may interfere with 
the mounting and operation of the test equipment and all pillar trim and 
any non-structural components that overlap the door and cause improper 
placement of the force application plates.
    (c) Each force application device and associated support structure 
is rigidly

[[Page 757]]

fixed on a horizontal surface on the vehicle floor, while applying the 
loads.
    (d) Determine the forward and aft edge of the sliding door, or its 
adjoining vehicle structure, that contains a latch/striker.
    (e) Close the sliding door, ensuring that all door retention 
components are fully engaged.
    (f) For any tested door edge that contains one latch/striker, the 
following set-up procedures are used:
    (1)(i) The force application plate is 150 mm in length, 50 mm in 
width, and at least 15 mm in thickness. The plate edges are rounded to a 
radius of 6 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 1 mm.
    (ii) The plates are fixed perpendicular to the force application 
devices and move in the transverse direction. For alignment purposes, 
each plate is attached to the application device in a manner that allows 
for rotation about the vehicle's y-axis. In this manner, the face of 
each plate remains parallel to the vertical plane which passes through 
the vehicle's longitudinal centerline.
    (2) Place the force application device and force application plate 
against the door so that the applied force is perpendicular to the 
vertical longitudinal plane that passes through the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline, and vertically centered on the door-mounted 
portion of the latch/striker.
    (3) The force application plate is positioned such that the long 
edge of the plate is as close to the interior edge of the door as 
possible, but not such that the forward edge of forward plate and the 
rear edge of the rear plate are more than 12.5 mm from the respective 
interior edges.
    (g) For any tested door edge that contains more than one latch/
striker, the following setup procedures are used:
    (1)(i) The force application plate is 300 mm in length, 50 mm in 
width, and at least 15 mm in thickness. The plate edges are rounded to a 
radius of 6 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 1 mm.
    (ii) The plates are fixed perpendicular to the force application 
devices and move in the transverse direction. For alignment purposes, 
each plate is attached to the application device in a manner that allows 
for rotation about the vehicle's y-axis. In this manner, the face of 
each plate remains parallel to the vertical plane which passes through 
the vehicle's longitudinal centerline.
    (2) Place the force application device and force application plate 
against the door so that the applied force is perpendicular to the 
vertical longitudinal plane that passes through the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline, and vertically centered on a point mid-way 
between the outermost edges of the latch/striker assemblies.
    (3) The force application plate is positioned such that the long 
edge of the plate is as close to the interior edge of the door as 
possible, but not such that the forward edge of forward plate and the 
rear edge of the rear plate are more than 12.5 mm from the respective 
interior edges.
    (h) For any tested door edge that does not contain at least one 
latch/striker, the following set-up procedures are used:
    (1)(i) The force application plate is 300 mm in length, 50 mm in 
width, and at least 15 mm in thickness. The plate edges are rounded to a 
radius of 6 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 1 mm.
    (ii) The plates are fixed perpendicular to the force application 
devices and move in the transverse direction. For alignment purposes, 
each plate is attached to the application device in a manner that allows 
for rotation about the vehicle's y-axis. In this manner, the face of 
each plate remains parallel to the vertical plane which passes through 
the vehicle's longitudinal centerline.
    (2) Place the force application device and force application plate 
against the door so that the applied force is perpendicular to the 
vertical longitudinal plane that passes through the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline, and vertically centered on a point mid-way 
along the length of the door edge ensuring that the loading device 
avoids contact with the window glazing.
    (3) The force application plate is positioned such that the long 
edge of the plate is as close to the interior edge of the door as 
possible, but not such that the forward edge of forward plate and the 
rear edge of the rear plate are more

[[Page 758]]

than 12.5 mm from the respective interior edges.
    (i) The door is unlocked. No extra fixtures or components may be 
welded or affixed to the sliding door or any of its components.
    (j) Place the load application structure so that the force 
application plates are in contact with the interior of the sliding door.
    (k) Apply a preload of 500 N to each actuator and ``zero'' the 
displacement measuring device.
    S5.2.2.4 Test Procedure.
    (a) Increase the force on each force application device as linearly 
as practicable until a force of 9,000 N is achieved on each force 
application device in not less than 90 seconds and not more than 120 
seconds, or until either force application device reaches a total 
displacement of 300 mm.
    (b) If one of the force application devices reaches the target force 
of 9,000 N prior to the other, maintain the 9,000 N force with that 
force application device until the second force application device 
reaches the 9,000 N force.
    (c) Once both force application devices have achieved 9,000 N each 
hold the resulting load.
    (d) Maintain each force application device load as specified in 
paragraph (c) and within 30 seconds measure the separation between the 
exterior edge of the doorframe and the interior of the door along the 
perimeter of the door.
    S5.3 Sliding Side Doors. Compliance with S4.3 shall be demonstrated 
by applying an outward transverse load of 8,900 Newtons (2,000 pounds) 
to the load-bearing members at the opposite edges of the door (17,800 
Newtons (4,000 pounds) total). The demonstration may be performed either 
in the vehicle or with the door retention components in a bench test 
fixture.

[[Page 759]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP06FE07.006


[[Page 760]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP06FE07.007


[[Page 761]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP06FE07.008


[[Page 762]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP06FE07.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP06FE07.010


[[Page 763]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP06FE07.011


[[Page 764]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP06FE07.012


[[Page 765]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19FE10.004


[[Page 766]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP06FE07.014


[[Page 767]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP06FE07.015


[[Page 768]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TP06FE07.016


[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971, as amended at 37 FR 284, Jan. 8, 1972; 50 FR 
12031, Mar. 27, 1985; 60 FR 13646, Mar. 14, 1995; 60 FR 50134, Sept. 28, 
1995; 61 FR 39907, July 31, 1996; 72 FR 5399, June 27, 2007; 74 FR 
35135, July 20, 2009; 74 FR 37176, July 28, 2009; 75 FR 7382, Feb. 19, 
2010]

    Editorial Note: At 72 FR 5399, June 27, 2007, Sec. 571.206 was 
amended by adding S.5.3; however, the amendment could not be 
incorporated because S.5.3 already exists.


<R05>
Sec. 571.207  Standard No. 207; Seating systems.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard establishes requirements for 
seats, their attachment assemblies, and their installation to minimize 
the possibility of their failure by forces acting on them as a result of 
vehicle impact.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses.
    S3. Definitions. Occupant seat means a seat that provides at least 
one designated seating position.
    Seat adjuster means the part of the seat that provides forward and 
rearward positioning of the seat bench and back, and/or rotation around 
a vertical axis, including any fixed portion, such as a seat track. In 
the case of a seat

[[Page 769]]

equipped with seat adjusters at different levels, the term means the 
uppermost seat adjuster.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1 Driver's seat. Each vehicle shall have an occupant seat for the 
driver.
    S4.2. General performance requirements. When tested in accordance 
with S5, each occupant seat shall withstand the following forces, in 
newtons, except for: a side-facing seat; a passenger seat on a bus other 
than a school bus; a passenger seat on a school bus with a GVWR greater 
than 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds); and, a passenger seat on a school 
bus with a GVWR less than or equal to 4,536 kg manufactured before 
October 21, 2011.
    (a) In any position to which it can be adjusted--20 times the mass 
of the seat in kilograms multiplied by 9.8 applied in a forward 
longitudinal direction;
    (b) In any position to which it can be adjusted--20 times the mass 
of the seat in kilograms multiplied by 9.8 applied in a rearward 
longitudinal direction;
    (c) For a seat belt assembly attached to the seat--the force 
specified in paragraph (a), if it is a forward facing seat, or paragraph 
(b), if it is a rearward facing seat, in each case applied 
simultaneously with the forces imposed on the seat by the seat belt 
assembly when it is loaded in accordance with S4.2 of Sec. 571.210; and
    (d) In its rearmost position--a force that produces a 373 newton 
meters moment about the seating reference point for each designated 
seating position that the seat provides, applied to the upper cross-
member of the seat back or the upper seat back, in a rearward 
longitudinal direction for forward-facing seats and in a forward 
longitudinal direction for rearward-facing seats.
    S4.2.1 Seat adjustment. Except for vertical movement of nonlocking 
suspension type occupant seats in trucks or buses, each seat shall 
remain in its adjusted position when tested in accordance with the test 
procedures specified in S5.
    S4.3. Restraining device for hinged or folding seats or seat backs. 
Except for a passenger seat in a bus or a seat having a back that is 
adjustable only for the comfort of its occupants, a hinged or folding 
occupant seat or occupant seat back shall--
    (a) Be equipped with a self-locking device for restraining the 
hinged or folding seat or seat back, and
    (b) If there are any designated seating positions or auxiliary 
seating accommodations behind the seat, either immediately to the rear 
or to the sides, be equipped with a control for releasing that 
restraining device.
    S4.3.1 Accessibility of release control. If there is a designated 
seating position immediately behind a seat equipped with a restraining 
device, the control for releasing the device shall be readily accessible 
to the occupant of the seat equipped with the device and, if access to 
the control is required in order to exit from the vehicle, to the 
occupant of the designated seating position immediately behind the seat.
    S4.3.2 Performance of restraining device.
    S4.3.2.1 Static force. (a) Once engaged, the restraining device for 
a forward-facing seat shall not release or fail when a forward 
longitudinal force, in newtons, equal to 20 times the mass of the hinged 
or folding portion of the seat in kilograms multiplied by 9.8 is applied 
through the center of gravity of that portion of the seat.
    (b) Once engaged, the restraining device for a rearward-facing seat 
shall not release or fail when a rearward longitudinal force, in 
newtons, equal to 8 times the mass of the hinged or folding portion of 
the seat in kilograms multiplied by 9.8 is applied through the center of 
gravity of that portion of the seat.
    S4.3.2.2 Acceleration. Once engaged, the restraining device shall 
not release or fail when the device is subjected to an acceleration of 
20 g., in the longitudinal direction opposite to that in which the seat 
folds.
    S4.4 Labeling. Seats not designated for occupancy while the vehicle 
is in motion shall be conspicuously labeled to that effect.
    S5. Test procedures.
    S5.1 Apply the forces specified in S4.2(a) and S4.2(b) as follows:
    S5.1.1 For a seat whose seat back and seat bench are attached to the 
vehicle by the same attachments. (a) For a seat

[[Page 770]]

whose seat back and seat bench are attached to the vehicle by the same 
attachments and whose height is adjustable, the loads are applied when 
the seat is in its highest adjustment position in accordance with the 
procedure or procedures specified in S5.1.1(a)(1), S5.1.1(a)(2), or 
S5.1.1(a)(3), as appropriate.
    (1) For a seat whose center of gravity is in a horizontal plane that 
is above the seat adjuster or that passes through any part of the 
adjuster, use, at the manufacturer's option, either S5.1.1(b) or, if 
physically possible, S5.1.1(c).
    (2) For a seat specified in S5.1.1(a)(1) for which it is not 
physically possible to follow the procedure in S5.1.1(c), use S5.1.1(b).
    (3) For a seat whose center of gravity is in a horizontal plane that 
is below the seat adjuster, use S5.1.1(c).
    (4) For all other seats whose seat back and seat bench are attached 
to the vehicle by the same attachments, use S5.1.1(b).
    (b) Secure a strut on each side of the seat from a point on the 
outside of the seat frame in the horizontal plane of the seat's center 
of gravity to a point on the frame as far forward as possible of the 
seat anchorages. Between the upper ends of the struts attach a rigid 
cross-member, in front of the seat back frame for rearward loading and 
behind the seat back frame for forward loading. Apply the force 
specified by S4.2(a) or S4.2(b) horizontally through the rigid cross-
member as shown in Figure 1.
    (c) Find ``cg<INF>1</INF>,'' the center of gravity of the portion of 
the seat that is above the lowest surface of the seat adjuster. On each 
side of the seat, secure a strut from a point on the outside of the seat 
frame in the horizontal plane of cg<INF>1</INF> to a point on the frame 
as far forward as possible of the seat adjusted position. Between the 
upper ends of the struts attach a rigid cross-member, in front of the 
seat back frame for rearward loading and behind the seat back frame for 
forward loading. Find ``cg<INF>2</INF>,'' the center of gravity of the 
portion of the seat that is below the seat adjuster. Apply a force 
horizontally through cg<INF>1</INF> equal to 20 times the weight of the 
portion of the seat represented by cg<INF>1</INF>, and simultaneously 
apply a force horizontally through cg<INF>2</INF> equal to 20 times the 
weight of the portion of the seat represented by cg<INF>2</INF>.
    S5.1.2 If the seat back and the seat bench are attached to the 
vehicle by different attachments, attach to each component a fixture 
capable of transmitting a force to that component. Apply forces, in 
newtons, equal to 20 times the mass of the seat back in kilograms 
multiplied by 9.8 m/s\2\ horizontally through the center of gravity of 
the seat back, as shown in Figure 2 and apply forces, in newtons, equal 
to 20 times the mass of the seat bench in kilograms multiplied by 9.8 m/
s\2\ horizontally through the center of gravity of the seat bench, as 
shown in Figure 3.
    S5.2 Develop the moment specified in S4.2(d) as shown in Figure 4.
    S5.3 Apply the forces specified in S4.3.2.1(a) and (b) to a hinged 
or folding seat as shown in Figure 1 and to a hinged or folding seat 
back as shown in Figure 5.
    S5.4 Determine the center of gravity of a seat or seat component 
with all cushions and upholstery in place and with the head restraint in 
its fully extended design position.

[[Page 771]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.079


[[Page 772]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.081


[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971, as amended at 52 FR 7868, Mar. 13, 1987; 53 
FR 30434, Aug. 12, 1988; 59 FR 37167, July 21, 1994; 60 FR 13647, Mar. 
14, 1995; 63 FR 28935, May 27, 1998; 73 FR 62779, Oct. 21, 2008]

[[Page 773]]


<R05>
Sec. 571.208  Standard No. 208; Occupant crash protection.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies performance requirements for the 
protection of vehicle occupants in crashes.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce the number of 
deaths of vehicle occupants, and the severity of injuries, by specifying 
vehicle crashworthiness requirements in terms of forces and 
accelerations measured on anthropomorphic dummies in test crashes, and 
by specifying equipment requirements for active and passive restraint 
systems.
    S3. Application. (a) This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses. In addition, S9, 
Pressure vessels and explosive devices, applies to vessels designed to 
contain a pressurized fluid or gas, and to explosive devices, for use in 
the above types of motor vehicles as part of a system designed to 
provide protection to occupants in the event of a crash.
    (b) Notwithstanding any language to the contrary, any vehicle 
manufactured after March 19, 1997, and before September 1, 2006, that is 
subject to a dynamic crash test requirement conducted with unbelted 
dummies may meet the requirements specified in S5.1.2(a)(1), 
S5.1.2(a)(2), or S13 instead of the applicable unbelted requirement, 
unless the vehicle is certified to meet the requirements specified in 
S14.5, S15, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25.
    (c) For vehicles which are certified to meet the requirements 
specified in S13 instead of the otherwise applicable dynamic crash test 
requirement conducted with unbelted dummies, compliance with S13 shall, 
for purposes of Standards No. 201, 203 and 209, be deemed as compliance 
with the unbelted frontal barrier requirements of S5.1.2.
    S4. General requirements.
    S4.1 Passenger cars.
    S4.1.1 Passenger cars manufactured from January 1, 1972, to August 
31, 1973. Each passenger car manufactured from January 1, 1972, to 
August 31, 1973, inclusive, shall meet the requirements of S4.1.1.1, 
S4.1.1.2, or S4.1.1.3. A protection system that meets the requirements 
of S4.1.1.1, or S4.1.1.2 may be installed at one or more designated 
seating positions of a vehicle that otherwise meets the requirements of 
S4.1.1.3.
    S4.1.1.1 First option--complete passive protection system. The 
vehicle shall meet the crash protection requirements of S5. by means 
that require no action by vehicle occupants.
    S4.1.1.2 Second option--lap belt protection system with belt 
warning. The vehicle shall--
    (a) At each designated seating position have a Type 1 seatbelt 
assembly or a Type 2 seatbelt assembly with a detachable upper torso 
portion that conforms to S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard;
    (b) At each front outboard designated seating position, have a seat 
belt warning system that conforms to S7.3; and
    (c) Meet the frontal crash protection requirements of S5.1, in a 
perpendicular impact, with respect to anthropomorphic test devices in 
each front outboard designated seating position restrained only by Type 
1 seat belt assemblies.
    S4.1.1.3 Third option--lap and shoulder belt protection system with 
belt warning.
    S4.1.1.3.1 Except for convertibles and open-body vehicles, the 
vehicle shall--
    (a) At each front outboard designated seating position have a Type 2 
seatbelt assembly that conforms to Sec. 571.209 and S7.1 and S7.2 of 
this standard, with either an integral or detachable upper torso 
portion, and a seatbelt warning system that conforms to S7.3;
    (b) At each designated seating position other than the front 
outboard positions, have a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly that 
conforms to Sec. 571.209 and to S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard; and
    (c) When it perpendicularly impacts a fixed collision barrier, while 
moving longitudinally forward at any speed up to and including 30 
m.p.h., under the test conditions of S8.1 with anthropomorphic test 
devices at each front outboard position restrained by Type 2 seatbelt 
assemblies, experience no complete separation of any load-bearing 
element of a seatbelt assembly or anchorage.
    S4.1.1.3.2 Convertibles and open-body type vehicles shall at each 
designated seating position have a Type 1

[[Page 774]]

or Type 2 seatbelt assembly that conforms to Sec. 571.209 and to S7.1 
and S7.2 of this standard, and at each front outboard designated seating 
position have a seatbelt warning system that conforms to S7.3.
    S4.1.2 Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1973, 
and before September 1, 1986. Each passenger car manufactured on or 
after September 1, 1973, and before September 1, 1986, shall meet the 
requirements of S4.1.2.1, S4.1.2.2 or S4.1.2.3. A protection system that 
meets the requirements of S4.1.2.1 or S4.1.2.2 may be installed at one 
or more designated seating positions of a vehicle that otherwise meets 
the requirements of S4.1.2.3.
    S4.1.2.1 First option--frontal/angular automatic protection system. 
The vehicle shall:
    (a) At each front outboard designated seating position meet the 
frontal crash protection requirements of S5.1 by means that require no 
action by vehicle occupants;
    (b) At the front center designated seating position and at each rear 
designated seating position have a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly 
that conforms to Standard No. 209 and to S7.1 and S7.2; and
    (c) Either. (1) Meet the lateral crash protection requirements of 
S5.2 and the rollover crash protection requirements of S5.3 by means 
that require no action by vehicle occupants; or
    (2) At each front outboard designated seating position have a Type 1 
or Type 2 seat belt assembly that conforms to Standard No. 209 and S7.1 
through S7.3, and that meets the requirements of S5.1 with front test 
dummies as required by S5.1, restrained by the Type 1 or Type 2 seat 
belt assembly (or the pelvic portion of any Type 2 seat belt assembly 
which has a detachable upper torso belt) in addition to the means that 
require no action by the vehicle occupant.
    S4.1.2.2 Second option--head-on automatic protection system. The 
vehicle shall--
    (a) At each designated seating position have a Type 1 seat belt 
assembly or Type 2 seat belt assembly with a detachable upper torso 
portion that conforms to S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard.
    (b) At each front outboard designated seating position, meet the 
frontal crash protection requirements of S5.1, in a perpendicular 
impact, by means that require no action by vehicle occupants;
    (c) At each front outboard designated seating position, meet the 
frontal crash protection requirements of S5.1, in a perpendicular 
impact, with a test device restrained by a Type 1 seat belt assembly; 
and
    (d) At each front outboard designated seating position, have a seat 
belt warning system that conforms to S7.3.
    S4.1.2.3 Third option--lap and shoulder belt protection system with 
belt warning.
    S4.1.2.3.1 Except for convertibles and open-body vehicles, the 
vehicle shall--
    (a) At each front outboard designated seating position have a seat 
belt assembly that conforms to S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard, and a 
seat belt warning system that conforms to S7.3. The belt assembly shall 
be either a Type 2 seat belt assembly with a nondetachable shoulder belt 
that conforms to Standard No. 209 (Sec. 571.209), or a Type 1 seat belt 
assembly such that with a test device restrained by the assembly the 
vehicle meets the frontal crash protection requirements of S5.1 in a 
perpendicular impact.
    (b) At any center front designated seating position, have a Type 1 
or Type 2 seat belt assembly that conforms to Standard No. 209 (Sec. 
571.209) and to S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard, and a seat belt warning 
system that conforms to S7.3; and
    (c) At each other designated seating position, have a Type 1 or Type 
2 seat belt assembly that conforms to Standard No. 209 (Sec. 571.209) 
and S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard.
    S4.1.2.3.2 Convertibles and open-body type vehicles shall at each 
designated seating position have a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly 
that conforms to Standard No. 209 (Sec. 571.209) and to S7.1 and S7.2 
of this standard, and at each front designated seating position have a 
seat belt warning system that conforms to S7.3.
    S4.1.3 Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1986, 
and before September 1, 1989.

[[Page 775]]

    S4.1.3.1 Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1986, 
and before September 1, 1987.
    S4.1.3.1.1 Subject to S4.1.3.1.2 and S4.1.3.4, each passenger car 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1986, and before September 1, 
1987, shall comply with the requirements of S4.1.2.1, S4.1.2.2 or 
S4.1.2.3. A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in noncompliance with this 
standard if its manufacturer establishes that it did not have reason to 
know in the exercise of due care that such vehicle is not in conformity 
with the requirement of this standard.
    S4.1.3.1.2 Subject to S4.1.3.4 and S4.1.5, the amount of passenger 
cars, specified in S4.1.3.1.1 complying with the requirements of 
S4.1.2.1 shall be not less than 10 percent of:
    (a) The average annual production of passenger cars manufactured on 
or after September 1, 1983, and before September 1, 1986, by each 
manufacturer, or
    (b) The manufacturer's annual production of passenger cars during 
the period specified in S4.1.3.1.1.
    S4.1.3.1.3 A manufacturer may exclude convertibles which do not 
comply with the requirements of S4.1.2.1, when it is calculating its 
average annual production under S4.1.3.1.2(a) or its annual production 
under S4.1.3.1.2(b).
    S4.1.3.2 Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1987, 
and before September 1, 1988.
    S4.1.3.2.1 Subject to S4.1.3.2.2 and S4.1.3.4, each passenger car 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1987, and before September 1, 
1988, shall comply with the requirements of S4.1.2.1, S4.1.2.2 or 
S4.1.2.3. A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in noncompliance with this 
standard if its manufacturer establishes that it did not have reason to 
know in the exercise of due care that such vehicle is not in conformity 
with the requirement of this standard.
    S4.1.3.2.2 Subject to S4.1.3.4 and S4.1.5, the amount of passenger 
cars specified in S4.1.3.2.1 complying with the requirements of 
S4.1.2.1. shall be not less than 25 percent of:
    (a) The average annual production of passenger cars manufactured on 
or after September 1, 1984, and before September 1, 1987, by each 
manufacturer, or
    (b) The manufacturer's annual production of passenger cars during 
the period specified in S4.1.3.2.1.
    S4.1.3.2.3 A manufacturer may exclude convertibles which do not 
comply with the requirements of S4.1.2.1, when it is calculating its 
average annual production under S4.1.3.2.2(a) or its annual production 
under S4.1.3.2.2(b).
    S4.1.3.3 Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1988, 
and before September 1, 1989.
    S4.1.3.3.1 Subject to S4.1.3.3.2 and S4.1.3.4, each passenger car 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1988, and before September 1, 
1989, shall comply with the requirements of S4.1.2.1, S4.1.2.2 or 
S4.1.2.3. A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in noncompliance with this 
standard if its manufacturer establishes that it did not have reason to 
know in the exercise of due care that such vehicle is not in conformity 
with the requirement of this standard.
    S4.1.3.3.2 Subject to S4.1.3.4 and S4.1.5, the amount of passenger 
cars specified in S4.1.3.3.1 complying with the requirements of S4.1.2.1 
shall be not less than 40 percent of:
    (a) The average annual production of passenger cars manufactured on 
or after September 1, 1985, and before September 1, 1988, by each 
manufacturer or
    (b) The manufacturer's annual production of passenger cars during 
the period specified in S4.1.3.3.1.
    S4.1.3.3.3 A manufacturer may exclude convertibles which do not 
comply with the requirements of S4.1.2.1, when it is calculating its 
average annual production under S4.1.3.3.2(a) or its annual production 
under S4.1.3.3.2(b).
    S4.1.3.4 Calculation of complying passenger cars. (a) For the 
purposes of calculating the numbers of cars manufactured under 
S4.1.3.1.2, S4.1.3.2.2, or S4.1.3.3.2 to comply with S4.1.2.1:
    (1) Each car whose driver's seating position complies with the 
requirements of S4.1.2.1(a) by means not including any type of seat belt 
and whose front right seating position will comply with the requirements 
of S4.1.2.1(a) by any means is counted as 1.5 vehicles, and
    (2) Each car whose driver's seating position complies with the 
requirements of S4.1.2.1(a) by means not including any type of seat belt 
and whose

[[Page 776]]

right front seat seating position is equipped with a manual Type 2 seat 
belt is counted as one vehicle.
    (b) For the purposes of complying with S4.1.3.1.2, a passenger car 
may be counted if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after September 1, 1985, but before 
September 1, 1986, and
    (2) Complies with S4.1.2.1.
    (c) For the purposes of complying with S4.1.3.2.2, a passenger car 
may be counted if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after September 1, 1985, but before 
September 1, 1987,
    (2) Complies with S4.1.2.1, and
    (3) Is not counted toward compliance with S4.1.3.1.2
    (d) For the purposes of complying with S4.1.3.3.2, a passenger car 
may be counted if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after September 1, 1985, but before 
September 1, 1988,
    (2) Complies with S4.1.2.1, and
    (3) Is not counted toward compliance with S4.1.3.1.2 or S4.1.3.2.2.
    S4.1.3.5 Passenger cars produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S4.1.3.5.1 For the purposes of calculating average annual production 
of passenger cars for each manufacturer and the amount of passenger cars 
manufactured by each manufacturer under S4.1.3.1.2, S4.1.3.2.2 or 
S4.1.3.3.2, a passenger car produced by more than one manufacturer shall 
be attributed to a single manufacturer as follows, subject to 
S4.1.3.5.2:
    (a) A passenger car which is imported shall be attributed to the 
importer.
    (b) A passenger car manufactured in the United States by more than 
one manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be 
attributed to the manufacturer which markets the vehicle.
    S4.1.3.5.2 A passenger car produced by more than one manufacturer 
shall be attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified 
by an express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR part 585, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S4.1.3.5.1.
    S4.1.4 Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1989, 
but before September 1, 1996.
    S4.1.4.1 Except as provided in S4.1.4.2, each passenger car 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1989 shall comply with the 
requirements of S4.1.2.1. Any passenger car manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1989 and before September 1, 1993 whose driver's designated 
seating position complies with the requirements of S4.1.2.1(a) by means 
not including any type of seat belt and whose right front designated 
seating position is equipped with a manual Type 2 seat belt so that the 
seating position complies with the occupant crash protection 
requirements of S5.1, with the Type 2 seat belt assembly adjusted in 
accordance with S7.4.2, shall be counted as a vehicle complying with 
S4.1.2.1. A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in noncompliance with this 
standard if its manufacturer establishes that it did not know in the 
exercise of due care that such vehicle is not in conformity with this 
standard.
    S4.1.4.2 (a) Each passenger car, other than a convertible, 
manufactured before December 11, 1989 may be equipped with, and each 
passenger car, other than a convertible, manufactured on or after 
December 11, 1989 and before September 1, 1990 shall be equipped with a 
Type 2 seat belt assembly at every forward-facing rear outboard 
designated seating position. Type 2 seat belt assemblies installed 
pursuant to this provision shall comply with Standard No. 209 (49 CFR 
571.209) and with S7.1.1 of this standard.
    (b) Except as provided in S4.1.4.2.1 and S4.1.4.2.2, each passenger 
car, other than a convertible, manufactured on or after September 1, 
1990 and each convertible passenger car manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1991 shall be equipped with an integral Type 2 seat belt 
assembly at every forward-facing rear outboard designated seating 
position. Type 2 seat belt assemblies installed in compliance with this 
requirement shall comply with Standard No. 209 (49 CFR 571.209) and with 
S7.1 an S7.2 of this standard. If a Type 2 seat belt assembly installed 
in compliance with this requirement incorporates any webbing tension-
relieving device, the vehicle owner's manual shall include

[[Page 777]]

the information specified in S7.4.2(b) of this standard for the tension 
relieving device, and the vehicle shall comply with S7.4.2(c) of this 
standard.
    (c) As used in this section, ``rear outboard designated seating 
position'' means any ``outboard designated seating position'' (as that 
term is defined at 49 CFR 571.3) that is rearward of the front seat(s), 
except any designated seating position adjacent to a walkway that is 
located between the seat and the near side of the vehicle and is 
designed to allow access to more rearward seating positions.
    S4.1.4.2.1 Any rear outboard designated seating position with a seat 
that can be adjusted to be forward-facing and to face some other 
direction shall either:
    (i) Meet the requirements of S4.1.4.2 with the seat in any position 
in which it can be occupied while the vehicle is in motion; or
    (ii) When the seat is in its forward-facing position, have a Type 2 
seat belt assembly with an upper torso restraint that conforms to S7.1 
and S7.2 of this standard and that adjusts by means of an emergency 
locking retractor that conforms with Standard No. 209 (49 CFR 571.209), 
which upper torso restraint may be detachable at the buckle, and, when 
the seat is in any position in which it can be occupied while the 
vehicle is in motion, have a Type 1 seat belt or the pelvic portion of a 
Type 2 seat belt assembly that conforms to S7.1 and S7.2 of this 
standard.
    S4.1.4.2.2 Any rear outboard designated seating position on a 
readily removable seat (that is, a seat designed to be easily removed 
and replaced by means installed by the manufacturer for that purpose) in 
a vehicle manufactured on or after September 1, 1992 shall meet the 
requirements of S4.1.4.2 and may use an upper torso belt that detaches 
at either its upper or lower anchorage points, but not both anchorage 
points, to meet those requirements. The means for detaching the upper 
torso belt may use a pushbutton action.
    S4.1.5 Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1996.
    S4.1.5.1 Frontal/angular automatic protection system. (a) Each 
passenger car manufactured on or after September 1, 1996 shall:
    (1) At each front outboard designated seating position meet the 
frontal crash protection requirements of S5.1 by means that require no 
action by vehicle occupants;
    (2) At any front designated seating positions that are not 
``outboard designated seating positions,'' as that term is defined at 49 
CFR 571.3, and at any rear designated seating positions that are not 
``rear outboard designated seating positions,'' as that term is defined 
at S4.1.4.2(c) of this standard, have a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt 
assembly that conforms to Standard No. 209 and S7.1 and S7.2 of this 
standard; and
    (3) At each front designated seating position that is an ``outboard 
designated seating position,'' as that term is defined at 49 CFR 571.3, 
and at each forward-facing rear designated seating position that is a 
``rear outboard designated seating positions,'' as that term is defined 
at S4.1.4.2(c) of this standard, have a Type 2 seat belt assembly that 
conforms to Standard No. 209 and S7.1 through S7.3 of this standard, 
and, in the case of the Type 2 seat belt assemblies installed at the 
front outboard designated seating positions, meet the frontal crash 
protection requirements with the appropriate anthropomorphic test dummy 
restrained by the Type 2 seat belt assembly in addition to the means 
that requires no action by the vehicle occupant.
    (b) For the purposes of sections S4.1.5 through S4.1.5.3 and S4.2.6 
through S4.2.6.2 of this standard, an inflatable restraint system means 
an air bag that is activated in a crash.
    S4.1.5.2 Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1996 
and before September 1, 1997.
    S4.1.5.2.1 The amount of passenger cars complying with the 
requirement of S4.1.5.1(a)(1) by means of an inflatable restraint system 
at the driver's and right front passenger's position shall be not less 
than 95 percent of the manufacturer's total production of passenger cars 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1996, and before September 1, 
1997. A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in noncompliance with

[[Page 778]]

this standard if its manufacturer establishes that it did not have 
reason to know in the exercise of due care that such vehicle is not in 
conformity with the requirement of this standard.
    S4.1.5.2.2 Passenger cars produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S4.1.5.2.2.1 For the purpose of calculating the production of 
passenger cars by each manufacturer during the period specified in 
S4.1.5.2, a passenger car produced by more than one manufacturer shall 
be attributed to a single manufacturer as follows, subject to 
S4.1.5.2.2.2:
    (a) A passenger car that is imported into the United States shall be 
attributed to the importer.
    (b) A passenger car manufactured within the United States by more 
than one manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be 
attributed to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    S4.1.5.2.2.2 A passenger car produced by more than one manufacturer 
shall be attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers, as 
specified in an express written contract, reported to the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration pursuant to part 585 of this 
chapter, between the manufacturer so specified and the manufacturer to 
which the vehicle otherwise would be attributed, pursuant to 
S4.1.5.2.2.1.
    S4.1.5.3 Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1997. 
Each passenger car manufactured on or after September 1, 1997 shall 
comply with the requirement of S4.1.5.1(a)(1) by means of an inflatable 
restraint system at the driver's and right front passenger's position. A 
vehicle shall not be deemed to be in noncompliance with this standard if 
its manufacturer establishes that it did not have reason to know in the 
exercise of due care that such vehicle is not in conformity with the 
requirement of this standard.
    S4.1.5.4 Passenger cars certified to S14. Each passenger car 
certified to S14 shall, at each front outboard designated seating 
position, meet the applicable frontal crash protection requirements of 
S5.1.2(b) by means of an inflatable restraint system that requires no 
action by vehicle occupants.
    S4.1.5.5 Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 2007.
    S4.1.5.5.1 Except as provided in S4.1.5.5.2, each passenger car 
shall have a Type 2 seat belt assembly that conforms to Standard No. 209 
and to S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard at each rear designated seating 
position, except that side-facing designated seating positions shall 
have a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly that conforms to Standard No. 
209 and to S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard.
    S4.1.5.5.2 Any inboard designated seating position on a seat for 
which the entire seat back can be folded (including the head restraints 
and any other part of the vehicle attached to the seat back) such that 
no part of the seat back extends above a horizontal plane located 250 mm 
above the highest SRP located on the seat may meet the requirements of 
S4.1.5.5.1 by use of a belt incorporating a release mechanism that 
detaches both the lap and shoulder portion at either the upper or lower 
anchorage point, but not both. The means of detachment shall be a key or 
key-like object.
    S4.2 Trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 
10,000 pounds or less. As used in this section, vehicles manufactured 
for operation by persons with disabilities means vehicles that 
incorporate a level change device (e.g., a wheelchair lift or a ramp) 
for onloading or offloading an occupant in a wheelchair, an interior 
element of design intended to provide the vertical clearance necessary 
to permit a person in a wheelchair to move between the lift or ramp and 
the driver's position or to occupy that position, and either an adaptive 
control or special driver seating accommodation to enable persons who 
have limited use of their arms or legs to operate a vehicle. For 
purposes of this definition, special driver seating accommodations 
include a driver's seat easily removable with means installed for that 
purpose or with simple tools, or a driver's seat with extended 
adjustment capability to allow a person to easily transfer from a 
wheelchair to the driver's seat.
    S4.2.1 Trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 
10,000 pounds or less, manufactured on or after January 1, 1976 and 
before September 1, 1991. Each truck and multipurpose passenger vehicle, 
with a gross vehicle

[[Page 779]]

weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less, manufactured before September 1, 
1991, shall meet the requirements of S4.1.2.1, or at the option of the 
manufacturer, S4.1.2.2 or S4.1.2.3 (as specified for passenger cars), 
except that forward control vehicles manufactured prior to September 1, 
1981, convertibles, open-body type vehicles, walk-in van-type trucks, 
motor homes, vehicles designed to be exclusively sold to the U.S. Postal 
Service, and vehicles carrying chassis-mount campers may instead meet 
the requirements of S4.2.1.1 or S4.2.1.2.
    S4.2.1.1 First option--complete automatic protection system. The 
vehicle shall meet the crash protection requirements of S5 by means that 
require no action by vehicle occupants.
    S4.2.1.2 Second option--belt system. The vehicle shall have seat 
belt assemblies that conform to Standard 209 (49 CFR 571.209) installed 
as follows:
    (a) A Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly shall be installed for 
each designated seating position in convertibles, open-body type 
vehicles, and walk-in van-type trucks.
    (b) In vehicles manufactured for operation by persons with 
disabilities, a Type 2 or Type 2A seat belt assembly shall be installed 
for the driver's seating position, a Type 2 seat belt assembly shall be 
installed for each other outboard designated seating position that 
includes the windshield header within the head impact area, and a Type 1 
or Type 2 seat belt assembly shall be installed for each other 
designated seating position.
    (c) In all vehicles except those for which requirements are 
specified in S4.2.1.2 (a) or (b), a Type 2 seat belt assembly shall be 
installed for each outboard designated seating position that includes 
the windshield header within the head impact area, and a Type 1 or Type 
2 seat belt assembly shall be installed for each other designated 
seating position.
    S4.2.2 Trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 
8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or 
less, manufactured on or after September 1, 1991 and before September 1, 
1997. Except as provided in S4.2.4, each truck and multipurpose 
passenger vehicle, with a gross vehicle weight rating of 8,500 pounds or 
less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less, 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1991 and before September 1, 1997, 
shall meet the requirements of S4.1.2.1, or at the option of the 
manufacturer, S4.1.2.2 or S4.1.2.3 (as specified for passenger cars), 
except that convertibles, open-body type vehicles, walk-in van-type 
trucks, motor homes, vehicles designed to be exclusively sold to the 
U.S. Postal Service, vehicles carrying chassis-mount campers, and 
vehicles manufactured for operation by persons with disabilities may 
instead meet the requirements of S4.2.1.1 or S4.2.1.2. Each Type 2 seat 
belt assembly installed in a front outboard designated seating position 
in accordance with S4.1.2.3 shall meet the requirements of S4.6.
    S4.2.3 Trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles manufactured on or 
after September 1, 1991 with either a GVWR or more than 8,500 pounds but 
not greater than 10,000 pounds or with an unloaded vehicle weight 
greater than 5,500 pounds and a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less. Except as 
provided in S4.2.4, each truck and multipurpose passenger vehicle 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1991, that has either a gross 
vehicle weight rating which is greater than 8,500 pounds, but not 
greater than 10,000 pounds, or has an unloaded vehicle weight greater 
than 5,500 pounds and a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less, shall meet the 
requirements of S4.1.2.1, or at the option of the manufacturer, S4.1.2.2 
or S4.1.2.3 (as specified for passenger cars), except that convertibles, 
open-body type vehicles, walk-in van-type trucks, motor homes, vehicles 
designed to be exclusively sold to the U.S. Postal Service, and vehicles 
carrying chassis-mount campers may instead meet the requirements of 
S4.2.1.1 or S4.2.1.2.
    S4.2.4 Rear outboard seating positions in trucks and multipurpose 
passenger vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1991 with a 
GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less. Except as provided in S4.2.4.2 and 
S4.2.4.3, each truck and each multipurpose passenger vehicle, other than 
a motor home, manufactured on or after September 1, 1991 that has a 
gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less shall be equipped 
with an integral

[[Page 780]]

Type 2 seat belt assembly at every forward-facing rear outboard 
designated seating position. Type 2 seat belt assemblies installed in 
compliance with this requirement shall comply with Standard No. 209 (49 
CFR 571.209) and with S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard. If a Type 2 seat 
belt assembly installed in compliance with this requirement incorporates 
any webbing tension-relieving device, the vehicle owner's manual shall 
include the information specified in S7.4.2(b) of this standard for the 
tension relieving device, and the vehicle shall comply with S7.4.2(c) of 
this standard.
    S4.2.4.1 As used in this section--
    (a) [Reserved]
    (b) Rear outboard designated seating position means any ``outboard 
designated seating position'' (as that term is defined at 49 CFR 571.3) 
that is rearward of the front seat(s), except any designated seating 
positions adjacent to a walkway located between the seat and the side of 
the vehicle, which walkway is designed to allow access to more rearward 
seating positions.
    S4.2.4.2 Any rear outboard designated seating position with a seat 
that can be adjusted to be forward-facing and to face some other 
direction shall either:
    (i) Meet the requirements of S4.2.4 with the seat in any position in 
which it can be occupied while the vehicle is in motion; or
    (ii) When the seat is in its forward-facing position, have a Type 2 
seat belt assembly with an upper torso restraint that conforms to S7.1 
and S7.2 of this standard and that adjusts by means of an emergency 
locking retractor that conforms with Standard No. 209 (49 CFR 571.209), 
which upper torso restraint may be detachable at the buckle, and, when 
the seat is in any position in which it can be occupied while the 
vehicle is in motion, have a Type 1 seat belt or the pelvic portion of a 
Type 2 seat belt assembly that conforms to S7.1 and S7.2 of this 
standard.
    S4.2.4.3 Any rear outboard designated seating position on a readily 
removable seat (that is, a seat designed to be easily removed and 
replaced by means installed by the manufacturer for that purpose) in a 
vehicle manufactured on or after September 1, 1992 shall meet the 
requirements of S4.2.4 and may use an upper torso belt that detaches at 
either its upper or lower anchorage point, but not both anchorage 
points, to meet those requirements. The means for detaching the upper 
torso belt may use a pushbutton action.
    S4.2.5 Trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a 
GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 
pounds or less manufactured on or after September 1, 1994, and before 
September 1, 1997.
    S4.2.5.1 Trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a 
GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 
pounds or less manufactured on or after September 1, 1994, and before 
September 1, 1995.
    S4.2.5.1.1 Subject to S4.2.5.1.2 and S4.2.5.5 and except as provided 
in S4.2.4, each truck, bus and multipurpose passenger vehicle, other 
than walk-in van-type trucks, vehicles designed to be exclusively sold 
to the U.S. Postal Service, and vehicles manufactured for operation by 
persons with disabilities, with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an 
unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less that is manufactured on 
or after September 1, 1994 and before September 1, 1995, shall comply 
with the requirements of S4.1.2.1, S4.1.2.2, or S4.1.2.3 (as specified 
for passenger cars). A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in 
noncompliance with this standard if its manufacturer establishes that it 
did not have reason to know in the exercise of due care that such 
vehicle is not in conformity with the requirement of standard.
    S4.2.5.1.2 Subject to S4.2.5.5, the amount of trucks, buses, and 
multipurpose passenger vehicles specified in S4.2.5.1.1 complying with 
S4.1.2.1 (as specified for passenger cars) shall be not less than 20 
percent of:
    (a) The average annual production of trucks, buses, and multipurpose 
passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded 
vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1991, and before September 1, 1994, by each manufacturer 
that produced such vehicles during each of those annual production 
periods, or
    (b) The manufacturer's total production of trucks, buses, and 
multipurpose

[[Page 781]]

passenger vehicle with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded 
vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less during the period specified in 
S4.2.5.1.1.
    S4.2.5.2 Trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a 
GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 
pounds or less manufactured on or after September 1, 1995 and before 
September 1, 1996.
    S4.2.5.2.1 Subject to S4.2.5.2.2 and S4.2.5.5 and except as provided 
in S4.2.4, each truck, bus, and multipurpose passenger vehicle, other 
than walk-in van-type trucks, vehicles designed to be exclusively sold 
to the U.S. Postal Service, and vehicles manufactured for operation by 
persons with disabilities, with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an 
unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less that is manufactured on 
or after September 1, 1995 and before September 1, 1996, shall comply 
with the requirements of S4.1.2.1, S4.1.2.2, or S4.1.2.3 (as specified 
for passenger cars). A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in 
noncompliance with this standard if its manufacturer establishes that it 
did not have reason to know in the exercise of due care that such 
vehicle is not in conformity with the requirement of this standard.
    S4.2.5.2.2 Subject to S4.2.5.5, the amount of trucks, buses, and 
multipurpose passenger vehicles specified in S4.2.5.2.1 complying with 
S4.1.2.1 (as specified for passenger cars) shall be not less than 50 
percent of:
    (a) The average annual production of trucks, buses, and multipurpose 
passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded 
vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1992, and before September 1, 1995, by each manufacturer 
that produced such vehicles during each of those annual production 
periods, or
    (b) The manufacturer's total production of trucks, buses, and 
multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and 
an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less during the period 
specified in S4.2.5.2.1.
    S4.2.5.3 Trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a 
GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 
pounds or less manufactured on or after September 1, 1996 and before 
September 1, 1997.
    S4.2.5.3.1 Subject to S4.2.5.3.2 and S4.2.5.5 and except as provided 
in S4.2.4, each truck, bus, and multipurpose passenger vehicle, other 
than walk-in van-type trucks, vehicles designed to be exclusively sold 
to the U.S. Postal Service, and vehicles manufactured for operation by 
persons with disabilities, with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an 
unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less that is manufactured on 
or after September 1, 1996 and before September 1, 1997, shall comply 
with the requirements of S4.1.2.1, S4.1.2.2, or S4.1.2.3 (as specified 
for passenger cars). A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in 
noncompliance with this standard if its manufacturer establishes that it 
did not have reason to know in the exercise of due care that such 
vehicle is not in conformity with the requirement of this standard.
    S4.2.5.3.2 Subject to S4.2.5.5, the amount of trucks, buses, and 
multipurpose passenger vehicles specified in S4.2.5.3.1 complying with 
S4.1.2.1 (as specified for passenger cars) shall be not less than 90 
percent of:
    (a) The average annual production of trucks, buses, and multipurpose 
passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded 
vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1993, and before September 1, 1996, by each manufacturer 
that produced such vehicles during each of those annual production 
periods, or
    (b) The manufacturer's total production of trucks, buses, and 
multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and 
an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less during the period 
specified in S4.2.5.3.1.
    S4.2.5.4 Alternative phase-in schedule. A manufacturer may, at its 
option, comply with the requirements of this section instead of 
complying with the requirements set forth in S4.2.5.1, S4.2.5.2, and 
S4.2.5.3.
    (a) Except as provided in S4.2.4, each truck, bus, and multipurpose 
passenger vehicle, other than walk-in van-type trucks, vehicles designed 
to be exclusively sold to the U.S. Postal Service, and vehicles 
manufactured for operation by persons with disabilities, with

[[Page 782]]

a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 
pounds or less that is manufactured on or after September 1, 1994 and 
before September 1, 1995 shall comply with the requirements of S4.1.2.1, 
S4.1.2.2, or S4.1.2.3 (as specified for passenger cars).
    (b) Except as provided in S4.2.4, each truck, bus, and multipurpose 
passenger vehicle, other than walk-in van-tape trucks, vehicles designed 
to be exclusively sold to the U.S. Postal Service, and vehicles 
manufactured for operation by persons with disabilities, with a GVWR of 
8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or 
less that is manufactured on or after September 1, 1995 shall comply 
with the requirements of S4.1.2.1 (as specified for passenger cars) of 
this standard. A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in noncompliance with 
this standard if its manufacturer establishes that it did not have 
reason to know in the exercise of due care that such vehicle is not in 
conformity with the requirement of this standard.
    (c) Each truck, bus, and multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR 
of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds 
or less manufactured on or after September 1, 1995, but before September 
1, 1998, whose driver's seating position complies with the requirements 
of S4.1.2.1(a) of this standard by means not including any type of seat 
belt and whose right front passenger's seating position is equipped with 
a manual Type 2 seat belt that complies with S5.1 of this standard, with 
the seat belt assembly adjusted in accordance with S7.4.2, shall be 
counted as a vehicle complying with S4.1.2.1.
    S4.2.5.5 Calculation of complying trucks, buses, and multipurpose 
passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded 
vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less.
    (a) For the purposes of the calculations required in S4.2.5.1.2, 
S4.2.5.2.2, and S4.2.5.3.2 of the number of trucks, buses, and 
multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and 
an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less that comply with 
S4.1.2.1 (as specified for passenger cars):
    (1) Each truck, bus, and multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR 
of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds 
or less whose driver's seating position complies with the requirements 
of S4.1.2.1(a) by means not including any type of seat belt and whose 
front right seating position complies with the requirements of 
S4.1.2.1(a) by any means is counted as 1.5 vehicles, and
    (2) Each truck, bus, and multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR 
of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds 
or less whose driver's seating position complies with the requirements 
of S4.1.2.1(a) by means not including any type of seat belt and whose 
right front passenger's seating position is equipped with a manual Type 
2 seat belt that complies with S5.1 of this standard, with the seat belt 
assembly adjusted in accordance with S7.4.2, is counted as one vehicle.
    (3) Each truck, bus, and multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR 
of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds 
or less that is manufactured in two or more stages or that is altered 
(within the meaning of Sec. 567.7 of this chapter) after having 
previously been certified in accordance with part 567 of this chapter is 
not subject to the requirements of S4.2.5.1.2, S4.2.5.2.2, and 
S4.2.5.3.2. Such vehicles may be excluded from all calculations of 
compliance with S4.2.5.1.2, S4.2.5.2.2, and S4.2.5.3.2.
    (b) For the purposes of complying with S4.2.5.1.2, a truck, bus, or 
multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and 
an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less may be counted if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after September 1, 1992, but before 
September 1, 1994, and
    (2) Is certified as complying with S4.1.2.1 (as specified for 
passenger cars).
    (c) For the purposes of complying with S4.2.5.2.2, a truck, bus, or 
multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and 
an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less may be counted if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after September 1, 1992, but before 
September 1, 1995,

[[Page 783]]

    (2) Is certified as complying with S4.1.2.1 (as specified for 
passenger cars), and
    (3) Is not counted toward compliance with S4.2.5.1.2.
    (d) For the purposes of complying with S4.2.5.3.2, a truck, bus, or 
multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and 
an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less may be counted if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after September 1, 1992, but before 
September 1, 1996,
    (2) Is certified as complying with S4.1.2.1 (as specified for 
passenger cars), and
    (3) Is not counted toward compliance with S4.2.5.1.2 or S4.2.5.2.2.
    S4.2.5.6 Trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a 
GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 
pounds or less produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S4.2.5.6.1 For the purposes of calculating average annual production 
for each manufacturer and the amount of vehicles manufactured by each 
manufacturer under S4.2.5.1.2, S4.2.5.2.2, or S4.2.5.3.2, a truck, bus, 
or multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less 
and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less produced by more 
than one manufacturer shall be attributed to a single manufacturer as 
follows, subject to S4.2.5.6.2:
    (a) A vehicle that is imported shall be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle that is manufactured in the United States by more than 
one manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be 
attributed to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    S4.2.5.6.2 A truck, bus, or multipurpose passenger vehicle with, 
GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 
pounds or less produced by more than one manufacturer shall be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified in an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR part 585, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S4.2.5.6.1 of this standard.
    S4.2.6 Trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a 
GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 
pounds or less manufactured on or after September 1, 1997. Each truck, 
bus, and multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or 
less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less, which is 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1997, shall comply with the 
requirements of S4.1.5.1 of this standard (as specified for passenger 
cars), except that walk-in van-type trucks and vehicles designed to be 
sold exclusively to the U.S. Postal Service may meet the requirements of 
S4.2.1.1 or S4.2.1.2 of this standard instead of the requirements of 
S4.1.5.1.
    S4.2.6.1 Trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a 
GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 
pounds or less manufactured on or after September 1, 1997 and before 
September 1, 1998.
    S4.2.6.1.1 The amount of trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger 
vehicles complying with the requirements of S4.1.5.1(a)(1) of this 
standard by means of an inflatable restraint system shall be not less 
than 80 percent of the manufacturer's total combined production of 
subject vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 1997 and before 
September 1, 1998. Each truck, bus, or multipurpose passenger vehicle 
with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 
5,500 pounds or less manufactured on or after September 1, 1997 and 
before September 1, 1998, whose driver's seating position complies with 
S4.1.5.1(a)(1) by means of an inflatable restraint system and whose 
right front passenger's seating position is equipped with a manual Type 
2 seat belt assembly that complies with S5.1 of this standard, with the 
seat belt assembly adjusted in accordance with S7.4.2 of this standard, 
shall be counted as a vehicle complying with S4.1.5.1(a)(1) by means of 
an inflatable restraint system. A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in 
noncompliance with this standard if its manufacturer establishes that it 
did not have reason to know in the exercise of due care that such 
vehicle is not in conformity with the requirement of this standard.

[[Page 784]]

    S4.2.6.1.2 Trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a 
GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 
pounds or less produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S4.2.6.1.2.1 For the purpose of calculating the production by each 
manufacturer during the period specified in S4.2.6.1.1, a truck, bus, or 
multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and 
an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less produced by more than 
one manufacturer shall be attributed to a single manufacturer as 
follows, subject to S4.2.6.1.2.2:
    (a) A vehicle that is imported into the United States shall be 
attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured within the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    S4.2.6.1.2.2 A truck, bus, or multipurpose passenger vehicle 
produced by more than one manufacturer shall be attributed to any one of 
the vehicle's manufacturers, as specified in an express written 
contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 
pursuant to part 585 of this chapter, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle otherwise would be 
attributed, pursuant to S4.2.6.1.2.1.
    S4.2.6.2 Trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a 
GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 
pounds or less manufactured on or after September 1, 1998. Each truck, 
bus, or multipurpose vehicle with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an 
unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1998 shall comply with the requirement of S4.1.5.1(a)(1) by 
means of an inflatable restraint system at the driver's and right front 
passenger's position. A vehicle shall not be deemed to be in 
noncompliance with this standard if its manufacturer establishes that it 
did not have reason to know in the exercise of due care that such 
vehicle is not in conformity with the requirement of this standard.
    S4.2.6.3 Trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles 
certified to S14. Each truck, bus, or multipurpose passenger vehicle 
with a GVWR of 3,855 kg (8,500 lb) or less and an unloaded vehicle 
weight of 2,495 kg (5,500 lb) or less certified to S14 shall, at each 
front outboard designated seating position, meet the applicable frontal 
crash protection requirements of S5.1.2(b) by means of an inflatable 
restraint system that requires no action by vehicle occupants.
    S4.2.7 Rear seating positions in trucks, and multipurpose passenger 
vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2007 with a GVWR of 
10,000 lbs. (4,536 kg) or less.
    S4.2.7.1 Except as provided in S4.2.7.2, S4.2.7.3, S4.2.7.4, 
S4.2.7.5, and S4.2.7.6, each truck and each multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, other than a motor home, a walk-in van-type truck, or a vehicle 
designed to be sold exclusively to the U.S. Postal Service with a GVWR 
of 10,000 lbs. (4,536 kg) or less, or a vehicle carrying chassis-mount 
camper with a gross vehicle weight rating of 8,500-10,000 lbs. (3,855-
4,536 kg), shall be equipped with a Type 2 seat belt assembly at every 
rear designated seating position other than a side-facing position, 
except that Type 2 seat belt assemblies installed in compliance with 
this requirement shall conform to Standard No. 209 (49 CFR 571.209) and 
with S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard. If a Type 2 seat belt assembly 
installed in conformity to this requirement incorporates any webbing 
tension-relieving device, the vehicle owner's manual shall include the 
information specified in S7.4.2(b) of this standard for the tension 
relieving device, and the vehicle shall conform to S7.4.2(c) of this 
standard. Side-facing designated seating positions shall be equipped, at 
the manufacturer's option, with a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly 
that conforms with S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard.
    S4.2.7.2 Any rear designated seating position with a seat that can 
be adjusted to be forward-or rear-facing and to face some other 
direction shall either:
    (a) Meet the requirements of S4.2.7.1 with the seat in any position 
in which it can be occupied while the vehicle is in motion; or
    (b) When the seat is in its forward-facing and/or rear-facing 
position or

[[Page 785]]

within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>30 degrees of either position, have a Type 
2 seat belt assembly with an upper torso restraint that conforms to S7.1 
and S7.2 of this standard and that adjusts by means of an emergency 
locking retractor that conforms to Standard No. 209 (49 CFR 571.209), 
which upper torso restraint may be detachable at either the buckle or 
the upper anchorage, but not both, and, when the seat is in any other 
position in which it can be occupied while the vehicle is in motion, 
have a Type 1 seat belt or the pelvic portion of a Type 2 seat belt 
assembly that conforms to S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard.
    S4.2.7.3 Any rear designated seating position on a readily removable 
seat (i.e., a seat designed to be easily removed and replaced by means 
installed by the manufacturer for that purpose) may meet the 
requirements of S4.2.7.1 by use of a belt incorporating a release 
mechanism that detaches both the lap and shoulder portion at either the 
upper or lower anchorage point, but not both. The means of detachment 
shall be a key or key-like object.
    S4.2.7.4 Any inboard designated seating position on a seat for which 
the entire seat back can be folded such that no part of the seat back 
extends above a horizontal plane located 250 mm above the highest SRP 
located on the seat may meet the requirements of S4.2.7.1 by use of a 
belt incorporating a release mechanism that detaches both the lap and 
shoulder portion at either the upper or lower anchorage point, but not 
both. The means of detachment shall be a key or key-like object.
    S4.2.7.5 Any rear designated seating position adjacent to a walkway 
located between the seat and the side of the vehicle, which walkway is 
designed to allow access to more rearward designated seating positions 
may meet the requirements of S4.2.7.1 by use of a belt incorporating a 
release mechanism that detaches both the lap and shoulder portion at 
either the upper or lower anchorage point, but not both. The means of 
detachment shall be a key or key-like object.
    S4.2.7.6 Any rear side-facing designated seating position shall have 
a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly that conforms to S7.1 and S7.2 of 
this standard.
    S4.3 Trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles, with GVWR of more 
than 10,000 pounds.
    S4.3.1 Trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 
more than 10,000 pounds, manufactured in or after January 1, 1972 and 
before September 1, 1990. Each truck and multipurpose passenger vehicle 
with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds, 
manufactured on or after January 1, 1972 and before September 1, 1990, 
shall meet the requirements of S4.3.1.1 or S4.3.1.2. A protection system 
that meets the requirements of S4.3.1.1 may be installed at one or more 
designated seating positions of a vehicle that otherwise meets the 
requirements of S4.3.1.2.
    S4.3.1.1 First option--complete passenger protection system. The 
vehicle shall meet the crash protection requirements of S5 by means that 
require no action by vehicle occupants.
    S4.3.1.2 Second option--belt system. The vehicle shall, at each 
designated seating position, have either a Type 1 or a Type 2 seat belt 
assembly that conforms to S571.209.
    S4.3.2 Trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 
more than 10,000 pounds, manufactured on or after September 1, 1990. 
Each truck and multipurpose passenger vehicle with a gross vehicle 
weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds, manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1990, shall meet the requirements of S4.3.2.1 or S4.3.2.2. 
A protection system that meets the requirements of S4.3.2.1 may be 
installed at one or more designated seating positions of a vehicle that 
otherwise meets the requirements of S4.3.2.2.
    S4.3.2.1 First option--complete passenger protection system. The 
vehicle shall meet the crash protection requirements of S5 by means that 
require no action by vehicle occupants.
    S4.3.2.2 Second option--belt system. The vehicle shall, at each 
designated seating position, have either a Type 1 or a Type 2 seat belt 
assembly that conforms to Sec. 571.209 of this part and S7.2 of this 
Standard. A Type 1 belt assembly or the pelvic portion of a dual

[[Page 786]]

retractor Type 2 belt assembly installed at a front outboard seating 
position shall include either an emergency locking retractor or an 
automatic locking retractor. If a seat belt assembly installed at a 
front outboard seating position includes an automatic locking retractor 
for the lap belt or the lap belt portion, that seat belt assembly shall 
comply with the following:
    (a) An automatic locking retractor used at a front outboard seating 
position that has some type of suspension system for the seat shall be 
attached to the seat structure that moves as the suspension system 
functions.
    (b) The lap belt or lap belt portion of a seat belt assembly 
equipped with an automatic locking retractor that is installed at a 
front outboard seating position must allow at least \3/4\ inch, but less 
than 3 inches, of webbing movement before retracting webbing to the next 
locking position.
    (c) Compliance with S4.3.2.2(b) of this standard is determined as 
follows:
    (1) The seat belt assembly is buckled and the retractor end of the 
seat belt assembly is anchored to a horizontal surface. The webbing for 
the lap belt or lap belt portion of the seat belt assembly is extended 
to 75 percent of its length and the retractor is locked after the 
initial adjustment.
    (2) A load of 20 pounds is applied to the free end of the lap belt 
or the lap belt portion of the belt assembly (i.e., the end that is not 
anchored to the horizontal surface) in the direction away from the 
retractor. The position of the free end of the belt assembly is 
recorded.
    (3) Within a 30 second period, the 20 pound load is slowly 
decreased, until the retractor moves to the next locking position. The 
position of the free end of the belt assembly is recorded again.
    (4) The difference between the two positions recorded for the free 
end of the belt assembly shall be at least \3/4\ inch but less than 3 
inches.
    S4.4 Buses.
    S4.4.1 Buses manufactured on or after January 1, 1972 and before 
September 1, 1990. Each bus manufactured on or after January 1, 1972 and 
before September 1, 1990, shall meet the requirements of S4.4.1.1 or 
S4.4.1.2.
    S4.4.1.1 First option--complete passenger protection system--driver 
only. The vehicle shall meet the crash protection requirements of S5, 
with respect to an anthropomorphic test dummy in the driver's designated 
seating position, by means that require no action by vehicle occupants.
    S4.4.1.2 Second option--belt system--driver only. The vehicle shall, 
at the driver's designated seating position, have either a Type 1 or a 
Type 2 seat belt assembly that conforms to S571.209.
    S4.4.2 Buses manufactured on or after September 1, 1990. Each bus 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1990, shall meet the requirements 
of S4.4.2.1 or S4.4.2.2.
    S4.4.2.1 First option--complete passenger protection system--driver 
only. The vehicle shall meet the crash protection requirements of S5, 
with respect to an anthropomorphic test dummy in the driver's designated 
seating position, by means that require no action by vehicle occupants.
    S4.4.2.2 Second option--belt system--driver only. The vehicle shall, 
at the driver's designated seating position, have either a Type 1 or a 
Type 2 seat belt assembly that conforms to Sec. 571.209 of this part 
and S7.2 of this Standard. A Type 1 belt assembly or the pelvic portion 
of a dual retractor Type 2 belt assembly installed at the driver's 
seating position shall include either an emergency locking retractor or 
an automatic locking retractor. If a seat belt assembly installed at the 
driver's seating position includes an automatic locking retractor for 
the lap belt or the lap belt portion, that seat belt assembly shall 
comply with the following:
    (a) An automatic locking retractor used at a driver's seating 
position that has some type of suspension system for the seat shall be 
attached to the seat structure that moves as the suspension system 
functions.
    (b) The lap belt or lap belt portion of a seat belt assembly 
equipped with an automatic locking retractor that is installed at the 
driver's seating position must allow at least \3/4\ inch, but less than 
3 inches, of webbing movement before retracting webbing to the next 
locking position.

[[Page 787]]

    (c) Compliance with S4.4.2.2(b) of this standard is determined as 
follows:
    (1) The seat belt assembly is buckled and the retractor end of the 
seat belt assembly is anchored to a horizontal surface. The webbing for 
the lap belt or lap belt portion of the seat belt assembly is extended 
to 75 percent of its length and the retractor is locked after the 
initial adjustment.
    (2) A load of 20 pounds is applied to the free end of the lap belt 
or the lap belt portion of the belt assembly (i.e., the end that is not 
anchored to the horizontal surface) in the direction away from the 
retractor. The position of the free end of the belt assembly is 
recorded.
    (3) Within a 30 second period, the 20 pound load is slowly 
decreased, until the retractor moves to the next locking position. The 
position of the free end of the belt assembly is recorded again.
    (4) The difference between the two positions recorded for the free 
end of the belt assembly shall be at least \3/4\ inch but less than 3 
inches.
    S4.4.3 Buses manufactured on or after September 1, 1991.
    S4.4.3.1 Each bus with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 
10,000 pounds shall comply with the requirements S4.4.2.1 or S4.4.2.2.
    S4.4.3.2 Except as provided in S4.4.3.2.2 and S4.4.3.2.3, each bus 
with a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less, except a 
school bus, shall be equipped with an integral Type 2 seat belt assembly 
at the driver's designated seating position and at the front and every 
rear forward-facing outboard designated seating position, and with a 
Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly at all other designated seating 
positions. Type 2 seat belt asemblies installed in compliance with this 
requirement shall comply with Standard No. 209 (49 CFR 571.209) and with 
S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard. If a Type 2 seat belt assembly installed 
in compliance with this requirement incorporates any webbing tension-
relieving device, the vehicle owner's manual shall include the 
information specified in S7.4.2(b) of this standard for the tension 
relieving device, and the vehicle shall comply with S7.4.2(c) of this 
standard.
    S4.4.3.2.1 As used in this section, a ``rear outboard designated 
position'' means any ``outboard designated seating position'' (as that 
term is defined at 49 CFR 571.3) that is rearward of the front seat(s), 
except any designated seating positions adjacent to a walkway located 
between the seat and the side of the vehicle, which walkway is designed 
to allow access to more rearward seating positions.
    S4.4.3.2.2 Any rear outboard designated seating position with a seat 
that can be adjusted to be forward-facing and to face some other 
direction shall either:
    (i) Meet the requirements of S4.4.3.2 with the seat in any position 
in which it can be occupied while the vehicle is in motion; or
    (ii) When the seat is in its forward-facing position, have a Type 2 
seat belt assembly with an upper torso restraint that conforms to S7.1 
and S7.2 of this standard and that adjusts by means of an emergency 
locking retractor that conforms with Standard No. 209 (49 CFR 571.209), 
which upper torso restraint may be detachable at the buckle, and, when 
the seat is in any position in which it can be occupied while the 
vehicle is in motion, have a Type 1 seat belt or the pelvic portion of a 
Type 2 seat belt assembly that conforms to S7.1 and S7.2 of this 
standard.
    S4.4.3.2.3 Any rear outboard designated seating position on a 
readily removable seat (that is, a seat designed to be easily removed 
and replaced by means installed by the manufacturer for that purpose) in 
a vehicle manufactured on or after September 1, 1992 shall meet the 
requirements of S4.4.3.2 and may use an upper torso belt that detaches 
at either its upper or lower anchorage point, but not both anchorage 
points, to meet those requirements. The means for detaching the upper 
torso belt may use a pushbutton action.
    S4.4.3.3 School buses with a gross vehicle weight rating of 4,536 kg 
(10,000 pounds) or less.
    (a) Each school bus with a gross vehicle weight rating of 4,536 kg 
(10,000 pounds) or less manufactured before October 21, 2011 must be 
equipped with an integral Type 2 seat belt assembly

[[Page 788]]

at the driver's designated seating position and at the right front 
passenger's designated seating position (if any), and with a Type 1 or 
Type 2 seat belt assembly at all other seating positions. Type 2 seat 
belt assemblies installed in compliance with this requirement must 
comply with Standard No. 209 (49 CFR 571.209) and with S7.1 and S7.2 of 
this standard. The lap belt portion of a Type 2 seat belt assembly 
installed at the driver's designated seating position and at the right 
front passenger's designated seating position (if any) must meet the 
requirements specified in S4.4.3.3(c).
    (b) Each school bus with a gross vehicle weight rating of 4,536 kg 
(10,000 pounds) or less manufactured on or after October 21, 2011 must 
be equipped with an integral Type 2 seat belt assembly at all seating 
positions. The seat belt assembly at the driver's designated seating 
position and at the right front passenger's designated seating position 
(if any) shall comply with Standard No. 209 (49 CFR 571.209) and with 
S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard. The lap belt portion of a Type 2 seat 
belt assembly installed at the driver's designated seating position and 
at the right front passenger's designated seating position (if any) 
shall meet the requirements specified in S4.4.3.3(c). Type 2 seat belt 
assemblies installed on the rear seats of school buses must meet the 
requirements of S7.1.1.5, S7.1.5 and S7.2 of this standard.
    (c) The lap belt portion of a Type 2 seat belt assembly installed at 
the driver's designated seating position and at the right front 
passenger's designated seating position (if any) shall include either an 
emergency locking retractor or an automatic locking retractor, which 
retractor shall not retract webbing to the next locking position until 
at least \3/4\ inch of webbing has moved into the retractor. In 
determining whether an automatic locking retractor complies with this 
requirement, the webbing is extended to 75 percent of its length and the 
retractor is locked after the initial adjustment. If a Type 2 seat belt 
assembly installed in compliance with this requirement incorporates any 
webbing tension-relieving device, the vehicle owner's manual shall 
include the information specified in S7.4.2(b) of this standard for the 
tension-relieving device, and the vehicle shall comply with S7.4.2(c) of 
this standard.
    S4.4.4 Buses with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded 
vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1994. Each bus with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less and an 
unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds or less manufactured on or after 
September 1, 1984 shall comply with the requirements of S4.2.5 and 
S4.2.6 of this standard, as applicable, for front seating positions, and 
with the requirements of S4.4.3.2 or S4.4.3.3 of this standard, as 
applicable, for all rear seating positions.
    S4.4.5 Buses with a GVWR of 10,000 lb (4,536 kg) or less, except 
school buses, manufactured on or after September 1, 2007.
    S4.4.5 Buses with a GVWR of 10,000 lb (4,536 kg) or less, except 
school buses, manufactured on or after September 1, 2007.
    S4.4.5.1 Except as provided in S4.4.5.2, S4.4.5.3, S4.4.5.4, 
S4.4.5.5 and S4.4.5.6, each bus with a gross vehicle weight rating of 
10,000 lb (4,536 kg) or less, except school buses, shall be equipped 
with a Type 2 seat belt assembly at every designated seating position 
other than a side-facing position. Type 2 seat belt assemblies installed 
in compliance with this requirement shall conform to Standard No. 209 
(49 CFR 571.209) and with S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard. If a Type 2 
seat belt assembly installed in compliance with this requirement 
incorporates a webbing tension relieving device, the vehicle owner's 
manual shall include the information specified in S7.4.2(b) of this 
standard for the tension relieving device, and the vehicle shall conform 
to S7.4.2(c) of this standard. Side-facing designated seating positions 
shall be equipped, at the manufacturer's option, with a Type 1 or Type 2 
seat belt assembly.
    S4.4.5.2 Any rear designated seating position with a seat that can 
be adjusted to be forward- or rear-facing and to face some other 
direction shall either:
    (a) Meet the requirements of S4.4.5.1 with the seat in any position 
in which

[[Page 789]]

it can be occupied while the vehicle is in motion; or
    (b) (1) When the seat is in its forward-facing and/or rear-facing 
position, or within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>30 degrees of either position, 
have a Type 2 seat belt assembly with an upper torso restraint that
    (i) Conforms to S7.1 and S7.2 of this standard,
    (ii) Adjusts by means of an emergency locking retractor conforming 
to Standard No. 209 (49 CFR 571.209), and
    (iii) May be detachable at the buckle or upper anchorage, but not 
both, and
    (2) When the seat is in any position in which it can be occupied 
while the vehicle is in motion, have a Type 1 seat belt or the pelvic 
portion of a Type 2 seat belt assembly that conforms to S7.1 and S7.2 of 
this standard.
    S4.4.5.3 Any rear designated seating position on a readily removable 
seat (that is, a seat designed to be easily removed and replaced by 
means installed by the manufacturer for that purpose) may meet the 
requirements of S4.4.5.1 by use of a belt incorporating a release 
mechanism that detaches both the lap and shoulder portion at either the 
upper or lower anchorage point, but not both. The means of detachment 
shall be a key or key-like object.
    S4.4.5.4 Any inboard designated seating position on a seat for which 
the entire seat back can be folded such that no part of the seat back 
extends above a horizontal plane located 250 mm above the highest SRP 
located on the seat may meet the requirements of S4.4.5.1 by use of a 
belt incorporating a release mechanism that detaches both the lap and 
shoulder portion at either the upper or lower anchorage point, but not 
both. The means of detachment shall be a key or key-like object.
    S4.4.5.5 Any rear designated seating position adjacent to a walkway 
located between the seat, which walkway is designed to allow access to 
more rearward designated seating positions, and not adjacent to the side 
of the vehicle may meet the requirements of S4.4.5.1 by use of a belt 
incorporating a release mechanism that detaches both the lap and 
shoulder portion at either the upper or lower anchorage point, but not 
both. The means of detachment shall be a key or key-like object.
    S4.4.5.6 Any rear side-facing designated seating position shall have 
a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly that conforms to S7.1 and S7.2 of 
this standard.
    S4.5 Other general requirements.
    S4.5.1 Labeling and owner's manual information.
    (a) Air bag maintenance or replacement information. If the vehicle 
manufacturer recommends periodic maintenance or replacement of an 
inflatable restraint system, as that term is defined in S4.1.5.1(b) of 
this standard, installed in a vehicle, that vehicle shall be labeled 
with the recommended schedule for maintenance or replacement. The 
schedule shall be specified by month and year, or in terms of vehicle 
mileage, or by intervals measured from the date appearing on the vehicle 
certification label provided pursuant to 49 CFR part 567. The label 
shall be permanently affixed to the vehicle within the passenger 
compartment and lettered in English in block capital and numerals not 
less than three thirty-seconds of an inch high. This label may be 
combined with the label required by S4.5.1(b) of this standard to appear 
on the sun visor. If some regular maintenance or replacement of the 
inflatable restraint system(s) in a vehicle is recommended by the 
vehicle manufacturer, the owner's manual shall also set forth the 
recommended schedule for maintenance or replacement.
    (b) Sun visor air bag warning label. (1) Except as provided in 
S4.5.1(b)(2), each vehicle shall have a label permanently affixed to 
either side of the sun visor, at the manufacturer's option, at each 
front outboard seating position that is equipped with an inflatable 
restraint. The label shall conform in content to the label shown in 
either Figure 6a or 6b of this standard, as appropriate, and shall 
comply with the requirements of S4.5.1(b)(1)(i) through 
S4.5.1(b)(1)(iv).
    (i) The heading area shall be yellow with the word ``WARNING'' and 
the alert symbol in black.
    (ii) The message area shall be white with black text. The message 
area shall be no less than 30 cm\2\ (4.7 in\2\).
    (iii) The pictogram shall be black with a red circle and slash on a 
white background. The pictogram shall be no less than 30 mm (1.2 in) in 
diameter.

[[Page 790]]

    (iv) If the vehicle does not have a back seat, the label shown in 
Figure 6a or 6b may be modified by omitting the statements: ``The BACK 
SEAT is the SAFEST place for children.''
    (2) Vehicles certified to meet the requirements specified in S19, 
S21, or S23 before September 1, 2003 shall have a label permanently 
affixed to either side of the sun visor, at the manufacturer's option, 
at each front outboard seating position that is equipped with an 
inflatable restraint. The label shall conform in content to the label 
shown either in Figure 8 or Figure 11 of this standard, at the 
manufacturer's option, and shall comply with the requirements of 
S4.5.1(b)(2)(i) through S4.5.1(b)(2)(iv).
    (i) The heading area shall be yellow with the word ``WARNING'' and 
the alert symbol in black.
    (ii) The message area shall be white with black text. The message 
area shall be no less than 30 cm\2\ (4.7 in\2\).
    (iii) The pictogram shall be black on a white background. The 
pictogram shall be no less than 30 mm (1.2 in) in length.
    (iv) If the vehicle does not have a back seat, the label shown in 
the figure may be modified by omitting the statement: ``The BACK SEAT is 
the SAFEST place for CHILDREN.''
    (v) If the vehicle does not have a back seat or the back seat is too 
small to accommodate a rear-facing child restraint consistent with 
S4.5.4.1, the label shown in the figure may be modified by omitting the 
statement: ``Never put a rear-facing child seat in the front.''
    (3) Vehicles certified to meet the requirements specified in S19, 
S21, or S23 on or after September 1, 2003 shall have a label permanently 
affixed to either side of the sun visor, at the manufacturer's option, 
at each front outboard seating position that is equipped with an 
inflatable restraint. The label shall conform in content to the label 
shown in Figure 11 of this standard and shall comply with the 
requirements of S4.5.1(b)(3)(i) through S4.5.1(b)(3)(iv).
    (i) The heading area shall be yellow with the word ``WARNING'' and 
the alert symbol in black.
    (ii) The message area shall be white with black text. The message 
area shall be no less than 30 cm\2\ (4.7 in\2\).
    (iii) The pictogram shall be black on a white background. The 
pictogram shall be no less than 30 mm (1.2 in) in length.
    (iv) If the vehicle does not have a back seat, the label shown in 
the figure may be modified by omitting the statement: ``The BACK SEAT is 
the SAFEST place for CHILDREN.''
    (v) If the vehicle does not have a back seat or the back seat is too 
small to accommodate a rear-facing child restraint consistent with 
S4.5.4.1, the label shown in the figure may be modified by omitting the 
statement: ``Never put a rear-facing child seat in the front.''
    (4) Design-specific information.
    (i) A manufacturer may request in writing that the Administrator 
authorize additional design-specific information to be placed on the air 
bag sun visor label for vehicles certified to meet the requirements 
specified in S19, S21, or S23. The label shall conform in content to the 
label shown in Figure 11 of this standard and shall comply with the 
requirements of S4.5.1(b)(3)(i) through S4.5.1(b)(3)(iv), except that 
the label may contain additional, design-specific information, if 
authorized by the Administrator.
    (ii) The request must meet the following criteria:
    (A) The request must provide a mock-up of the label with the 
specific language or pictogram the manufacturer requests permission to 
add to the label.
    (B) The additional information conveyed by the requested label must 
be specific to the design or technology of the air bag system in the 
vehicle and not applicable to all or most air bag systems.
    (C) The additional information conveyed by the requested label must 
address a situation in which foreseeable occupant behavior can affect 
air bag performance.
    (iii) The Administrator shall authorize or reject a request by a 
manufacturer submitted under S4.5.1(b)(4)(i) on the basis of whether the 
additional information could result in information overload or would 
otherwise make the

[[Page 791]]

label confusing or misleading. No determination will be made as to 
whether, in light of the above criteria, the particular information best 
prevents information overload or whether the information best addresses 
a particular air bag risk. Moreover, the Administrator will not verify 
or vouch for the accuracy of the information.
    (5) Limitations on additional labels.
    (i) Except for the information on an air bag maintenance label 
placed on the sun visor pursuant to S4.5.1(a) of this standard, or on a 
utility vehicle warning label placed on the sun visor that conforms in 
content, form, and sequence to the label shown in Figure 1 of 49 CFR 
575.105, no other information shall appear on the same side of the sun 
visor to which the sun visor air bag warning label is affixed.
    (ii) Except for the information in an air bag alert label placed on 
the sun visor pursuant to S4.5.1(c) of this standard, or on a utility 
vehicle warning label placed on the sun visor that conforms in content, 
form, and sequence to the label shown in Figure 1 of 49 CFR 575.105, no 
other information about air bags or the need to wear seat belts shall 
appear anywhere on the sun visor.
    (c) Air bag alert label. If the label required by S4.5.1(b) is not 
visible when the sun visor is in the stowed position, an air bag alert 
label shall be permanently affixed to that visor so that the label is 
visible when the visor is in that position. The label shall conform in 
content to the sun visor label shown in Figure 6(c) of this standard, 
and shall comply with the requirements of S4.5.1(c)(1) through 
S4.5.1(c)(3).
    (1) The message area shall be black with yellow text. The message 
area shall be no less than 20 square cm.
    (2) The pictogram shall be black with a red circle and slash on a 
white background. The pictogram shall be no less than 20 mm in diameter.
    (3) If a vehicle does not have an inflatable restraint at any front 
seating position other than that for the driver, the pictogram may be 
omitted from the label shown in Figure 6c.
    (d) At the option of the manufacturer, the requirements in S4.5.1(b) 
and S4.5.1(c) for labels that are permanently affixed to specified parts 
of the vehicle may instead be met by permanent marking or molding of the 
required information.
    (e) Label on the dashboard. (1) Except as provided in S4.5.1(e)(2), 
each vehicle that is equipped with an inflatable restraint for the 
passenger position shall have a label attached to a location on the 
dashboard or the steering wheel hub that is clearly visible from all 
front seating positions. The label need not be permanently affixed to 
the vehicle. This label shall conform in content to the label shown in 
Figure 7 of this standard, and shall comply with the requirements of 
S4.5.1(e)(1)(i) through S4.5.1(e)(1)(iii).
    (i) The heading area shall be yellow with the word ``WARNING'' and 
the alert symbol in black.
    (ii) The message area shall be white with black text. The message 
area shall be no less than 30 cm\2\ (4.7 in\2\).
    (iii) If the vehicle does not have a back seat, the label shown in 
Figure 7 may be modified by omitting the statement: ``The back seat is 
the safest place for children 12 and under.''
    (2) Vehicles certified to meet the requirements specified in S19, 
S21, and S23 before December 1, 2003, that are equipped with an 
inflatable restraint for the passenger position shall have a label 
attached to a location on the dashboard or the steering wheel hub that 
is clearly visible from all front seating positions. The label need not 
be permanently affixed to the vehicle. This label shall conform in 
content to the label shown in either Figure 9 or Figure 12 of this 
standard, at manufacturer's option, and shall comply with the 
requirements of S4.5.1(e)(2)(i) through S4.5.1(e)(2)(iv).
    (i) The heading area shall be yellow with black text.
    (ii) The message area shall be white with black text. The message 
area shall be no less than 30 cm\2\ (4.7 in\2\).
    (iii) If the vehicle does not have a back seat, the labels shown in 
Figures 9 and 12 may be modified by omitting the statement: ``The back 
seat is the safest place for children.''
    (iv) If the vehicle does not have a back seat or the back seat is 
too small to accommodate a rear-facing child restraint consistent with 
S4.5.4.1, the

[[Page 792]]

label shown in Figure 12 may be modified by omitting the statement: 
``Never put a rear-facing child seat in the front.''
    (3) Vehicles certified to meet the requirements specified in S19, 
S21, and S23 on or after December 1, 2003, that are equipped with an 
inflatable restraint for the passenger position shall have a label 
attached to a location on the dashboard or the steering wheel hub that 
is clearly visible from all front seating positions. The label need not 
be permanently affixed to the vehicle. This label shall conform in 
content to the label shown in Figure 12 of this standard and shall 
comply with the requirements of S4.5.1(e)(3)(i) through 
S4.5.1(e)(3)(iv).
    (i) The heading area shall be yellow with black text.
    (ii) The message area shall be white with black text. The message 
area shall be no less than 30 cm\2\ (4.7 in\2\).
    (iii) If the vehicle does not have a back seat, the label shown in 
Figure 12 may be modified by omitting the statement: ``The back seat is 
the safest place for children.''
    (iv) If the vehicle does not have a back seat or the back seat is 
too small to accommodate a rear-facing child restraint consistent with 
S4.5.4.1, the label shown in Figure 12 may be modified by omitting the 
statement: ``Never put a rear-facing child seat in the front.''
    (f) Information to appear in owner's manual. (1) The owner's manual 
for any vehicle equipped with an inflatable restraint system shall 
include an accurate description of the vehicle's air bag system in an 
easily understandable format. The owner's manual shall include a 
statement to the effect that the vehicle is equipped with an air bag and 
lap/shoulder belt at both front outboard seating positions, and that the 
air bag is a supplemental restraint at those seating positions. The 
information shall emphasize that all occupants, including the driver, 
should always wear their seat belts whether or not an air bag is also 
provided at their seating position to minimize the risk of severe injury 
or death in the event of a crash. The owner's manual shall also provide 
any necessary precautions regarding the proper positioning of occupants, 
including children, at seating positions equipped with air bags to 
ensure maximum safety protection for those occupants. The owner's manual 
shall also explain that no objects should be placed over or near the air 
bag on the instrument panel, because any such objects could cause harm 
if the vehicle is in a crash severe enough to cause the air bag to 
inflate.
    (2) For any vehicle certified to meet the requirements specified in 
S14.5, S15, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25, the manufacturer shall also 
include in the vehicle owner's manual a discussion of the advanced 
passenger air bag system installed in the vehicle. The discussion shall 
explain the proper functioning of the advanced air bag system and shall 
provide a summary of the actions that may affect the proper functioning 
of the system. The discussion shall include, at a minimum, accurate 
information on the following topics:
    (i) A presentation and explanation of the main components of the 
advanced passenger air bag system.
    (ii) An explanation of how the components function together as part 
of the advanced passenger air bag system.
    (iii) The basic requirements for proper operation, including an 
explanation of the actions that may affect the proper functioning of the 
system.
    (iv) For vehicles certified to meet the requirements of S19.2, S21.2 
or S23.2, a complete description of the passenger air bag suppression 
system installed in the vehicle, including a discussion of any 
suppression zone.
    (v) An explanation of the interaction of the advanced passenger air 
bag system with other vehicle components, such as seat belts, seats or 
other components.
    (vi) A summary of the expected outcomes when child restraint 
systems, children and small teenagers or adults are both properly and 
improperly positioned in the passenger seat, including cautionary advice 
against improper placement of child restraint systems.
    (vii) For vehicles certified to meet the requirements of S19.2, 
S21.2 or S23.2, a discussion of the telltale light, specifying its 
location in the vehicle and explaining when the light is illuminated.

[[Page 793]]

    (viii) Information on how to contact the vehicle manufacturer 
concerning modifications for persons with disabilities that may affect 
the advanced air bag system.
    (g) Additional labels placed elsewhere in the vehicle interior. The 
language on additional air bag warning labels placed elsewhere in the 
vehicle interior shall not cause confusion or contradiction of any of 
the statements required in the air bag sun visor label, and shall be 
expressed in symbols, words and abbreviations required by this standard.
    S4.5.2 Readiness indicator. An occupant protection system that 
deploys in the event of a crash shall have a monitoring system with a 
readiness indicator. The indicator shall monitor its own readiness and 
shall be clearly visible from the driver's designated seating position. 
If the vehicle is equipped with a single readiness indicator for both a 
driver and passenger air bag, and if the vehicle is equipped with an on-
off switch permitted by S4.5.4 of this standard, the readiness indicator 
shall monitor the readiness of the driver air bag when the passenger air 
bag has been deactivated by means of the on-off switch, and shall not 
illuminate solely because the passenger air bag has been deactivated by 
the manual on-off switch. A list of the elements of the system being 
monitored by the indicator shall be included with the information 
furnished in accordance with S4.5.1 but need not be included on the 
label.
    S4.5.3 Automatic belts. Except as provided in S4.5.3.1, a seat belt 
assembly that requires no action by vehicle occupants (hereinafter 
referred to as an ``automatic belt'') may be used to meet the crash 
protection requirements of any option under S4. and in place of any seat 
belt assembly otherwise required by that option.
    S4.5.3.1. An automatic belt that provides only pelvic restraint may 
not be used pursuant to S4.5.3 to meet the requirements of an option 
that requires a Type 2 seat belt assembly. An automatic belt may not be 
used pursuant to S4.5.3 to meet the requirements of S4.1.5.1(a)(3) for a 
Type 2 seat belt assembly at any seating position equipped with an 
inflatable restraint system pursuant to S4.1.5.2, S4.1.5.3, S4.2.6.1, or 
S4.2.6.2 of this standard.
    S4.5.3.2 An automatic belt, furnished pursuant to S4.5.3, that 
provides both pelvic and upper torso restraint may have either a 
detachable or nondetachable upper torso portion, notwithstanding 
provisions of the option under which it is furnished.
    S4.5.3.3 An automatic belt furnished pursuant to S4.5.3 shall:
    (a) Conform to S7.1 and have a single emergency release mechanism 
whose components are readily accessible to a seated occupant.
    (b) In place of a warning system that conforms to S7.3 of this 
standard, be equipped with the following warning system: At the left 
front designated seating position (driver's position), a warning system 
that activates a continuous or intermittent audible signal for a period 
of not less than 4 seconds and not more than 8 seconds and that 
activates a continuous or flashing warning light visible to the driver 
for not less than 60 seconds (beginning when the vehicle ignition switch 
is moved to the ``on'' or the ``start'' position) when condition (A) 
exists simultaneously with condition (B), and that activates a 
continuous or flashing warning light, visible to the driver, displaying 
the identifying symbol for the seat belt telltale shown in Table 2 of 
Standard No. 101 (49 CFR 571.101), or, at the option of the manufacturer 
if permitted by Standard No. 101, displaying the words ``Fasten Seat 
Belts'' or ``Fasten Belts,'' for as long as condition (A) exists 
simultaneously with condition (C).
    (A) The vehicle's ignition switch is moved to the ``on'' position or 
to the ``start'' position.
    (B) The driver's automatic belt is not in use, as determined by the 
belt latch mechanism not being fastened, or, if the automatic belt is 
non-detachable, by the emergency release mechanism being in the released 
position. In the case of motorized automatic belts, the determination of 
use shall be made once the belt webbing is in its locked protective mode 
at the anchorage point.
    (C) The belt webbing of a motorized automatic belt system is not in 
its

[[Page 794]]

locked, protective mode at the anchorage point.
    S4.5.3.4 An automatic belt furnished pursuant to S4.5.3 that is not 
required to meet the perpendicular frontal crash protection requirements 
of S5.1 shall conform to the webbing, attachment hardware, and assembly 
performance requirements of Standard No. 209.
    S4.5.3.5 A replacement automatic belt shall meet the requirements of 
S4.1(k) of Standard No. 209.
    S4.5.4 Passenger air bag manual cut-off device. Passenger cars, 
trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles manufactured before 
September 1, 2012 may be equipped with a device that deactivates the air 
bag installed at the right front outboard seating position in the 
vehicle, if all the conditions in S4.5.4.1 through S4.5.4.4 are 
satisfied.
    S4.5.4.1 The vehicle complies with either S4.5.4.1(a) or 
S4.5.4.1(b).
    (a) The vehicle has no forward-facing designated seating positions 
to the rear of the front seating positions.
    (b) With the seats and seat backs adjusted as specified in S8.1.2 
and S8.1.3, the distance, measured along a longitudinal horizontal line 
tangent to the highest point of the rear seat bottom in the longitudinal 
vertical plane described in either S4.5.4.1(b)(1) or S4.5.4.1(b)(2), 
between the rearward surface of the front seat back and the forward 
surface of the rear seat back is less than 720 millimeters.
    (1) In a vehicle equipped with front bucket seats, the vertical 
plane at the centerline of the driver's seat cushion.
    (2) In a vehicle equipped with front bench seating, the vertical 
plane which passes through the center of the steering wheel rim.
    S4.5.4.2 The device is operable by means of the ignition key for the 
vehicle. The device shall be separate from the ignition switch for the 
vehicle, so that the driver must take some action with the ignition key 
other than inserting it or turning it in the ignition switch to 
deactivate the passenger air bag. Once deactivated, the passenger air 
bag shall remain deactivated until it is reactivated by means of the 
device.
    S4.5.4.3 A telltale light in the interior of the vehicle shall be 
illuminated whenever the passenger air bag is turned off by means of the 
on-off switch. The telltale shall be clearly visible to occupants of all 
front seating positions. ``Clearly visible'' means within the normal 
range of vision throughout normal driving operations. The telltale:
    (a) Shall be yellow;
    (b) Shall have the identifying words ``PASSENGER AIR BAG OFF'' or 
``PASS AIR BAG OFF'' on the telltale or within 25 millimeters of the 
telltale;
    (c) Shall remain illuminated for the entire time that the air bag is 
``off'';
    (d) Shall not be illuminated at any time when the air bag is ``on''; 
and,
    (e) Shall not be combined with the readiness indicator required by 
S4.5.2 of this standard.
    S4.5.4.4 The vehicle owner's manual shall provide, in a readily 
understandable format:
    (a) Complete instructions on the operation of the on-off switch;
    (b) A statement that the on-off switch should only be used when a 
member of a passenger risk group identified in the request form in 
appendix B to part 595 of this chapter is occupying the right front 
passenger seating position; and,
    (c) A warning about the safety consequences of using the on-off 
switch at other times.
    S4.5.5 Rear seat belt requirements for passenger cars and for 
trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 4,536 
kg (10,000 lbs.) or less.
    S4.5.5.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 and 
before September 1, 2007.
    (a) For vehicles manufactured for sale in the United States on or 
after September 1, 2005, and before September 1, 2007, a percentage of 
the manufacturer's production as specified in S4.5.5.2, shall meet the 
requirements specified in either S4.1.5.5 for complying passenger cars, 
S4.2.7 for complying trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles, or 
S4.4.5 for complying buses.
    (b) A manufacturer that sells two or fewer carlines, as that term is 
defined at 49 CFR 583.4, in the United States may, at the option of the 
manufacturer, meet the requirements of this paragraph, instead of 
paragraph (a) of

[[Page 795]]

this section. Each vehicle manufactured on or after September 1, 2006, 
and before September 1, 2007, shall meet the requirements specified in 
S4.1.5.5 for complying passenger cars, S4.2.7 for complying trucks & 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, and S4.4.5 for complying buses. Credits 
for vehicles manufactured before September 1, 2006 are not to be applied 
to the requirements of this paragraph.
    (c) Vehicles that are manufactured in two or more stages or that are 
altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) after having previously 
been certified in accordance with part 567 of this chapter are not 
subject to the requirements of S4.5.5.1.
    (d) Vehicles that are manufactured by a manufacturer that produces 
fewer than 5,000 vehicles annually for sale in the United States are not 
subject to the requirements of S4.5.5.1.
    S4.5.5.2 Phase-in schedule.
    (a) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2005, and before 
September 1, 2006. Subject to S4.5.5.3(a), for vehicles manufactured on 
or after September 1, 2005, and before September 1, 2006, the amount of 
vehicles complying with S4.1.5.5 for complying passenger cars, S4.2.7 
for complying trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles, or S4.4.5 for 
complying buses shall be not less than 50 percent of:
    (1) If the manufacturer has manufactured vehicles for sale in the 
United States during both of the two production years immediately prior 
to September 1, 2005, the manufacturer's average annual production of 
vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2003, and before 
September 1, 2006, or
    (2) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2005, and 
before September 1, 2006.
    (b) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2006, and before 
September 1, 2007. Subject to S4.5.5.3(b), for vehicles manufactured on 
or after September 1, 2006, and before September 1, 2007, the amount of 
vehicles complying with S4.1.5.5 for complying passenger cars, S4.2.7 
for complying trucks and multipurpose passenger vehicles, or S4.4.5 for 
complying buses shall be not less than 80 percent of:
    (1) If the manufacturer has manufactured vehicles for sale in the 
United States during both of the two production years immediately prior 
to September 1, 2006, the manufacturer's average annual production of 
vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2004, and before 
September 1, 2007, or
    (2) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2006, and 
before September 1, 2007.
    S4.5.5.3 Calculation of complying vehicles.
    (a) For the purposes of complying with S4.5.5.2(a), a manufacturer 
may count a vehicle if it is manufactured on or after February 7, 2005, 
but before September 1, 2006.
    (b) For the purposes of complying with S4.5.5.2(b), a manufacturer 
may count a vehicle if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after February 7, 2005, but before 
September 1, 2007, and
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S4.5.5.2(a).
    S4.5.5.4 Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer.
    (a) For the purpose of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer under S4.5.5.2, a vehicle produced by more than one 
manufacturer shall be attributed to a single manufacturer as follows, 
subject to paragraph (b) of this section.
    (1) A vehicle that is imported shall be attributed to the importer.
    (2) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    (b) A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer shall be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR part 585, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under paragraph (a) of this section.
    S4.6 Dynamic testing of manual belt systems.
    S4.6.1 Each truck and multipurpose passenger vehicle with a GVWR of 
8,500 pounds or less and an unloaded weight

[[Page 796]]

of less than 5,500 pounds that is manufactured on or after September 1, 
1991, and is equipped with a Type 2 seat belt assembly at a front 
outboard designated seating position pursuant to S4.1.2.3 shall meet the 
frontal crash protection requirements of S5.1 at those designated 
seating positions with a test dummy restrained by a Type 2 seat belt 
assembly that has been adjusted in accordance with S7.4.2. A vehicle 
shall not be deemed to be in noncompliance with this standard if its 
manufacturer establishes that it did not have reason to know in the 
exercise of due care that such vehicle is not in conformity with the 
requirement of this standard.
    S4.6.2 Any manual seat belt assembly subject to the requirements of 
S5.1 of this standard by virtue of any provision of this standard other 
than S4.1.2.1(c)(2) does not have to meet the requirements of S4.2(a)-
(f) and S4.4 of Standard No. 209 (Sec. 571.209).
    S4.6.3 Any manual seat belt assembly subject to the requirements of 
S5.1 of this standard by virtue of S4.1.2.1(c)(2) does not have to meet 
the elongation requirements of S4.2(c), S4.4(a)(2), S4.4(b)(4), and 
S4.4(b)(5) of Standard No. 209 (Sec. 571.209).
    S4.7 Incorporation by reference. Society of Automotive Engineers 
(SAE) Recommended Practice J211/1 rev. Mar 95, ``Instrumentation for 
Impact Test--Part 1--Electronic Instrumentation,'' (SAE J211/1 rev. Mar 
95) is incorporated by reference in sections S4.13, S6.6, S13.1, 
S15.3.6, S19.4.4, S21.5.5, S23.5.5, and S25.4, Department of Defense 
MIL-S-13192P, 1988, ``Military Specification, Shoes, Men's, Dress, 
Oxford'', Amendment 1, October 14, 1994 (MIL-S-13192P) is incorporated 
by reference in section S8.1.8, and Department of Defense MIL-S-21711E, 
1982, ``Military Specification, Shoes, Women's'', Amendment 2, October 
14, 1994 (MIL-S-21711E) is incorporated by reference in section S16.2.5, 
and are thereby made part of this standard. The Director of the Federal 
Register approved the material incorporated by reference in accordance 
with 5 U.S.C. 552 (a) and 1 CFR part 51. A copy of SAE J211/1 rev. Mar 
95 may be obtained from SAE at the Society of Automotive Engineers, 
Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096. A copy of SAE J211/1 
rev. Mar 95 and copies of MIL-S-13192P and MIL-S-21711E may be inspected 
at NHTSA's technical reference library, 400 Seventh Street, S.W., Room 
5109, Washington, DC, or at the National Archives and Records 
Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this 
material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/
federal--register/code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    S4.8 Selection of compliance options. Where manufacturer options are 
specified, the manufacturer shall select the option by the time it 
certifies the vehicle and may not thereafter select a different option 
for the vehicle. Each manufacturer shall, upon request from the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, provide information regarding 
which of the compliance options it has selected for a particular vehicle 
or make/model.
    S4.9 Values and tolerances. Wherever a range of values or tolerances 
are specified, requirements shall be met at all values within the range 
of values or tolerances. With respect to the positioning of 
anthropomorphic dummies, torso and spine angle tolerances shall be 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 degrees unless otherwise stated, and leg, thigh, 
foot, and arm angle tolerances shall be <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees 
unless otherwise stated.
    S4.10 Metric values. Specifications and requirements are given in 
metric units with English units provided for reference. The metric 
values are controlling.
    S4.11 Test duration for purpose of measuring injury criteria.
    (a) For all barrier crashes, the injury criteria specified in this 
standard shall be met when calculated based on data recorded for 300 
milliseconds after the vehicle strikes the barrier.
    (b) For the 3-year-old and 6-year-old child dummy low risk 
deployment tests, the injury criteria specified in this standard shall 
be met when calculated on data recorded for 100 milliseconds after the 
initial deployment of the air bag.
    (c) For 12-month-old infant dummy low risk deployment tests, the 
injury criteria specified in the standard shall

[[Page 797]]

be met when calculated on data recorded for 125 milliseconds after the 
initiation of the final stage of air bag deployment designed to deploy 
in any full frontal rigid barrier crash up to 64 km/h (40 mph).
    (d) For driver-side low risk deployment tests, the injury criteria 
shall be met when calculated based on data recorded for 125 milliseconds 
after the initiation of the final stage of air bag deployment designed 
to deploy in any full frontal rigid barrier crash up to 26 km/h (16 
mph).
    (e) The requirements for dummy containment shall continue until both 
the vehicle and the dummies have ceased moving.
    S4.12 Suppression systems that do not detect dummies. For vehicles 
with occupant sensing systems that recognize humans and not dummies, 
such that the air bag or bags would not function in crash tests, the 
manufacturer shall provide NHTSA with information and equipment 
necessary to circumvent the suppression system for the crash test such 
that the restraint system operates as if 5th percentile adult female 
humans and 50th percentile adult male humans are seated in the vehicle.
    S4.13 Data channels. For vehicles manufactured on or after September 
1, 2001, all data channels used in injury criteria calculations shall be 
filtered using a phaseless digital filter, such as the Butterworth four-
pole phaseless digital filter specified in appendix C of SAE J211/1, 
rev. Mar 95, incorporated by reference in S4.7.
    S5 Occupant crash protection requirements for the 50th percentile 
adult male dummy.
    S5.1 Frontal barrier crash test.
    S5.1.1 Belted test. (a) Vehicles not certified to S14. Impact a 
vehicle traveling longitudinally forward at any speed, up to and 
including 48 km/h (30 mph), into a fixed rigid barrier that is 
perpendicular to the line of travel of the vehicle, and at any angle up 
to 30 degrees in either direction from the perpendicular to the line of 
travel of the vehicle, under the applicable conditions of S8 and S10. 
The test dummy specified in S8.1.8 placed in each front outboard 
designated seating position shall meet the injury criteria of S6.1, 
S6.2(a), S6.3, S6.4(a), and S6.5 of this standard.
    (b) Vehicles certified to S14--(1) Vehicles certified to S14.1 or 
S14.2. Impact a vehicle traveling longitudinally forward at any speed, 
up to and including 48 km/h (30 mph), into a fixed rigid barrier that is 
perpendicular to the line of travel of the vehicle under the applicable 
conditions of S8 and S10. The test dummy specified in S8.1.8 placed in 
each front outboard designated seating position shall meet the injury 
criteria of S6.1, S6.2(b), S6.3, S6.4(b), S6.5, and S6.6 of this 
standard.
    (2) Vehicles certified to S14.3 or S14.4. Impact a vehicle traveling 
longitudinally forward at any speed, up to and including 56 km/h (35 
mph), into a fixed rigid barrier that is perpendicular to the line of 
travel of the vehicle under the applicable conditions of S8 and S10. The 
test dummy specified in S8.1.8 placed in each front outboard designated 
seating position shall meet the injury criteria of S6.1, S6.2(b), S6.3, 
S6.4(b), S6.5, and S6.6 of this standard.
    S5.1.2 Unbelted test. (a) Vehicles not certified to the requirements 
of S13 or S14. At the manufacturer's option, either one of the following 
unbelted tests shall be met:
    (1) Impact a vehicle traveling longitudinally forward at any speed 
up to and including 48 km/h (30 mph), into a fixed rigid barrier that is 
perpendicular to the line of travel of the vehicle, and at any angle up 
to 30 degrees in either direction from the perpendicular to the line of 
travel of the vehicle, under the applicable conditions of S8 and S10, 
excluding S10.7, S10.8, and S10.9. The test dummy specified in S8.1.8 
placed in each front outboard designated seating position shall meet the 
injury criteria of S6.1, S6.2(a), S6.3, S6.4(a), and S6.5 of this 
standard.
    (2) Impact a vehicle traveling longitudinally forward at any speed 
between 32 km/h (20 mph) and 40 km/h (25 mph), inclusive, into a fixed 
rigid barrier that is perpendicular to the line of travel of the 
vehicle, and at any angle up to 30 degrees in either direction from the 
perpendicular to the line of travel of the vehicle, under the applicable 
conditions of S8 and S10, excluding S10.7, S10.8, and S10.9. The test 
dummy specified in S8.1.8 placed in each front outboard designated 
seating position shall meet the injury criteria of S6.1, S6.2(b),

[[Page 798]]

S6.3, S6.4(b), S6.5, and S6.6 of this standard.
    (b) Vehicles certified to the requirements of S14. Impact a vehicle 
traveling longitudinally forward at any speed between 32 km/h (20 mph) 
and 40 km/h (25 mph), inclusive, into a fixed rigid barrier that is 
perpendicular to the line of travel of the vehicle, and at any angle up 
to 30 degrees in either direction from the perpendicular to the line of 
travel of the vehicle, under the applicable conditions of S8 and S10, 
excluding S10.7, S10.8, and S10.9. The test dummy specified in S8.1.8 
placed in each front outboard designated seating position shall meet the 
injury criteria of S6.1, S6.2(b), S6.3, S6.4(b), S6.5, and S6.6 of this 
standard.
    S5.2 Lateral moving barrier crash test. Impact a vehicle laterally 
on either side by a barrier moving at 20 mph under the applicable 
conditions of S8. The test dummy specified in S8.1.8 positioned in the 
front outboard designated seating position adjacent to the impacted side 
shall meet the injury criteria of S6.2 and S6.3 of this standard.
    S5.3 Rollover. Subject a vehicle to a rollover test in either 
lateral direction at 30 mph under the applicable conditions of S8 of 
this standard with a test dummy specified in S8.1.8 placed in the front 
outboard designated seating position on the vehicle's lower side as 
mounted on the test platform. The test dummy shall meet the injury 
criteria of S6.1 of this standard.
    S6 Injury criteria for the part 572, subpart E, Hybrid III test 
dummy.
    S6.1 All portions of the test dummy shall be contained within the 
outer surfaces of the vehicle passenger compartment.
    S6.2 Head injury criteria. (a)(1) For any two points in time, 
t<INF>1</INF> and t<INF>2</INF>, during the event which are separated by 
not more than a 36 millisecond time interval and where t<INF>1</INF> is 
less than t<INF>2</INF>, the head injury criterion (HIC<INF>36</INF>) 
shall be determined using the resultant head acceleration at the center 
of gravity of the dummy head, a<INF>r</INF>, expressed as a multiple of 
g (the acceleration of gravity) and shall be calculated using the 
expression:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12MY00.003

    (2) The maximum calculated HIC<INF>36</INF> value shall not exceed 
1,000.
    (b)(1) For any two points in time, t<INF>1</INF> and t<INF>2</INF>, 
during the event which are separated by not more than a 15 millisecond 
time interval and where t<INF>1</INF> is less than t<INF>2</INF>, the 
head injury criterion (HIC<INF>15</INF>) shall be determined using the 
resultant head acceleration at the center of gravity of the dummy head, 
a<INF>r</INF>, expressed as a multiple of g (the acceleration of 
gravity) and shall be calculated using the expression:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12MY00.004

    (2) The maximum calculated HIC<INF>15</INF> value shall not exceed 
700.
    S6.3 The resultant acceleration calculated from the output of the 
thoracic instrumentation shown in drawing 78051.218, revision R 
incorporated by reference in part 572, subpart E of this chapter shall 
not exceed 60 g's, except for intervals whose cumulative duration is not 
more than 3 milliseconds.
    S6.4 Chest deflection. (a) Compressive deflection of the sternum 
relative to the spine shall not exceed 76 mm (3.0 in).
    (b) Compressive deflection of the sternum relative to the spine 
shall not exceed 63 mm (2.5 in).
    S6.5 The force transmitted axially through each upper leg shall not 
exceed 2250 pounds.
    S6.6 Neck injury. When measuring neck injury, each of the following 
injury criteria shall be met.
    (a) Nij.
    (1) The shear force (Fx), axial force (Fz), and bending moment (My) 
shall be measured by the dummy upper neck load cell for the duration of 
the crash event as specified in S4.11. Shear force, axial force, and 
bending moment shall be filtered for Nij purposes at SAE J211/1 rev. Mar 
95 Channel Frequency Class 600 (see S4.7).
    (2) During the event, the axial force (Fz) can be either in tension 
or compression while the occipital condyle

[[Page 799]]

bending moment (Mocy) can be in either flexion or extension. This 
results in four possible loading conditions for Nij: tension-extension 
(Nte), tension-flexion (Ntf), compression-extension (Nce), or 
compression-flexion (Ncf).
    (3) When calculating Nij using equation S6.6(a)(4), the critical 
values, Fzc and Myc, are:
    (i) Fzc = 6806 N (1530 lbf) when Fz is in tension
    (ii) Fzc = 6160 N (1385 lbf) when Fz is in compression
    (iii) Myc = 310 Nm (229 lbf-ft) when a flexion moment exists at the 
occipital condyle
    (iv) Myc = 135 Nm (100 lbf-ft) when an extension moment exists at 
the occipital condyle.
    (4) At each point in time, only one of the four loading conditions 
occurs and the Nij value corresponding to that loading condition is 
computed and the three remaining loading modes shall be considered a 
value of zero. The expression for calculating each Nij loading condition 
is given by:

    Nij = (Fz/Fzc) + (Mocy/Myc)

    (5) None of the four Nij values shall exceed 1.0 at any time during 
the event.
    (b) Peak tension. Tension force (Fz), measured at the upper neck 
load cell, shall not exceed 4170 N (937 lbf) at any time.
    (c) Peak compression. Compression force (Fz), measured at the upper 
neck load cell, shall not exceed 4000 N (899 lbf) at any time.
    S6.7 Unless otherwise indicated, instrumentation for data 
acquisition, data channel frequency class, and moment calculations are 
the same as given for the 49 CFR Part 572, Subpart E Hybrid III test 
dummy.
    S7. Seat belt assembly requirements. As used in this section, a law 
enforcement vehicle means any vehicle manufactured primarily for use by 
the United States or by a State or local government for police or other 
law enforcement purposes.
    S7.1 Adjustment.
    S7.1.1 Except as specified in S7.1.1.1 and S7.1.1.2, the lap belt of 
any seat belt assembly furnished in accordance with S4.1.2 shall adjust 
by means of any emergency-locking or automatic-locking retractor that 
conforms to Sec. 571.209 to fit persons whose dimensions range from 
those of a 50th percentile 6-year-old child to those of a 95th 
percentile adult male and the upper torso restraint shall adjust by 
means of an emergency-locking retractor or a manual adjusting device 
that conforms to Sec. 571.209 to fit persons whose dimensions range 
from those of a 5th percentile adult female to those of a 95th 
percentile adult male, with the seat in any position, the seat back in 
the manufacturer's nominal design riding position, and any adjustable 
anchorages adjusted to the manufacturer's nominal design position for a 
50th percentile adult male occupant. However, an upper torso restraint 
furnished in accordance with S4.1.2.3.1(a) shall adjust by means of an 
emergency-locking retractor that conforms to Sec. 571.209.
    S7.1.1.1 A seat belt assembly installed at the driver's seating 
position shall adjust to fit persons whose dimensions range from those 
of a 5th-percentile adult female to those of a 95th-percentile adult 
male.
    S7.1.1.2 (a) A seat belt assembly installed in a motor vehicle other 
than a forward control vehicle at any designated seating position other 
than the outboard positions of the front and second seats shall adjust 
either by a retractor as specified in S7.1.1 or by a manual adjusting 
device that conforms to Sec. 571.209.
    (b) A seat belt assembly installed in a forward control vehicle at 
any designated seating position other than the front outboard seating 
positions shall adjust either by a retractor as specified in S7.1.1 or 
by a manual adjusting device that conforms to Sec. 571.209.
    (c) A seat belt assembly installed in a forward-facing rear outboard 
seating position in a law enforcement vehicle shall adjust either by a 
retractor as specified in S7.1.1 or by a manual adjusting device that 
conforms to Sec. 571.209.
    S7.1.1.3 A Type 1 lap belt or the lap belt portion of any Type 2 
seat belt assembly installed at any forward-facing outboard designated 
seating position of a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of 
10,000 pounds or less to comply with a requirement of this standard, 
except walk-in van-type vehicles

[[Page 800]]

and school buses, and except in rear seating positions in law 
enforcement vehicles, shall meet the requirements of S7.1 by means of an 
emergency locking retractor that conforms to Standard No. 209 (49 CFR 
571.209).
    S7.1.1.4 Notwithstanding the other provisions of S7.1--S7.1.1.3, 
emergency-locking retractors on belt assemblies located in positions 
other than front outboard designated seating postions may be equipped 
with a manual webbing adjustment device capable of causing the retractor 
that adjusts the lap belt to lock when the belt is buckled.
    S7.1.1.5 Passenger cars, and trucks, buses, and multipurpose 
passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less manufactured on 
or after September 1, 1995 shall meet the requirements of S7.1.1.5(a), 
S7.1.1.5(b) and S7.1.1.5(c), subject to S7.1.1.5(d).
    (a) Each designated seating position, except the driver's position, 
and except any right front seating position that is equipped with an 
automatic belt, that is in any motor vehicle, except walk-in van-type 
vehicles and vehicles manufactured to be sold exclusively to the U.S. 
Postal Service, and that is forward-facing or can be adjusted to be 
forward-facing, shall have a seat belt assembly whose lap belt portion 
is lockable so that the seat belt assembly can be used to tightly secure 
a child restraint system. The means provided to lock the lap belt or lap 
belt portion of the seat belt assembly shall not consist of any device 
that must be attached by the vehicle user to the seat belt webbing, 
retractor, or any other part of the vehicle. Additionally, the means 
provided to lock the lap belt or lap belt portion of the seat belt 
assembly shall not require any inverting, twisting or otherwise 
deforming of the belt webbing.
    (b) If the means provided pursuant to S7.1.1.5(a) to lock the lap 
belt or lap belt portion of any seat belt assembly makes it necessary 
for the vehicle user to take some action to activate the locking 
feature, the vehicle owner's manual shall include a description in words 
and/or diagrams describing how to activate the locking feature so that 
the seat belt assembly can tightly secure a child restraint system and 
how to deactivate the locking feature to remove the child restraint 
system.
    (c) Except for seat belt assemblies that have no retractor or that 
are equipped with an automatic locking retractor, compliance with 
S7.1.1.5(a) is demonstrated by the following procedure:
    (1) With the seat in any adjustment position, buckle the seat belt 
assembly. Complete any procedures recommended in the vehicle owner's 
manual, pursuant to S7.1.1.5(b), to activate any locking feature for the 
seat belt assembly.
    (2) Locate a reference point A on the safety belt buckle. Locate a 
reference point B on the attachment hardware or retractor assembly at 
the other end of the lap belt or lap belt portion of the seat belt 
assembly. Adjust the lap belt or lap belt portion of the seat belt 
assembly pursuant to S7.1.1.5(c)(1) as necessary so that the webbing 
between points A and B is at the maximum length allowed by the belt 
system. Measure and record the distance between points A and B along the 
longitudinal centerline of the webbing for the lap belt or lap belt 
portion of the seat belt assembly.
    (3) Readjust the belt system so that the webbing between points A 
and B is at any length that is 5 inches or more shorter than the maximum 
length of the webbing.
    (4) Apply a pre-load of 10 pounds, using the webbing tension pull 
device described in Figure 5 of this standard, to the lap belt or lap 
belt portion of the seat belt assembly in a vertical plane parallel to 
the longitudinal axis of the vehicle and passing through the seating 
reference point of the designated seating position whose belt system is 
being tested. Apply the pre-load in a horizontal direction toward the 
front of the vehicle with a force application angle of not less than 5 
degrees nor more than 15 degrees above the horizontal. Measure and 
record the length of belt between points A and B along the longitudinal 
centerline of the webbing for the lap belt or lap belt portion of the 
seat belt assembly while the pre-load is being applied.
    (5) Apply a load of 50 pounds, using the webbing tension pull device 
described in Figure 5 of this standard, to the lap belt or lap belt 
portion of the

[[Page 801]]

seat belt assembly in a vertical plane parallel to the longitudinal axis 
of the vehicle and passing through the seating reference point of the 
designated seating position whose belt system is being tested. The load 
is applied in a horizontal direction toward the front of the vehicle 
with a force application angle of not less than 5 degrees nor more than 
15 degrees above the horizontal at an onset rate of not more than 50 
pounds per second. Attain the 50 pound load in not more than 5 seconds. 
If webbing sensitive emergency locking retroactive are installed as part 
of the lap belt assembly or lap belt portion of the seat belt assembly, 
apply the load at a rate less than the threshold value for lock-up 
specified by the manufacturer. Maintain the 50 pound load for at least 5 
seconds before the measurements specified in S7.1.1.5(c)(6) are obtained 
and recorded.
    (6) Measure and record the length of belt between points A and B 
along the longitudinal centerline of the webbing for the lap belt or lap 
belt portion of the seat belt assembly.
    (7) The difference between the measurements recorded under 
S7.1.1.5(c) (6) and (4) shall not exceed 2 inches.
    (8) The difference between the measurements recorded under 
S7.1.1.5(c) (6) and (2) shall be 3 inches or more.
    (d) For passenger cars, and trucks and multipurpose passenger 
vehicles with a GVWR of 8,500 pounds or less, and buses with a GVWR of 
10,000 lb or less manufactured on or after September 1, 2012, each 
designated seating position that is equipped with a child restraint 
anchorage system meeting the requirements of Sec. 571.225 need not meet 
the requirements of this S7.1.1.5.
    S7.1.2 Except as provided in S7.1.2.1, S7.1.2.2, and S7.1.2.3, for 
each Type 2 seat belt assembly which is required by Standard No. 208 (49 
CFR 571.208), the upper anchorage, or the lower anchorage nearest the 
intersection of the torso belt and the lap belt, shall include a movable 
component which has a minimum of two adjustment positions. The distance 
between the geometric center of the movable component at the two extreme 
adjustment positions shall be not less than five centimeters, measured 
linearly. If the component required by this paragraph must be manually 
moved between adjustment positions, information shall be provided in the 
owner's manual to explain how to adjust the seat belt and warn that 
misadjustment could reduce the effectiveness of the safety belt in a 
crash.
    S7.1.2.1 As an alternative to meeting the requirement of S7.1.2, a 
Type 2 seat belt assembly shall provide a means of automatically moving 
the webbing in relation to either the upper anchorage, or the lower 
anchorage nearest the intersection of the torso belt and the lap belt. 
The distance between the midpoint of the webbing at the contact point of 
the webbing and the anchorage at the extreme adjustment positions shall 
be not less than five centimeters, measured linearly.
    S7.1.2.2 The requirements of S7.1.2 do not apply the anchorages of a 
Type 2 seat belt assembly installed:
    (a) At a seat which is adjustable fore and aft while the vehicle is 
in motion and whose seat frame above the fore-and-aft adjuster is part 
of each of the assembly's seat belt anchorages, as defined in S3 of 
Standard No. 210 (49 CFR 571.210).
    (b) At a seat that is not adjustable fore and aft while the vehicle 
is in motion.
    S7.1.2.3 The requirements of S7.1.2 do not apply to any truck with a 
gross vehicle weight rating of more than 8,500 pounds manufactured 
before January 1, 1998.
    S7.1.3 The intersection of the upper torso belt with the lap belt in 
any Type 2 seat belt assembly furnished in accordance with S4.1.1 or 
S4.1.2, with the upper torso manual adjusting device, if provided, 
adjusted in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, shall be at 
least 6 inches from the front vertical centerline of a 50th-percentile 
adult male occupant, measured along the centerline of the lap belt, with 
the seat in its rearmost and lowest adjustable position and with the 
seat back in the manufacturer's nominal design riding position.
    S7.1.4 The weights and dimensions of the vehicle occupants referred 
to in this standard are as follows:

[[Page 802]]



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       50th-percentile  6-    50th-percentile  10-    5th-percentile adult  50th-percentile adult  95th-percentile adult
                                         year-old child          year-old child              female                  male                   male
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Weight.............................  47.3 pounds...........  82.1 pounds...........  102 pounds...........  164 pounds <plus-      215 pounds.
                                                                                                             minus<ls-thn-eq>3.
Erect sitting height...............  25.4 inches...........  28.9 inches...........  30.9 inches..........  35.7 inches <plus-     38 inches.
                                                                                                             minus<ls-thn-eq>.1.
Hip breadth (sitting)..............  8.4 inches............  10.1 inches...........  12.8 inches..........  14.7 inches <plus-     16.5 inches.
                                                                                                             minus<ls-thn-eq>.7.
Hip circumference (sitting)........  23.9 inches...........  27.4 inches (standing)  36.4 inches..........  42 inches............  47.2 inches.
Waist circumference (sitting)......  20.8 inches...........  25.7 inches (standing)  23.6 inches..........  32 inches <plus-       42.5 inches.
                                                                                                             minus<ls-thn-eq>.6.
Chest depth........................  6.0 inches............  7.5 inches............  9.3 inches <plus-      10.5 inches..........
                                                                                      minus<ls-thn-eq>.2.
Chest circumference:
    (nipple).......................  30.5 inches...........
    (upper)........................  26.3 inches...........  29.8 inches...........  37.4 inches <plus-     44.5 inches..........
                                                                                      minus<ls-thn-eq>.6.
    (lower)........................  26.6 inches...........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S7.1.5 School bus bench seats. The seat belt assemblies on school 
bus bench seats will operate by means of any emergency-locking retractor 
that conforms to 49 CFR 571.209 to restrain persons whose dimensions 
range from those of a 50th percentile 6-year-old child to those of a 
50th percentile 10-year-old, for small occupant seating positions, as 
defined in 49 CFR 571.222, and to those of a 50th percentile adult male 
for all other seating positions. The seat back may be in any position.
    S7.2 Latch mechanism. Except as provided in S7.2(e), each seat belt 
assembly installed in any vehicle shall have a latch mechanism that 
complies with the requirements specified in S7.2(a) through (d).
    (a) The components of the latch mechanism shall be accessible to a 
seated occupant in both the stowed and operational positions;
    (b) The latch mechanism shall release both the upper torso restraint 
and the lap belt simultaneously, if the assembly has a lap belt and an 
upper torso restraint that require unlatching for release of the 
occupant;
    (c) The latch mechanism shall release at a single point; and;
    (d) The latch mechanism shall release by a pushbutton action.
    (e) The requirements of S7.2 do not apply to any automatic belt 
assembly. The requirements specified in S7.2(a) through (c) do not apply 
to any safety belt assembly installed at a forward-facing rear outboard 
seating position in a law enforcement vehicle.
    S7.3 (a) A seat belt assembly provided at the driver's seating 
position shall be equipped with a warning system that, at the option of 
the manufacturer, either--
    (1) Activates a continuous or intermittent audible signal for a 
period of not less than 4 seconds and not more than 8 seconds and that 
activates a continuous or flashing warning light visible to the driver 
displaying the identifying symbol for the seat belt telltale shown in 
Table 2 of FMVSS 101 or, at the option of the manufacturer if permitted 
by FMVSS 101, displaying the words ``Fasten Seat Belts'' or ``Fasten 
Belts'', for not less than 60 seconds (beginning when the vehicle 
ignition switch is moved to the ``on'' or the ``start'' position) when 
condition (b) exists simultaneously with condition (c), or that
    (2) Activates, for a period of not less than 4 seconds and not more 
than 8 seconds (beginning when the vehicle ignition switch is moved to 
the ``on'' or the ``start'' position), a continuous or flashing warning 
light visible to the driver, displaying the identifying symbol of the 
seat belt telltale shown in Table 2 of FMVSS 101 or, at the option of 
the manufacturer if permitted by FMVSS 101, displaying the words 
``Fasten Seat Belts'' or ``Fasten Belts'', when condition (b) exists, 
and a continuous or intermittent audible signal when condition (b) 
exists simultaneously with condition (c).
    (b) The vehicle's ignition switch is moved to the ``on'' position or 
to the ``start'' position.
    (c) The driver's lap belt is not in use, as determined, at the 
option of the manufacturer, either by the belt latch mechanism not being 
fastened, or by the belt not being extended at least 4 inches from its 
stowed position.

[[Page 803]]

    S7.4 Seat belt comfort and convenience.
    (a) Automatic seat belts. Automatic seat belts installed in any 
vehicle, other than walk-in van-type vehicles, which has a gross vehicle 
weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less, and which is manufactured on or 
after September 1, 1986, shall meet the requirements of S7.4.1, S7.4.2, 
and S7.4.3.
    (b) Manual seat belts.
    (1) Vehicles manufactured after September 1, 1986. Manual seat belts 
installed in any vehicle, other than manual Type 2 belt systems 
installed in the front outboard seating positions in passenger cars or 
manual belts in walk-in van-type vehicles, which have a gross vehicle 
weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less, shall meet the requirements of 
S7.4.3, S7.4.4, S7.4.5, and S7.4.6.
    (2) Vehicles manufactured after September 1, 1989.
    (i) If the automatic restraint requirement of S4.1.4 is rescinded 
pursuant to S4.1.5, then manual seat belts installed in a passenger car 
shall meet the requirements of S7.1.1.3(a), S7.4.2, S7.4.3, S7.4.4, 
S7.4.5, and S7.4.6.
    (ii) Manual seat belts installed in a bus, multipurpose passenger 
vehicle and truck with a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or 
less, except for walk-in van-type vehicles, shall meet the requirements 
of S7.4.3, S7.4.4, S7.4.5, and S7.4.6.
    S7.4.1 Convenience hooks. Any manual convenience hook or other 
device that is provided to stow seat belt webbing to facilitate entering 
or exiting the vehicle shall automatically release the webbing when the 
automatic belt system is otherwise operational and shall remain in the 
released mode for as long as (a) exists simultaneously with (b), or, at 
the manufacturer's option, for as long as (a) exists simultaneously with 
(c)--
    (a) The vehicle ignition switch is moved to the ``on'' or ``start'' 
position;
    (b) The vehicle's drive train is engaged;
    (c) The vehicle's parking brake is in the released mode 
(nonengaged).
    S7.4.2 Webbing tension-relieving device. Each vehicle with an 
automatic seat belt assembly or with a Type 2 manual seat belt assembly 
that must meet the occupant crash protection requirements of S5.1 of 
this standard installed at a front outboard designated seating position, 
and each vehicle with a Type 2 manual seat belt assembly installed at a 
rear outboard designated seating position in compliance with a 
requirement of this standard, that has either automatic or manual 
tension-relieving devices permitting the introduction of slack in the 
webbing of the shoulder belt (e.g., ``comfort clips'' or ``window-
shade'' devices) shall:
    (a) Comply with the requirements of S5.1 with the shoulder belt 
webbing adjusted to introduce the maximum amount of slack recommended by 
the vehicle manufacturer pursuant to S7.4.2(b).
    (b) Have a section in the vehicle owner's manual that explains how 
the tension-relieving device works and specifies the maximum amount of 
slack (in inches) recommended by the vehicle manufacturer to be 
introduced into the shoulder belt under normal use conditions. The 
explanation shall also warn that introducing slack beyond the amount 
specified by the manufacturer could significantly reduce the 
effectiveness of the shoulder belt in a crash; and
    (c) Have, except for open-body vehicles with no doors, an automatic 
means to cancel any shoulder belt slack introduced into the belt system 
by a tension-relieving device. In the case of an automatic safety belt 
system, cancellation of the tension-relieving device shall occur each 
time the adjacent vehicle door is opened. In the case of a manual seat 
belt required to meet S5.1, cancellation of the tension-relieving device 
shall occur, at the manufacturer's option, either each time the adjacent 
door is opened or each time the latchplate is released from the buckle. 
In the case of a Type 2 manual seat belt assembly installed at a rear 
outboard designated seating position, cancellation of the tension-
relieving device shall occur, at the manufacturer's option either each 
time the door designed to allow the occupant of that seating position 
entry and egress of the vehicle is opened or each time the latchplate is 
released from the buckle. In the case of open-body vehicles with no 
doors, cancellation of the tension-

[[Page 804]]

relieving device may be done by a manual means.
    S7.4.3 Belt contact force. Except for manual or automatic seat belt 
assemblies that incorporate a webbing tension-relieving device, the 
upper torso webbing of any seat belt assembly shall not exert more than 
0.7 pounds of contact force when measured normal to and one inch from 
the chest of an anthropomorphic test dummy, positioned in accordance 
with S10 of this standard in the seating position for which that seat 
belt assembly is provided, at the point where the centerline of the 
torso belt crosses the midsagittal line on the dummy's chest.
    S7.4.4 Latchplate access. Any seat belt assembly latchplate that is 
located outboard of a front outboard seating position in accordance with 
S4.1.2 shall also be located within the outboard reach envelope of 
either the outboard arm or the inboard arm described in S10.7 and Figure 
3 of this standard, when the latchplate is in its normal stowed position 
and any adjustable anchorages are adjusted to the manufacturer's nominal 
design position for a 50th percentile adult male occupant. There shall 
be sufficient clearance between the vehicle seat and the side of the 
vehicle interior to allow the test block defined in Figure 4 of this 
standard unhindered transit to the latchplate or buckle.
    S7.4.5 Retraction. When tested under the conditions of S8.1.2 and 
S8.1.3, with anthropomorphic dummies whose arms have been removed and 
which are positioned in accordance with S10 of this standard in the 
front outboard seating positions and restrained by the belt systems for 
those positions, the torso and lap belt webbing of any of those seat 
belt systems shall automatically retract to a stowed position either 
when the adjacent vehicle door is in the open position and the seat belt 
latchplate is released, or, at the option of the manufacturer, when the 
latchplate is released. That stowed position shall prevent any part of 
the webbing or hardware from being pinched when the adjacent vehicle 
door is closed. A belt system with a tension-relieving device in an 
open-bodied vehicle with no doors shall fully retract when the tension-
relieving device is deactivated. For the purposes of these retraction 
requirements, outboard armrests, which are capable of being stowed, on 
vehicle seats shall be placed in their stowed position.
    S7.4.6 Seat belt guides and hardware.
    S7.4.6.1 (a) Any manual seat belt assembly whose webbing is designed 
to pass through the seat cushion or between the seat cushion and seat 
back shall be designed to maintain one of the following three seat belt 
parts (the seat belt latchplate, the buckle, or the seat belt webbing) 
on top of or above the seat cushion under normal conditions (i.e., 
conditions other than when belt hardware is intentionally pushed behind 
the seat by a vehicle occupant). In addition, the remaining two seat 
belt parts must be accessible under normal conditions.
    (b) The requirements of S7.4.6.1(a) do not apply to: (1) seats whose 
seat cushions are movable so that the seat back serves a function other 
than seating, (2) seats which are removable, or (3) seats which are 
movable so that the space formerly occupied by the seat can be used for 
a secondary function.
    S7.4.6.2 The buckle and latchplate of a manual seat belt assembly 
subject to S7.4.6.1 shall not pass through the guides or conduits 
provided for in S7.4.6.1 and fall behind the seat when the events listed 
below occur in the order specified: (a) The belt is completely retracted 
or, if the belt is nonretractable, the belt is unlatched; (b) the seat 
is moved to any position to which it is designed to be adjusted; and (c) 
the seat back, if foldable, is folded forward as far as possible and 
then moved backward into position. The inboard receptacle end of a seat 
belt assembly installed at a front outboard designated seating position 
shall be accessible with the center arm rest in any position to which it 
can be adjusted (without having to move the armrest).
    S8. Test conditions.
    S8.1 General conditions. The following conditions apply to the 
frontal, lateral, and rollover tests. Except for S8.1.1(d), the 
following conditions apply to the alternative unbelted sled test set 
forth in S13 from March 19, 1997 until September 1, 2001.

[[Page 805]]

    S8.1.1 Except as provided in paragraph (c) of S8.1.1, the vehicle, 
including test devices and instrumentation, is loaded as follows:
    (a) Passenger cars. A passenger car is loaded to its unloaded 
vehicle weight plus its rated cargo and luggage capacity weight, secured 
in the luggage area, plus the weight of the necessary anthropomorphic 
test devices.
    (b) Multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses. A 
multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, or bus is loaded to its unloaded 
vehicle weight plus 300 pounds or its rated cargo and luggage capacity 
weight, whichever is less, secured in the load carrying area and 
distributed as nearly as possible in proportion to its gross axle weight 
ratings, plus the weight of the necessary anthropomorphic test devices. 
For the purposes of Sec. 8.1.1, unloaded vehicle weight does not 
include the weight of work-performing accessories. Vehicles are tested 
to a maximum unloaded vehicle weight of 5,500 pounds.
    (c) Fuel system capacity. With the test vehicle on a level surface, 
pump the fuel from the vehicle's fuel tank and then operate the engine 
until it stops. Then, add Stoddard solvent to the test vehicle's fuel 
tank in an amount which is equal to not less than 92 and not more than 
94 percent of the fuel tank's usable capacity stated by the vehicle's 
manufacturer. In addition, add the amount of Stoddard solvent needed to 
fill the entire fuel system from the fuel tank through the engine's 
induction system.
    (d) Vehicle test attitude. Determine the distance between a level 
surface and a standard reference point on the test vehicle's body, 
directly above each wheel opening, when the vehicle is in its ``as 
delivered'' condition. The ``as delivered'' condition is the vehicle as 
received at the test site, with 100 percent of all fluid capacities and 
all tires inflated to the manufacturer's specifications as listed on the 
vehicle's tire placard. Determine the distance between the same level 
surface and the same standard reference points in the vehicle's ``fully 
loaded condition.'' The ``fully loaded condition'' is the test vehicle 
loaded in accordance with S8.1.1 (a) or (b), as applicable. The load 
placed in the cargo area shall be center over the longitudinal 
centerline of the vehicle. The pretest vehicle attitude shall be equal 
to either the as delivered or fully loaded attitude or between the as 
delivered attitude and the fully loaded attitude.
    S8.1.2 Adjustable seats are in the adjustment position midway 
between the forwardmost and rearmost positions, and if separately 
adjustable in a vertical direction, are at the lowest position. If an 
adjustment position does not exist midway between the forwardmost and 
rearmost positions, the closest adjustment position to the rear of the 
midpoint is used.
    S8.1.3 Place adjustable seat backs in the manufacturer's nominal 
design riding position in the manner specified by the manufacturer. 
Place any adjustable anchorages at the manufacturer's nominal design 
position for a 50th percentile adult male occupant. Place each 
adjustable head restraint in its highest adjustment position. Adjustable 
lumbar supports are positioned so that the lumbar support is in its 
lowest adjustment position.
    S8.1.4 Adjustable steering controls are adjusted so that the 
steering wheel hub is at the geometric center of the locus it describes 
when it is moved through its full range of driving positions.
    S8.1.5 Movable vehicle windows and vents are placed in the fully 
closed position, unless the vehicle manufacturer chooses to specify a 
different adjustment position prior to the time it certifies the 
vehicle.
    S8.1.6 Convertibles and open-body type vehicles have the top, if 
any, in place in the closed passenger compartment configuration.
    S8.1.7 Doors are fully closed and latched but not locked.
    S8.1.8 Anthropomorphic test dummies.
    S8.1.8.1 The anthropomorphic test dummies used for evaluation of 
occupant protection systems manufactured pursuant to applicable portions 
of S4.1.2, S4.1.3, and S4.1.4 of this standard shall conform to the 
requirements of subpart E of part 572 of this chapter.
    S8.1.8.2 Each test dummy is clothed in a form fitting cotton stretch 
short sleeve shirt with above-the-elbow sleeves and above-the-knee 
length pants. The weight of the shirt or pants

[[Page 806]]

shall not exceed 0.25 pounds each. Each foot of the test dummy is 
equipped with a size 11XW shoe which meets the configuration size, sole, 
and heel thickness specifications of MIL-S-13192 change ``P'' and whose 
weight is 1.25 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 pounds.
    S8.1.8.3 Limb joints are set at 1g, barely restraining the weight of 
the limb when extended horizontally. Leg joints are adjusted with the 
torso in the supine position.
    S8.1.8.4 Instrumentation does not affect the motion of the dummies 
during impact or rollover.
    S8.1.8.5 The stabilized test temperature of the test dummy is at any 
temperature level between 69 degrees F and 72 degrees F, inclusive.
    S8.2 Lateral moving barrier crash test conditions. The following 
conditions apply to the lateral moving barrier crash test.
    S8.2.1 The moving barrier, including the impact surface, supporting 
structure, and carriage, weighs 4,000 pounds.
    S8.2.2 The impact surface of the barrier is a vertical, rigid, flat 
rectangle, 78 inches wide and 60 inches high, perpendicular to its 
direction of movement, with its lower edge horizontal and 5 inches above 
the ground surface.
    S8.2.3 During the entire impact sequence the barrier undergoes no 
significant amount of dynamic or static deformation, and absorbs no 
significant portion of the energy resulting from the impact, except for 
energy that results in translational rebound movement of the barrier.
    S8.2.4 During the entire impact sequence the barrier is guided so 
that it travels in a straight line, with no significant lateral, 
vertical or rotational movement.
    S8.2.5 The concrete surface upon which the vehicle is tested is 
level, rigid and of uniform construction, with a skidnumber of 75 when 
measured in accordance with American Society for Testing and Materials 
Method E-274-65T at 40 m.p.h., omitting water delivery as specified in 
paragraph 7.1 of that method.
    S8.2.6 The tested vehicle's brakes are disengaged and the 
transmission is in neutral.
    S8.2.7 The barrier and the test vehicle are positioned so that at 
impact--
    (a) The vehicle is at rest in its normal attitude;
    (b) The barrier is traveling in a direction perpendicular to the 
longitudinal axis of the vehicle at 20 m.p.h.; and
    (c) A vertical plane through the geometric center of the barrier 
impact surface and perpendicular to that surface passes through the 
driver's seating reference point in the tested vehicle.
    S8.3 Rollover test conditions. The following conditions apply to the 
rollover test.
    S8.3.1 The tested vehicle's brakes are disengaged and the 
transmission is in neutral.
    S8.3.2 The concrete surface on which the test is conducted is level, 
rigid, of uniform construction, and of a sufficient size that the 
vehicle remains on it throughout the entire rollover cycle. It has a 
skid number of 75 when measured in accordance with American Society for 
Testing and Materials Method E-274-65T at 40 m.p.h. omitting water 
delivery as specified in paragraph 7.1 of that method.
    S8.3.3 The vehicle is placed on a device, similar to that 
illustrated in Figure 2, having a platform in the form of a flat, rigid 
plane at an angle of 23[deg] from the horizontal. At the lower edge of 
the platform is an unyielding flange, perpendicular to the platform with 
a height of 4 inches and a length sufficient to hold in place the tires 
that rest against it. The intersection of the inner face of the flange 
with the upper face of the platform is 9 inches above the rollover 
surface. No other restraints are used to hold the vehicle in position 
during the deceleration of the platform and the departure of the 
vehicle.
    S8.3.4 With the vehicle on the test platform, the test devices 
remain as nearly as possible in the posture specified in S8.1.
    S8.3.5 Before the deceleration pulse, the platform is moving 
horizontally, and perpendicularly to the longitudinal axis of the 
vehicle, at a constant speed of 30 m.p.h. for a sufficient period of 
time for the vehicle to become motionless relative to the platform.
    S8.3.6 The platform is decelerated from 30 to 0 m.p.h. in a distance 
of not

[[Page 807]]

more than 3 feet, without change of direction and without transverse or 
rotational movement during the deceleration of the platform and the 
departure of the vehicle. The deceleration rate is at least 20g for a 
minimum of 0.04 seconds.
    S8.4 Frontal test condition. If the vehicle is equipped with a 
cutoff device permitted by S4.5.4 of this standard, the device is 
deactivated.
    S9. Pressure vessels and explosive devices.
    S9.1 Pressure vessels. A pressure vessel that is continuously 
pressurized shall conform to the requirements of Sec. Sec. 178.65-2, 
178.65-6(b), 178.65-7, 178.65-9 (a) and (b), and 178.65-10 of this 
title. It shall not leak or evidence visible distortion when tested in 
accordance with Sec. 178.65-11(a) of this title and shall not fail in 
any of the ways enumerated in Sec. 178.65-11(b) of this title when 
hydrostatically tested to destruction. It shall not crack when flattened 
in accordance with Sec. 178.65-12(a) of this title to the limit 
specified in Sec. 178.65-12(a)(4) of this title.
    S9.2 Explosive devices. An explosive device shall not exhibit any of 
the characteristics prohibited by Sec. 173.51 of this title. All 
explosive material shall be enclosed in a structure that is capable of 
containing the explosive energy without sudden release of pressure 
except through overpressure relief devices or parts designed to release 
the pressure during actuation.
    S10. Test dummy positioning procedures.
    S10.1 Head. The transverse instrumentation platform of the head 
shall be level within \1/2\ degree. To level the head of the test dummy, 
the following sequences must be followed. First, adjust the position of 
the H point within the limits set forth in S10.4.2.1 to level the 
transverse instrumentation platform of the head of the test dummy. If 
the transverse instrumentation platform of the head is still not level, 
then adjust the pelvic angle of the test dummy within the limits 
specified in S10.4.2.2 of this standard. If the transverse 
instrumentation platform of the head is still not level, then adjust the 
neck bracket of the dummy the minimum amount necessary from the non-
adjusted ``0'' setting to ensure that the transverse instrumentation 
platform of the head is horizontal within \1/2\ degree. The test dummy 
shall remain within the limits specified in S10.4.2.1 and S10.4.2.2. 
after any adjustment of the neck bracket.
    S10.2 Upper Arms.
    S10.2.1 The driver's upper arms shall be adjacent to the torso with 
the centerlines as close to a vertical plane as possible.
    S10.2.2 The passenger's upper arms shall be in contact with the seat 
back and the sides of the torso.
    S10.3 Hands.
    S10.3.1 The palms of the drivers test dummy shall be in contact with 
the outer part of the steering wheel rim at the rim's horizontal 
centerline. The thumbs shall be over the steering wheel rim and shall be 
lightly taped to the steering wheel rim so that if the hand of the test 
dummy is pushed upward by a force of not less than 2 pounds and not more 
than 5 pounds, the tape shall release the hand from the steering wheel 
rim.
    S10.3.2 The palms of the passenger test dummy shall be in contact 
with the outside of the thigh. The little finger shall be in contact 
with the seat cushion.
    S10.4 Torso.
    S10.4.1 Upper Torso.
    S10.4.1.1 In vehicles equipped with bench seats, the upper torso of 
the driver and passenger test dummies shall rest against the seat back. 
The midsagittal plane of the driver dummy shall be vertical and parallel 
to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline, and pass through the center of 
the steering wheel rim. The midsagittal plane of the passenger dummy 
shall be vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline 
and the same distance from the vehicle's longitudinal centerline as the 
midsagittal plane of the driver dummy.
    S10.4.1.2 In vehicles equipped with bucket seats, the upper torso of 
the driver and passenger test dummies shall rest against the seat back. 
The midsagittal plane of the driver and the passenger dummy shall be 
vertical and shall coincide with the longitudinal centerline of the 
bucket seat.
    S10.4.2 Lower Torso.

[[Page 808]]

    S10.4.2.1 H-point. The H-points of the driver and passenger test 
dummies shall coincide within \1/2\ inch in the vertical dimension and 
\1/2\ inch in the horizontal dimension of a point \1/4\ inch below the 
position of the H-point determined by using the equipment and procedures 
specified in SAE J826 (APR 1980) except that the length of the lower leg 
and thigh segments of the H-point machine shall be adjusted to 16.3 and 
15.8 inches, respectively, instead of the 50th percentile values 
specified in Table 1 of SAE J826.
    S10.4.2.2 Pelvic angle. As determined using the pelvic angle gage 
(GM drawing 78051-532, incorporated by reference in part 572, subpart E 
of this chapter) which is inserted into the H-point gaging hole of the 
dummy, the angle measured from the horizontal on the three inch flat 
surface of the gage shall be 22\1/2\ degrees plus or minus 2\1/2\ 
degrees.
    S10.5 Legs. The upper legs of the driver and passenger test dummies 
shall rest against the seat cushion to the extent permitted by placement 
of the feet. The initial distance between the outboard knee clevis 
flange surfaces shall be 10.6 inches. To the extent practicable, the 
left leg of the driver dummy and both legs of the passenger dummy shall 
be in vertical longitudinal planes. To the extent practicable, the right 
leg of the driver dummy shall be in a vertical plane. Final adjustment 
to accommodate the placement of feet in accordance with S10.6 for 
various passenger compartment configurations is permitted.
    S10.6 Feet.
    S10.6.1 Driver's position.
    S10.6.1.1 If the vehicle has an adjustable accelerator pedal, adjust 
it to the full forward position. Rest the right foot of the test dummy 
on the undepressed accelerator pedal with the rearmost point of the heel 
on the floor pan in the plane of the pedal. If the foot cannot be placed 
on the accelerator pedal, set it initially perpendicular to the lower 
leg and then place it as far forward as possible in the direction of the 
pedal centerline with the rearmost point of the heel resting on the 
floor pan. If the vehicle has an adjustable accelerator pedal and the 
right foot is not touching the accelerator pedal when positioned as 
above, move the pedal rearward until it touches the right foot. If the 
accelerator pedal still does not touch the foot in the full rearward 
position, leave the pedal in that position.
    S10.6.1.2 Place the left foot on the toeboard with the rearmost 
point of the heel resting on the floor pan as close as possible to the 
point of intersection of the planes described by the toeboard and the 
floor pan and not on the wheelwell projection. If the foot cannot be 
positioned on the toeboard, set it initially perpendicular to the lower 
leg and place it as far forward as possible with the heel resting on the 
floor pan. If necessary to avoid contact with the vehicle's brake or 
clutch pedal, rotate the test dummy's left foot about the lower leg. If 
there is still pedal interference, rotate the left leg outboard about 
the hip the minimum distance necessary to avoid the pedal interference. 
For vehicles with a foot rest that does not elevate the left foot above 
the level of the right foot, place the left foot on the foot rest so 
that the upper and lower leg centerlines fall in a vertical plane.
    S10.6.2 Passenger's position.
    S10.6.2.1 Vehicles with a flat floor pan/toeboard. Place the right 
and left feet on the vehicle's toeboard with the heels resting on the 
floor pan as close as possible to the intersection point with the 
toeboard. If the feet cannot be placed flat on the toeboard, set them 
perpendicular to the lower leg centerlines and place them as far forward 
as possible with the heels resting on the floor pan.
    S10.6.2.2 Vehicles with wheelhouse projections in passenger 
compartment. Place the right and left feet in the well of the floor pan/
toeboard and not on the wheelhouse projection. If the feet cannot be 
placed flat on the toeboard, initially set them perpendicular to the 
lower leg centerlines and then place them as far forward as possible 
with the heels resting on the floor pan.
    S10.7 Test dummy positioning for latchplate access. The reach 
envelopes specified in S7.4.4 of this standard are obtained by 
positioning a test dummy in the driver's or passenger's seating position 
and adjusting that seating position to its forwardmost adjustment

[[Page 809]]

position. Attach the lines for the inboard and outboard arms to the test 
dummy as described in Figure 3 of this standard. Extend each line 
backward and outboard to generate the compliance arcs of the outboard 
reach envelope of the test dummy's arms.
    S10.8 Test dummy positioning for belt contact force. To determine 
compliance with S7.4.3 of this standard, position the test dummy in the 
vehicle in accordance with S10.1 through S10.6 of this standard and 
adjust the seating position in accordance with S8.1.2 and S8.1.3 of this 
standard. Pull the belt webbing three inches from the test dummy's chest 
and release until the webbing is within one inch of the test dummy's 
chest and measure the belt contact force.
    S10.9 Manual belt adjustment for dynamic testing. With the test 
dummy positioned in accordance with S10.1 through S10.6 of this standard 
and the seating position adjusted in accordance with S8.1.2 and S8.1.3 
of this standard, place the Type 2 manual belt around the test dummy and 
fasten the latch. Remove all slack from the lap belt portion. Pull the 
upper torso webbing out of the retractor and allow it to retract; repeat 
this four times. Apply a 2 to 4 pound tension load to the lap belt. If 
the belt system is equipped with a tension-relieving device, introduce 
the maximum amount of slack into the upper torso belt that is 
recommended by the vehicle manufacturer in the vehicle's owner's manual. 
If the belt system is not equipped with a tension-relieving device, 
allow the excess webbing in the upper torso belt to be retracted by the 
retractive force of the retractor.
    S11. [Reserved]
    S12. Temporary Exemption from Requirement for Inflatable Restraint 
System.
    S12.1 Scope. This section establishes procedures for filing and 
processing applications for temporary exemption from the requirements in 
this standard that vehicles be equipped with inflatable restraint 
systems.
    S12.2 Definitions.
    Line means a name that a manufacturer applies to a group of motor 
vehicles of the same make which have the same body or chassis, or 
otherwise are similar in construction or design. A line may, for 
example, include 2-door, 4-door, station wagon, and hatchback vehicles 
of the same make.
    S12.3 Standard of review. In order to receive a temporary exemption 
from the inflatable restraint requirement, a vehicle manufacturer must 
demonstrate in its application that there has been a disruption in the 
supply of one or more inflatable restraint system components, or a 
disruption in the use and installation by the manufacturer of any such 
component due to unavoidable events not under the control of the 
manufacturer, which will prevent a manufacturer from meeting its 
anticipated production volume of vehicles with inflatable restraint 
systems.
    S12.4 Exemption applications--General requirements. Each application 
for a temporary exemption from the inflatable restraint requirements 
must--
    (a) Be written in the English language;
    (b) Be submitted in three copies to: Administrator, National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 
20590;
    (c) State the full name and address of the manufacturer, the nature 
of its organization (individual, partnership, corporation, etc.), and 
the name of the State or country under the laws of which it is 
organized;
    (d) Identify the motor vehicle line or lines for which the temporary 
exemption is being sought;
    (e) Set forth in full the data, views, and arguments of the 
manufacturer that would support granting the temporary exemption, 
including the specific information required by S12.5; and
    (f) Specify and segregate any part of the information and data 
submitted in the application that should be withheld from public 
disclosure in accordance with part 512 of this chapter.
    S12.5 Exemption applications--Specific content requirements. Each 
application for a temporary exemption from the inflatable restraint 
requirement must include:
    (a) A clear and specific identification of any component in the 
inflatable restraint system that has become unavailable due to 
circumstances beyond the manufacturer's control, and a diagram showing 
the location of such

[[Page 810]]

component within the restraint system and within the vehicle;
    (b) A clear and specific explanation of the cause or causes of the 
disruption in the supply of the component, and a showing that such 
disruption is beyond the control of the manufacturer;
    (c) An estimate of the length of time that will be needed to correct 
the disruption and again incorporate the subject components into current 
production, or an explanation of why it is not possible to provide such 
an estimate;
    (d) A complete statement of the bases for the manufacturer's belief 
that NHTSA should grant a temporary exemption in response to this 
application;
    (e) An unconditional statement by the manufacturer that it will 
recall every vehicle for which a temporary exemption is requested in the 
application, to install all missing inflatable restraint systems;
    (f) A plan setting forth steps the manufacturer will take to ensure 
that as many exempted vehicles as possible will be returned for 
installation of missing inflatable restraint systems;
    (g) A proposed reasonable period of time after the disruption in the 
supply of inflatable restraint system components is corrected that the 
manufacturer estimates will ensure a sufficient quantity of components 
for both anticipated production and retrofit of those vehicles for which 
a temporary exemption is requested in the application, so that the 
vehicle manufacturer can recall those vehicles for which a temporary 
exemption is requested and install inflatable restraint systems in them, 
together with a demonstration of why the manufacturer believes this 
proposed period of time is reasonable for completing this recall, or an 
explanation of why it is not possible to provide such an estimate;
    (h) A proposed date for termination of the exemption;
    (i) A proposed date by which all exempted vehicles will have been 
recalled and had inflatable restraints installed (assuming owners 
returned their vehicles in a timely matter in response to a first notice 
by the manufacturer), or an explanation of why it is not possible to 
provide such an estimate.
    S12.6 Processing an application for a temporary exemption. (a) NHTSA 
will process any application for temporary exemption that contains the 
information specified in S12.4 and S12.5. If an application fails to 
provide the information specified in S12.4 and S12.5, NHTSA will not 
process the application, but will advise the manufacturer of the 
information that must be provided if the agency is to process the 
application.
    (b) Notice of each application for temporary exemption shall be 
published in the Federal Register.
    (c) NHTSA will issue its decision to grant or deny the requested 
temporary exemption not later than 15 days after the agency receives a 
complete petition, as defined in paragraph (a). However, a failure to 
issue a decision within this time does not result in a grant of the 
petition.
    (d) Notice of each decision to grant or deny a temporary exemption, 
and the reasons for granting or denying it, will be published in the 
Federal Register.
    (e) The Administrator may attach such conditions as he or she deems 
appropriate to a temporary exemption, including but not limited to 
requiring manufacturers to provide progress reports at specified times 
(including, as appropriate and to the extent possible, estimate of dates 
and times concerning when a supply disruption will be corrected and when 
recall will take place) and requiring manufacturers to take specific 
steps to ensure that as many exempted vehicles as possible will be 
returned for installation of missing inflatable restraint systems.
    (f) Unless a later effective date is specified in a notice 
announcing an agency decision to grant a temporary exemption, a 
temporary exemption from the inflatable restraint requirement will 
become effective upon the date the decision is issued.
    S12.7 Labels and written notice announcing temporary exemption.
    S12.7.1 It shall be a condition of every temporary exemption from 
the inflatable restraint requirement that the manufacturer of exempted 
vehicles comply with the provisions of S12.7.2 and S12.7.3.

[[Page 811]]

    S12.7.2 (a) The manufacturer of any vehicle granted a temporary 
exemption from the inflatable restraint requirement shall affix a label 
within the passenger compartment of such vehicle. The label shall set 
forth the following information in block capital letters and numerals 
not less than three thirty-seconds of an inch high:

THIS VEHICLE DOES NOT CONTAIN AN AIR BAG IN CONFORMANCE WITH THE FEDERAL 
MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY STANDARD FOR OCCUPANT CRASH PROTECTION. IT WAS 
EXEMPTED PURSUANT TO NHTSA EXEMPTION NO. (insert number assigned by 
NHTSA).

    (b) This label shall not be removed until after the vehicle 
manufacturer has recalled the vehicle and installed an inflatable 
restraint system at those seating positions for which it was granted an 
exemption.
    S12.7.3 The manufacturer of any vehicle that is delivered without an 
inflatable restraint system, pursuant to a temporary exemption granted 
under this section, shall, at the time of delivery of the vehicle, 
provide a written notice to the dealer to whom the vehicle is delivered. 
The manufacturer shall also provide a written notice by registered mail 
to the first purchaser of the vehicle for purposes other than resale, 
within two weeks after purchase. Unless otherwise provided for by the 
Administrator in the exemption, such notice shall provide the following 
information:
    (a) This vehicle does not conform to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standard No. 208, because it is not equipped with an inflatable 
restraint at (insert the affected seating positions).
    (b) The vehicle was allowed to be sold pursuant to NHTSA Exemption 
No. (insert appropriate exemption number).
    (c) The reason this vehicle was exempted from the requirement for an 
inflatable restraint was because of factors beyond the manufacturer's 
control.
    (d) The manufacturer will recall this vehicle not later than (insert 
the time set forth in the exemption) and install the missing inflatable 
restraint at no charge.
    (e) If the reader has any questions or would like some further 
information, he or she may contact the manufacturer at (insert an 
address and telephone number).
    S13 Alternative unbelted test available, under S3(b) of this 
standard, for certain vehicles manufactured before September 1, 2006.
    S13.1 Instrumentation for Impact Test--Part 1--Electronic 
Instrumentation. Under the applicable conditions of S8, mount the 
vehicle on a dynamic test platform at the vehicle attitude set forth in 
S13.3, so that the longitudinal center line of the vehicle is parallel 
to the direction of the test platform travel and so that movement 
between the base of the vehicle and the test platform is prevented. The 
test platform is instrumented with an accelerometer and data processing 
system having a frequency response of 60 channel class as specified in 
SAE J211/1 rev. Mar 95 (see S4.7). The accelerometer sensitive axis is 
parallel to the direction of test platform travel. The test is conducted 
at a velocity change approximating 48 km/h (30 mph) with acceleration of 
the test platform such that all points on the crash pulse curve within 
the corridor identified in Figure 6 are covered. An inflatable restraint 
is to be activated at 20 ms <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 ms from the time 
that 0.5 g is measured on the dynamic test platform. The test dummy 
specified in S8.1.8, placed in each front outboard designated seating 
position as specified in S10, excluding S10.7, S10.8, and S10.9, shall 
meet the injury criteria of S6.1, S6.2(a), S6.3, S6.4(a), S6.5, and 
S13.2 of this standard.
    S13.2 Neck injury criteria. A vehicle certified to this alternative 
test requirement shall, in addition to meeting the criteria specified in 
S13.1, meet the following injury criteria for the neck, measured with 
the six axis load cell (ref. Denton drawing C-1709) that is mounted 
between the bottom of the skull and the top of the neck as shown in 
Drawing 78051-218, in the unbelted sled test:
    (a) Flexion Bending Moment (calculated at the occipital condyle)--
190 Nm. SAE Class 600.
    (b) Extension Bending Moment (calculated at the occipital condyle)--
57 Nm. SAE Class 600.
    (c) Axial Tension--3300 peak N. SAE Class 1000.

[[Page 812]]

    (d) Axial Compression--4000 peak N. SAE Class 1000.
    (e) Fore-and-Aft Shear--3100 peak N. SAE Class 1000.
    S13.3 Vehicle test attitude. When the vehicle is in its ``as 
delivered'' condition, measure the angle between the driver's door sill 
and the horizontal. Mark where the angle is taken on the door sill. The 
``as delivered'' condition is the vehicle as received at the test site, 
with 100 percent of all fluid capacities and all tires inflated to the 
manufacturer's specifications as listed on the vehicle's tire placard. 
When the vehicle is in its ``fully loaded'' condition, measure the angle 
between the driver's door sill and the horizontal, at the same place the 
``as delivered'' angle was measured. The ``fully loaded'' condition is 
the test vehicle loaded in accordance with S8.1.1(a) or (b) of Standard 
No. 208, as applicable. The load placed in the cargo area shall be 
centered over the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle. The pretest 
door sill angle, when the vehicle is on the sled, (measured at the same 
location as the as delivered and fully loaded condition) shall be equal 
to or between the as delivered and fully loaded door sill angle 
measurements.
    S13.4 Tires and wheels. Remove the tires and wheels.
    S13.5. Vehicle Securing. The engine, transmissions, axles, exhaust, 
vehicle frame, and vehicle body may be rigidly secured to the vehicle 
and/or the sled, and fluids, batteries and unsecured components may be 
removed, in order to assure that all points on the crash pulse curve are 
within the corridor defined in Figure 6.
    S14 Advanced air bag requirements for passenger cars and for trucks, 
buses, and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 3,855 kg (8500 
pounds) or less and an unloaded vehicle weight of 2,495 kg (5500 pounds) 
or less, except for walk-in van-type trucks or vehicles designed to be 
sold exclusively to the U.S. Postal Service.
    S14.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2003, and 
before September 1, 2006. (a) For vehicles manufactured for sale in the 
United States on or after September 1, 2003, and before September 1, 
2006, a percentage of the manufacturer's production, as specified in 
S14.1.1, shall meet the requirements specified in S14.5.1(a), S14.5.2, 
S15.1, S15.2, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25 (in addition to the other 
requirements specified in this standard).
    (b) Manufacturers that sell three or fewer carlines, as that term is 
defined at 49 CFR 585.4, in the United States may, at the option of the 
manufacturer, meet the requirements of this paragraph instead of 
paragraph (a) of this section. At least 95 percent of the vehicles 
manufactured by the manufacturer on or after September 1, 2005 and 
before September 1, 2006 shall meet the requirements specified in 
S14.5.1(a), S14.5.2, S15.1, S15.2, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25 (in 
addition to the other requirements specified in this standard).
    (c) Vehicles that are manufactured in two or more stages or that are 
altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) after having previously 
been certified in accordance with part 567 of this chapter are not 
subject to the requirements of S14.1.
    (d) Vehicles that are manufactured by an original vehicle 
manufacturer that produces or assembles fewer than 5,000 vehicles 
annually for sale in the United States are not subject to the 
requirements of S14.1.
    S14.1.1 Phase-in schedule.
    S14.1.1.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2003, and 
before September 1, 2004. Subject to S14.1.2(a), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2003, and before 
September 1, 2004, the amount of vehicles complying with S14.5.1(a), 
S14.5.2, S15.1, S15.2, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25, shall be not less 
than 20 percent of:
    (a) If the manufacturer has manufactured vehicles for sale in the 
United States during both of the two production years prior to September 
1, 2003, the manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2001, and before September 1, 
2004, or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2003, and 
before September 1, 2004.
    S14.1.1.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2004, and 
before September 1, 2005. Subject to S14.1.2(b), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2004, and

[[Page 813]]

before September 1, 2005, the amount of vehicles complying with 
S14.5.1(a), S14.5.2, S15.1, S15.2, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25 shall be 
not less than 65 percent of:
    (a) If the manufacturer has manufactured vehicles for sale in the 
United States during both of the two production years prior to September 
1, 2004, the manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2002, and before September 1, 
2005, or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2004, and 
before September 1, 2005.
    S14.1.1.3 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2005, and 
before September 1, 2006. Subject to S14.1.2(c), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2005, and before 
September 1, 2006, the amount of vehicles complying with S14.5.1(a), 
S14.5.2, S15.1, S15.2, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25 shall be 100 percent 
of the manufacturer's production during that period.
    S14.1.2 Calculation of complying vehicles.
    (a) For the purposes of complying with S14.1.1.1, a manufacturer may 
count a vehicle if it is manufactured on or after June 12, 2000, but 
before September 1, 2004.
    (b) For purposes of complying with S14.1.1.2, a manufacturer may 
count a vehicle if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after June 12, 2000, but before September 
1, 2005, and
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S14.1.1.1.
    (c) For purposes of complying with S14.1.1.3, a manufacturer may 
count a vehicle if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after June 12, 2000, but before September 
1, 2006, and (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S14.1.1.1 or 
S14.1.1.2.
    S14.1.3 Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S14.1.3.1 For the purpose of calculating average annual production 
of vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles 
manufactured by each manufacturer under S14.1.1, a vehicle produced by 
more than one manufacturer shall be attributed to a single manufacturer 
as follows, subject to S14.1.3.2.
    (a) A vehicle that is imported shall be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    S14.1.3.2 A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer shall be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR part 585, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S14.1.3.1.
    S14.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2006. Each 
vehicle shall meet the requirements specified in S14.5.1(a), S14.5.2, 
S15.1, S15.2, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25 (in addition to the other 
requirements specified in this standard).
    S14.3 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2007, and 
before September 1, 2010.
    (a) For vehicles manufactured for sale in the United States on or 
after September 1, 2007, and before September 1, 2010, a percentage of 
the manufacturer's production, as specified in S14.3.1, shall meet the 
requirements specified in S14.5.1(b) (in addition to the other 
requirements of this standard).
    (b) Manufacturers that sell two or fewer carlines, as that term is 
defined at 49 CFR 583.4, in the United States may, at the option of the 
manufacturer, meet the requirements of this paragraph instead of 
paragraph (a) of this section. Each vehicle manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2008, and before September 1, 2010, shall meet the 
requirements specified in S14.5.1(b) (in addition to the other 
requirements specified in this standard).
    (c) Vehicles that are manufactured in two or more stages or that are 
altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) after having been 
previously certified in accordance with part 567 of this chapter are not 
subject to the requirements of S14.3.
    (d) Vehicles that are manufactured by an original vehicle 
manufacturer

[[Page 814]]

that produces or assembles fewer than 5,000 vehicles annually for sale 
in the United States are not subject to the requirements of S14.3.
    S14.3.1 Phase-in schedule.
    S14.3.1.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2007, and 
before September 1, 2008. Subject to S14.3.2(a), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2007, and before 
September 1, 2008, the amount of vehicles complying with S14.5.1(b), 
S14.5.2, S15.1, S15.2, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25, shall be not less 
than 35 percent of:
    (a) If the manufacturer has manufactured vehicles for sale in the 
United States during both of the two production years prior to September 
1, 2007, the manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2005, and before September 1, 
2008, or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2007, and 
before September 1, 2008.
    S14.3.1.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2008, and 
before September 1, 2009. Subject to S14.3.2(b), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2008, and before 
September 1, 2009, the amount of vehicles complying with S14.5.1(b), 
S14.5.2, S15.1, S15.2, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25 shall be not less 
than 65 percent of:
    (a) If the manufacturer has manufactured vehicles for sale in the 
United States during both of the two production years prior to September 
1, 2008, the manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2006 and before September 1, 2009, 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2008, and 
before September 1, 2009.
    S14.3.1.3 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2009, and 
before September 1, 2010. Subject to S14.3.2(c), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2009, and before 
September 1, 2010, the amount of vehicles complying with S14.5.1(b), 
S14.5.2, S15.1, S15.2, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25 shall be 100 percent 
of the manufacturer's production during that period.
    S14.3.2 Calculation of complying vehicles.
    (a) For the purposes of complying with S14.3.1.1, a manufacturer may 
count a vehicle if it is manufactured on or after September 1, 2006, but 
before September 1, 2008.
    (b) For purposes of complying with S14.3.1.2, a manufacturer may 
count a vehicle if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after September 1, 2006, but before 
September 1, 2009, and
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S14.3.1.1.
    (c) For purposes of complying with S14.3.1.3, a manufacturer may 
count a vehicle if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after September 1, 2006, but before 
September 1, 2010, and
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S14.3.1.1 or S14.3.1.2.
    S14.3.3  Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S14.3.3.1 For the purpose of calculating average annual production 
of vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles 
manufactured by each manufacturer under S14.3.1, a vehicle produced by 
more than one manufacturer shall be attributed to a single manufacturer 
as follows, subject to S14.3.3.2.
    (a) A vehicle that is imported shall be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    S14.3.3.2 A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer shall be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR part 585, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S14.3.3.1.
    S14.4 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2010. Each 
vehicle shall meet the requirements specified in S14.5.1(b), S14.5.2, 
S15.1, S15.2, S17, S19, S21, S23, and S25 (in addition to the other 
requirements specified in this standard).

[[Page 815]]

    S14.5 Barrier test requirements using 50th percentile adult male 
dummies.
    S14.5.1 Rigid barrier belted test. (a) Each vehicle that is 
certified as complying with S14.1 or S14.2 shall, at each front outboard 
designated seating position, meet the injury criteria specified in S6.1, 
S6.2(b), S6.3, S6.4(b), S6.5, and S6.6 when tested under S5.1.1(b)(1).
    (b) Each vehicle that is certified as complying with S14.3 or S14.4 
shall, at each front outboard designated seating position, meet the 
injury criteria specified in S6.1, S6.2(b), S6.3, S6.4(b), S6.5, and 
S6.6 when tested under S5.1.1(b)(2).
    S14.5.2 Rigid barrier unbelted test. Each vehicle that is certified 
as complying with S14 shall, at each front outboard designated seating 
position, meet the injury criteria specified in S6.1, S6.2(b), S6.3, 
S6.4(b), S6.5, and S6.6 when tested under S5.1.2(b).
    S14.6 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2009, and 
before September 1, 2012 (Phase-in of higher maximum speed (56 km/h (35 
mph)) belted test requirement using 5th percentile adult female 
dummies).
    (a) For vehicles manufactured for sale in the United States on or 
after September 1, 2009, and before September 1, 2012, a percentage of 
the manufacturer's production, as specified in S14.6.1, shall meet the 
requirements specified in S15.1(b) (in addition to the other 
requirements specified in this standard).
    (b) Manufacturers that sell two or fewer carlines, as that term is 
defined at 49 CFR 583.4, in the United States may, at the option of the 
manufacturer, meet the requirements of this paragraph instead of 
paragraph (a) of this section. Each vehicle manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2010, and before September 1, 2012, shall meet the 
requirements specified in S15.1(b) (in addition to the other 
requirements specified in this standard).
    (c) Vehicles that are manufactured in two or more stages or that are 
altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) after having previously 
been certified in accordance with part 567 of this chapter are not 
subject to the requirements of S14.6.
    (d) Vehicles that are manufactured by an original vehicle 
manufacturer that produces or assembles fewer than 5,000 vehicles 
annually for sale in the United States are not subject to the 
requirements of S14.6.
    S14.6.1 Phase-in schedule.
    S14.6.1.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2009, and 
before September 1, 2010. Subject to S14.6.2(a), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2009, and before 
September 1, 2010, the amount of vehicles complying with S15.1(b) shall 
be not less than 35 percent of:
    (a) If the manufacturer has manufactured vehicles for sale in the 
United States during both of the two production years prior to September 
1, 2009, the manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2007, and before September 1, 
2010, or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2009, and 
before September 1, 2010.
    S14.6.1.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2010, and 
before September 1, 2011. Subject to S14.6.2(b), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2010, and before 
September 1, 2011, the amount of vehicles complying with S15.1(b) shall 
be not less than 65 percent of:
    (a) If the manufacturer has manufactured vehicles for sale in the 
United States during both of the two production years prior to September 
1, 2010, the manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2008 and before September 1, 2011, 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2010, and 
before September 1, 2011.
    S14.6.1.3 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2011, and 
before September 1, 2012. Subject to S14.6.2(c), for vehicles 
manufactured by a manufacturer on or after September 1, 2011, and before 
September 1, 2012, the amount of vehicles complying with S15.1(b) shall 
be 100 percent of the manufacturer's production during that period.
    S14.6.2 Calculation of complying vehicles.
    (a) For the purposes of complying with S14.6.1.1, a manufacturer may 
count a vehicle if it is manufactured on or after September 1, 2008, but 
before September 1, 2010.

[[Page 816]]

    (b) For purposes of complying with S14.6.1.2, a manufacturer may 
count a vehicle if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after September 1, 2008, but before 
September 1, 2011, and
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S14.6.1.1.
    (c) For purposes of complying with S14.6.1.3, a manufacturer may 
count a vehicle if it:
    (1) Is manufactured on or after September 1, 2008, but before 
September 1, 2012, and
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S14.6.1.1 or S14.6.1.2.
    S14.6.3 Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S14.6.3.1 For the purpose of calculating average annual production 
of vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles 
manufactured by each manufacturer under S14.6.1, a vehicle produced by 
more than one manufacturer shall be attributed to a single manufacturer 
as follows, subject to S14.6.3.2.
    (a) A vehicle that is imported shall be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    S14.6.3.2 A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer shall be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR part 585, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S14.6.3.1.
    S14.7 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2012. (Higher 
maximum speed (56km/h (35 mph)) belted test requirement using 5th 
percentile adult female dummies). Each vehicle shall meet the 
requirements specified in S15.1(b) (in addition to the other 
requirements specified in this standard). However, vehicles that are 
manufactured in two or more stages or that are altered (within the 
meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) after having been previously certified in 
accordance with part 567 of this chapter may comply with the 
requirements specified in S15.1(a) instead of S15.1(b), if they are 
manufactured before September 1, 2013.
    S14.8 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2009 and before 
September 1, 2010. Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2009 
and before September 1, 2010, shall comply with S14.8.1 through S14.8.4. 
At any time during the production year ending August 31, 2010, each 
manufacturer shall, upon request from the Office of Vehicle Safety 
Compliance, provide information identifying the vehicles by make, model 
and vehicle identification number that have been certified as complying 
with S19, S21, and S23 (in addition to the other requirements specified 
in this standard) when using the child restraint systems specified in 
appendix A-1 of this standard. The manufacturer's designation of a 
vehicle as meeting the requirements when using the child restraint 
systems in appendix A-1 of this standard is irrevocable.
    S14.8.1 Subject to S14.8.2, for vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2009, the number of vehicles certified as complying with 
S19, S21, and S23 when using the child restraint systems specified in 
appendix A-1 of this standard shall be not less than 50 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles subject 
to S19, S21, and S23 of this standard manufactured on or after September 
1, 2006 and before September 1, 2009; or
    (b) The manufacturer's production of vehicles subject to S19, S21, 
and S23 manufactured on or after September 1, 2009 and before September 
1, 2010.
    S14.8.2 For the purpose of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer under S14.8.1, a vehicle produced by more than one 
manufacturer shall be attributed to a single manufacturer as provided in 
S14.8.2(a) through (c), subject to S14.8.3.
    (a) A vehicle which is imported shall be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer which markets the vehicle.
    (c) A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer shall be 
attributed

[[Page 817]]

to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an express 
written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration under 49 CFR part 585, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S14.8.2(a) or (b).
    S14.8.3 For the purposes of calculating average annual production of 
vehicle for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles by each 
manufacturer under S14.8.1, each vehicle that is excluded from the 
requirement to test with child restraints listed in appendix A or A-1 of 
this standard is not counted.
    S14.8.4 Until September 1, 2011, vehicles manufactured by a final-
stage manufacturer or alterer could be certified as complying with S19, 
S21, and S23 when using the child restraint systems specified in 
appendix A. Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2011 by these 
manufacturers must be certified as complying with S19, S21, and S23 when 
using the child restraint systems specified in appendix A-1.
    S14.8.5 Until September 1, 2011, manufacturers selling fewer than 
5,000 vehicles per year in the U.S. may certify their vehicles as 
complying with S19, S21, and S23 when using the child restraint systems 
specified in Appendix A. Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 
2011 by these manufacturers must be certified as complying with S19, 
S21, and S23 when using the child restraint systems specified in 
Appendix A-1.
    S15 Rigid barrier test requirements using 5th percentile adult 
female dummies.
    S15.1 Belted Test. (a) Each vehicle that is certified as complying 
with S14.1 or S14.2 shall, at each front outboard designated seating 
position, meet the injury criteria specified in S15.3 when tested under 
S16.1(a)(1).
    (b) Each vehicle that is certified as complying with S14.6 or S14.7 
shall, at each front outboard designated seating position, meet the 
injury criteria specified in S15.3 when tested under S16.1(a)(2).
    S15.2 Unbelted test. Each vehicle that is certified as complying 
with S14 shall, at each front outboard designated seating position, meet 
the injury criteria specified in S15.3 of this standard when the vehicle 
is crash tested in accordance with the procedures specified in S16.1(b) 
of this standard with the anthropomorphic test devices unbelted.
    S15.3 Injury criteria for the 49 CFR part 572, subpart O Hybrid III 
5th percentile female test dummy.
    S15.3.1 All portions of the test dummy shall be contained within the 
outer surfaces of the vehicle passenger compartment.
    S15.3.2 Head injury criteria. (a) For any two points in time, 
t<INF>1</INF> and t<INF>2</INF>, during the event which are separated by 
not more than a 15 millisecond time interval and where t<INF>1</INF> is 
less than t<INF>2</INF>, the head injury criterion (HIC<INF>15</INF>) 
shall be determined using the resultant head acceleration at the center 
of gravity of the dummy head, a<INF>r</INF>, expressed as a multiple of 
g (the acceleration of gravity) and shall be calculated using the 
expression:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12MY00.005

    (b) The maximum calculated HIC<INF>15</INF> value shall not exceed 
700.
    S15.3.3 The resultant acceleration calculated from the output of the 
thoracic instrumentation shall not exceed 60 g's, except for intervals 
whose cumulative duration is not more than 3 milliseconds.
    S15.3.4 Compression deflection of the sternum relative to the spine, 
as determined by instrumentation, shown shall not exceed 52 mm (2.0 in).
    S15.3.5 The force transmitted axially through each femur shall not 
exceed 6805 N (1530 lb).
    S15.3.6 Neck injury. When measuring neck injury, each of the 
following injury criteria shall be met.
    (a) Nij.
    (1) The shear force (Fx), axial force (Fz), and bending moment (My) 
shall be measured by the dummy upper neck load cell for the duration of 
the crash event as specified in S4.11. Shear force, axial force, and 
bending moment shall be filtered for Nij purposes at SAE J211/1 rev. Mar 
95 Channel Frequency Class 600 (see S4.7).

[[Page 818]]

    (2) During the event, the axial force (Fz) can be either in tension 
or compression while the occipital condyle bending moment (Mocy) can be 
in either flexion or extension. This results in four possible loading 
conditions for Nij: Tension-extension (Nte), tension-flexion (Ntf), 
compression-extension (Nce), or compression-flexion (Ncf).
    (3) When calculating Nij using equation S15.3.6(a)(4), the critical 
values, Fzc and Myc, are:
    (i) Fzc = 4287 N (964 lbf) when Fz is in tension
    (ii) Fzc = 3880 N (872 lbf) when Fz is in compression
    (iii) Myc = 155 Nm (114 lbf-ft) when a flexion moment exists at the 
occipital condyle
    (iv) Myc = 67 Nm (49 lbf-ft) when an extension moment exists at the 
occipital condyle.
    (4) At each point in time, only one of the four loading conditions 
occurs and the Nij value corresponding to that loading condition is 
computed and the three remaining loading modes shall be considered a 
value of zero. The expression for calculating each Nij loading condition 
is given by:

Nij = (Fz/Fzc) + (Mocy/Myc)

    (5) None of the four Nij values shall exceed 1.0 at any time during 
the event.
    (b) Peak tension. Tension force (Fz), measured at the upper neck 
load cell, shall not exceed 2620 N (589 lbf) at any time.
    (c) Peak compression. Compression force (Fz), measured at the upper 
neck load cell, shall not exceed 2520 N (566 lbf) at any time.
    S15.3.7 Unless otherwise indicated, instrumentation for data 
acquisition, data channel frequency class, and moment calculations are 
the same as given for the 49 CFR part 572, subpart O Hybrid III 5th 
percentile female test dummy.
    S16. Test procedures for rigid barrier test requirements using 5th 
percentile adult female dummies.
    S16.1 General provisions. Crash testing to determine compliance with 
the requirements of S15 of this standard is conducted as specified in 
the following paragraphs (a) and (b).
    (a) Belted test--(1) Vehicles certified to S14.1 or S14.2. Place a 
49 CFR Part 572 Subpart O 5th percentile adult female test dummy at each 
front outboard seating position of a vehicle, in accordance with the 
procedures specified in S16.3 of this standard. Impact the vehicle 
traveling longitudinally forward at any speed, up to and including 48 
km/h (30 mph), into a fixed rigid barrier that is perpendicular within a 
tolerance of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 degrees to the line of travel of 
the vehicle under the applicable conditions of S16.2 of this standard.
    (2) Vehicles certified to S14.6 or S14.7. Place a 49 CFR Part 572 
Subpart O 5th percentile adult female test dummy at each front outboard 
seating position of a vehicle, in accordance with the procedures 
specified in S16.3 of this standard. Impact the vehicle traveling 
longitudinally forward at any speed, up to and including 56km/h (35 
mph), into a fixed rigid barrier that is perpendicular within a 
tolerance of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 degrees to the line of travel of 
the vehicle under the applicable conditions of S16.2 of this standard.
    (b) Unbelted test. Place a 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart O 5th percentile 
adult female test dummy at each front outboard seating position of a 
vehicle, in accordance with the procedures specified in S16.3 of this 
standard, except S16.3.5. Impact the vehicle traveling longitudinally 
forward at any speed, from 32 km/h (20 mph) to 40 km/h (25 mph), 
inclusive, into a fixed rigid barrier that is perpendicular within a 
tolerance of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees to the line of travel of 
the vehicle under the applicable conditions of S16.2 of this standard.
    S16.2 Test conditions.
    S16.2.1 The vehicle, including test devices and instrumentation, is 
loaded as in S8.1.1.
    S16.2.2 Movable vehicle windows and vents are placed in the fully 
closed position, unless the vehicle manufacturer chooses to specify a 
different adjustment position prior to the time the vehicle is 
certified.
    S16.2.3 Convertibles and open-body type vehicles have the top, if 
any, in place in the closed passenger compartment configuration.
    S16.2.4 Doors are fully closed and latched but not locked.

[[Page 819]]

    S16.2.5 The dummy is clothed in form fitting cotton stretch garments 
with short sleeves and above the knee length pants. A size 7 1/2W shoe 
which meets the configuration and size specifications of MIL-S-21711E 
(see S4.7) or its equivalent is placed on each foot of the test dummy.
    S16.2.6 Limb joints are set at one g, barely restraining the weight 
of the limb when extended horizontally. Leg joints are adjusted with the 
torso in the supine position.
    S16.2.7 Instrumentation shall not affect the motion of dummies 
during impact.
    S16.2.8 The stabilized temperature of the dummy is at any level 
between 20.6 [deg]C and 22.2 [deg]C (69 [deg]F to 72 [deg]F).
    S16.2.9 Steering wheel adjustment.
    S16.2.9.1 Adjust a tiltable steering wheel, if possible, so that the 
steering wheel hub is at the geometric center of its full range of 
driving positions.
    S16.2.9.2 If there is no setting detent at the mid-position, lower 
the steering wheel to the detent just below the mid-position.
    S16.2.9.3 If the steering column is telescoping, place the steering 
column in the mid-position. If there is no mid-position, move the 
steering wheel rearward one position from the mid-position.
    S16.2.10 Driver and passenger seat set-up.
    S16.2.10.1 Lumbar support adjustment. Position adjustable lumbar 
supports so that the lumbar support is in its lowest, retracted or 
deflated adjustment position.
    S16.2.10.2 Other seat adjustments. Position any adjustable parts of 
the seat that provide additional support so that they are in the lowest 
or most open adjustment position. Position any adjustable head restraint 
in the lowest and most forward position.
    S16.2.10.3 Seat position adjustment. If the passenger seat does not 
adjust independently of the driver seat, the driver seat shall control 
the final position of the passenger seat.
    S16.2.10.3.1 Using only the controls that primarily move the seat 
and seat cushion independent of the seat back in the fore and aft 
directions, move the seat cushion reference point (SCRP) to the rearmost 
position. Using any part of any control, other than those just used, 
determine the full range of angles of the seat cushion reference line 
and set the seat cushion reference line to the middle of the range. 
Using any part of any control other than those that primarily move the 
seat or seat cushion fore and aft, while maintaining the seat cushion 
reference line angle, place the SCRP to its lowest position.
    S16.2.10.3.2 Using only the control that primarily moves the seat 
fore and aft, move the SCRP to the full forward position.
    S16.2.10.3.3 If the seat or seat cushion height is adjustable, other 
than by the controls that primarily move the seat or seat cushion fore 
and aft, determine the maximum and minimum heights of the SCRP, while 
maintaining, as closely as possible, the angle determined in 
S16.2.10.3.1. Set the SCRP at the midpoint height with the seat cushion 
reference line angle set as closely as possible to the angle determined 
in S16.2.10.3.1. Mark location of the seat for future reference.
    S16.3 Dummy seating positioning procedures. The 49 CFR Part 572 
Subpart O 5th percentile adult female test dummy is positioned as 
follows:
    S16.3.1 General provisions and definitions.
    S16.3.1.1 All angles are measured with respect to the horizontal 
plane unless otherwise stated.
    S16.3.1.2 The dummy's neck bracket is adjusted to align the zero 
degree index marks.
    S16.3.1.3 The term ``midsagittal plane'' refers to the vertical 
plane that separates the dummy into equal left and right halves.
    S16.3.1.4 The term ``vertical longitudinal plane'' refers to a 
vertical plane parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline.
    S16.3.1.5 The term ``vertical plane'' refers to a vertical plane, 
not necessarily parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline.
    S16.3.1.6 The term ``transverse instrumentation platform'' refers to 
the transverse instrumentation surface inside the dummy's skull casting 
to which the neck load cell mounts. This surface is perpendicular to the 
skull cap's machined inferior-superior mounting surface.

[[Page 820]]

    S16.3.1.7 The term ``thigh'' refers to the femur between, but not 
including, the knee and the pelvis.
    S16.3.1.8 The term ``leg'' refers to the lower part of the entire 
leg, including the knee.
    S16.3.1.9 The term ``foot'' refers to the foot, including the ankle.
    S16.3.1.10 The longitudinal centerline of a bucket seat cushion is 
defined by a vertical plane that passes through the SgRP and is parallel 
to the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle.
    S16.3.1.11 For leg and thigh angles, use the following references:
    S16.3.1.11.1 Thigh--a straight line on the thigh skin between the 
center of the 1/2-13 UNC-2B tapped hole in the upper leg femur clamp 
(see drawings 880105-504 (left thigh) and 880105-505 (right thigh), 
upper leg femur clamp) and the knee pivot shoulder bolt (part 880105-527 
in drawing 880105-528R & 528L, sliding knee assembly without 
potentiometer).
    S16.3.1.11.2 Leg--a straight line on the leg skin between the center 
of the ankle shell (parts 880105-609 & 633 in drawing 880105-660, ankle 
assembly) and the knee pivot shoulder bolt (part 880105-527 in drawing 
880105-528R & 528L, sliding knee assembly without potentiometer).
    S16.3.1.12 The term ``seat cushion reference point'' (SCRP) means a 
point placed on the outboard side of the seat cushion at a horizontal 
distance between 150 mm (5.9 in) and 250 mm (9.8 in) from the front edge 
of the seat used as a guide in positioning the seat.
    S16.3.1.13 The term ``seat cushion reference line'' means a line on 
the side of the seat cushion, passing through the seat cushion reference 
point, whose projection in the vehicle vertical longitudinal plane is 
straight and has a known angle with respect to the horizontal.
    S16.3.2 Driver dummy positioning.
    S16.3.2.1 Driver torso/head/seat back angle positioning.
    S16.3.2.1.1 With the seat in the position determined in 
S16.2.10.3.3, use only the control that primarily moves the seat fore 
and aft to place the seat in the rearmost position. If the seat cushion 
reference line angle automatically changes as the seat is moved from the 
full forward position, maintain, as closely as possible, the seat 
cushion reference line angle determined in S16.2.10.3.1, for the final 
forward position when measuring the pelvic angle as specified in 
S16.3.2.1.11. The seat cushion reference angle position may be achieved 
through the use of any seat or seat cushion adjustments other than that 
which primarily moves the seat or seat cushion fore-aft.
    S16.3.2.1.2 Fully recline the seat back, if adjustable. Install the 
dummy into the driver's seat, such that when the legs are positioned 120 
degrees to the thighs, the calves of the legs are not touching the seat 
cushion.
    S16.3.2.1.3 Bucket seats. Place the dummy on the seat cushion so 
that its midsagittal plane is vertical and coincides with the vertical 
longitudinal plane through the center of the seat cushion, within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in).
    S16.3.2.1.4 Bench seats. Position the midsagittal plane of the dummy 
vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline and 
aligned within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 
in) of the center of the steering wheel rim.
    S16.3.2.1.5 Hold the dummy's thighs down and push rearward on the 
upper torso to maximize the dummy's pelvic angle.
    S16.3.2.1.6 Place the legs at 120 degrees to the thighs. Set the 
initial transverse distance between the longitudinal centerlines at the 
front of the dummy's knees at 160 to 170 mm (6.3 to 6.7 in), with the 
thighs and legs of the dummy in vertical planes. Push rearward on the 
dummy's knees to force the pelvis into the seat so there is no gap 
between the pelvis and the seat back or until contact occurs between the 
back of the dummy's calves and the front of the seat cushion.
    S16.3.2.1.7 Gently rock the upper torso laterally in a side to side 
motion three times through a <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degree arc 
(approximately 51 mm (2 in) side to side).
    S16.3.2.1.8 If needed, extend the legs slightly so that the feet are 
not in contact with the floor pan. Let the thighs rest on the seat 
cushion to the extent permitted by the foot movement. Keeping the leg 
and the thigh in a vertical plane, place the foot in the vertical 
longitudinal plane that passes through the centerline of the accelerator 
pedal.

[[Page 821]]

Rotate the left thigh outboard about the hip until the center of the 
knee is the same distance from the midsagittal plane of the dummy as the 
right knee <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 in). 
Using only the control that primarily moves the seat fore and aft, 
attempt to return the seat to the full forward position. If either of 
the dummy's legs first contacts the steering wheel, then adjust the 
steering wheel, if adjustable, upward until contact with the steering 
wheel is avoided. If the steering wheel is not adjustable, separate the 
knees enough to avoid steering wheel contact. Proceed with moving the 
seat forward until either the leg contacts the vehicle interior or the 
seat reaches the full forward position. (The right foot may contact and 
depress the accelerator and/or change the angle of the foot with respect 
to the leg during seat movement.) If necessary to avoid contact with the 
vehicles brake or clutch pedal, rotate the test dummy's left foot about 
the leg. If there is still interference, rotate the left thigh outboard 
about the hip the minimum distance necessary to avoid pedal 
interference. If a dummy leg contacts the vehicle interior before the 
full forward position is attained, position the seat at the next detent 
where there is no contact. If the seat is a power seat, move the seat 
fore and aft to avoid contact while assuring that there is a maximum of 
5 mm (0.2 in) distance between the vehicle interior and the point on the 
dummy that would first contact the vehicle interior. If the steering 
wheel was moved, return it to the position described in S16.2.9. If the 
steering wheel contacts the dummy's leg(s) prior to attaining this 
position, adjust it to the next higher detent, or if infinitely 
adjustable, until there is 5 mm (0.2 in) clearance between the wheel and 
the dummy's leg(s).
    S16.3.2.1.9 For vehicles without adjustable seat backs, adjust the 
lower neck bracket to level the head as much as possible. For vehicles 
with adjustable seat backs, while holding the thighs in place, rotate 
the seat back forward until the transverse instrumentation platform of 
the head is level to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degree, making 
sure that the pelvis does not interfere with the seat bight. Inspect the 
abdomen to ensure that it is properly installed. If the torso contacts 
the steering wheel, adjust the steering wheel in the following order 
until there is no contact: telescoping adjustment, lowering adjustment, 
raising adjustment. If the vehicle has no adjustments, or contact with 
the steering wheel cannot be eliminated by adjustment, position the seat 
at the next detent where there is no contact with the steering wheel as 
adjusted in S16.2.9. If the seat is a power seat, position the seat to 
avoid contact while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) 
distance between the steering wheel as adjusted in S16.2.9 and the point 
of contact on the dummy.
    S16.3.2.1.10 If it is not possible to achieve the head level within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degrees, minimize the angle.
    S16.3.2.1.11 Measure and set the dummy's pelvic angle using the 
pelvic angle gauge (drawing TE-2504, incorporated by reference in 49 CFR 
part 572, subpart O of this chapter). The angle shall be set to 20.0 
degrees <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 degrees. If this is not possible, 
adjust the pelvic angle as close to 20.0 degrees as possible while 
keeping the transverse instrumentation platform of the head as level as 
possible by adjustments specified in S16.3.2.1.9 and S16.3.2.1.10.
    S16.3.2.1.12 If the dummy is contacting the vehicle interior after 
these adjustments, using only the control that primarily moves the seat 
fore and aft, move the seat rearward until there is a maximum of 5 mm 
(0.2 in) between the contact point of the dummy and the interior of the 
vehicle or if it has a manual seat adjustment, to the next rearward 
detent position. If after these adjustments, the dummy contact point is 
more than 5 mm (0.2 in) from the vehicle interior and the seat is still 
not in its forwardmost position, move the seat forward until the contact 
point is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) from the vehicle interior, or if it 
has a manual seat adjustment, move the seat to the closest detent 
position that causes no contact, or until the seat reaches its 
forwardmost position, whichever occurs first.
    S16.3.2.2 Driver foot positioning.
    S16.3.2.2.1 If the vehicle has an adjustable accelerator pedal, 
adjust it to the full forward position. If the heel of

[[Page 822]]

the right foot can contact the floor pan, follow the positioning 
procedure in (a). If not, follow the positioning procedure in (b).
    (a) Rest the right foot of the test dummy on the undepressed 
accelerator pedal with the rearmost point of the heel on the floor pan 
in the plane of the pedal. If the foot cannot be placed on the 
accelerator pedal, set it initially perpendicular to the leg and then 
place it as far forward as possible in the direction of the pedal 
centerline with the rearmost point of the heel resting on the floor pan. 
If the vehicle has an adjustable accelerator pedal and the right foot is 
not touching the accelerator pedal when positioned as above, move the 
pedal rearward until it touches the right foot. If the accelerator pedal 
in the full rearward position still does not touch the foot, leave the 
pedal in that position. Extend the foot and lower leg by decreasing the 
knee flexion angle until any part of the foot contacts the undepressed 
accelerator pedal. If the foot does not contact the pedal, place the 
highest part of the foot at the same height as the highest part of the 
pedal.
    (b) Extend the foot and lower leg by decreasing the knee flexion 
angle until any part of the foot contacts the undepressed accelerator 
pedal or the highest part of the foot is at the same height as the 
highest part of the pedal. If the vehicle has an adjustable accelerator 
pedal and the right foot is not touching the accelerator pedal when 
positioned as above, move the pedal rearward until it touches the right 
foot.
    S16.3.2.2.2 If the ball of the right foot does not contact the 
pedal, increase the ankle plantar flexion angle such that the toe of the 
foot contacts or is as close as possible to contact with the undepressed 
accelerator pedal.
    S16.3.2.2.3 If, in its final position, the heel is off of the 
vehicle floor, a spacer block must be used under the heel to support the 
final foot position (see figure 13). The surface of the block in contact 
with the heel must have an inclination of 30 degrees, measured from the 
horizontal, with the highest surface towards the rear of the vehicle.
    S16.3.2.2.4 Place the left foot on the toe-board with the rearmost 
point of the heel resting on the floor pan as close as possible to the 
point of intersection of the planes described by the toe-board and floor 
pan.
    S16.3.2.2.5 If the left foot cannot be positioned on the toe board, 
place the foot perpendicular to the lower leg centerline as far forward 
as possible with the heel resting on the floor pan.
    S16.3.2.2.6 If the left foot does not contact the floor pan, place 
the foot parallel to the floor and place the lower leg as perpendicular 
to the thigh as possible.
    S16.3.2.2.7 When positioning the test dummy under S16.3.2.2.4, 
S16.3.2.2.5, and S16.2.2.6, avoid contact between the left foot of the 
test dummy and the vehicle's brake pedal, clutch pedal, wheel well 
projection, and foot rest. To avoid this contact, use the three foot 
position adjustments listed in paragraphs (a) through (c). The 
adjustment options are listed in priority order, with each subsequent 
option incorporating the previous. In making each adjustment, move the 
foot the minimum distance necessary to avoid contact. If it is not 
possible to avoid all prohibited foot contact, give priority to avoiding 
brake or clutch pedal contact.
    (a) Rotate (abduction/adduction) the test dummy's left foot about 
the lower leg,
    (b) Plantar flex the foot,
    (c) Rotate the left leg about the hip in either an outboard or 
inboard direction.
    S16.3.2.3 Driver arm/hand positioning.
    S16.3.2.3.1 Place the dummy's upper arms adjacent to the torso with 
the arm centerlines as close to a vertical longitudinal plane as 
possible.
    S16.3.2.3.2 Place the palms of the dummy in contact with the outer 
part of the steering wheel rim at its horizontal centerline with the 
thumbs over the steering wheel rim.
    S16.3.2.3.3 If it is not possible to position the thumbs inside the 
steering wheel rim at its horizontal centerline, then position them 
above and as close to the horizontal centerline of the steering wheel 
rim as possible.
    S16.3.2.3.4 Lightly tape the hands to the steering wheel rim so that 
if the hand of the test dummy is pushed upward by a force of not less 
than 9 N (2 lb) and not more than 22 N (5 lb), the

[[Page 823]]

tape releases the hand from the steering wheel rim.
    S16.3.3 Passenger dummy positioning.
    S16.3.3.1 Passenger torso/head/seat back angle positioning.
    S16.3.3.1.1 With the seat at the mid-height in the full forward 
position determined in S16.2.10.3.3, use only the control that primarily 
moves the seat fore and aft to place the seat in the rearmost position, 
without adjusting independent height controls. If the seat cushion 
reference line angle automatically changes as the seat is moved from the 
full forward position, maintain as closely as possible the seat cushion 
reference line angle in S16.2.10.3.1, for the final forward position 
when measuring the pelvic angle as specified in S16.3.3.1.11. The seat 
cushion reference line angle position may be achieved through the use of 
any seat or seat cushion adjustments other than that which primarily 
moves the seat or seat cushion fore-aft.
    S16.3.3.1.2 Fully recline the seat back, if adjustable. Install the 
dummy into the passenger seat, such that when the legs are 120 degrees 
to the thighs, the calves of the legs are not touching the seat cushion.
    S16.3.3.1.3 Bucket seats. Place the dummy on the seat cushion so 
that its midsagittal plane is vertical and coincides with the vertical 
longitudinal plane through the center of the seat cushion, within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 mm).
    S16.3.3.1.4 Bench seats. Position the midsagittal plane of the dummy 
vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline and the 
same distance from the vehicle's longitudinal centerline, within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in), as the midsagittal 
plane of the driver dummy.
    S16.3.3.1.5 Hold the dummy's thighs down and push rearward on the 
upper torso to maximize the dummy's pelvic angle.
    S16.3.3.1.6 Place the legs at 120 degrees to the thighs. Set the 
initial transverse distance between the longitudinal centerlines at the 
front of the dummy's knees at 160 to 170 mm (6.3 to 6.7 in), with the 
thighs and legs of the dummy in vertical planes. Push rearward on the 
dummy's knees to force the pelvis into the seat so there is no gap 
between the pelvis and the seat back or until contact occurs between the 
back of the dummy's calves and the front of the seat cushion.
    S16.3.3.1.7 Gently rock the upper torso laterally side to side three 
times through a <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degree arc (approximately 51 mm 
(2 in) side to side).
    S16.3.3.1.8 If needed, extend the legs slightly so that the feet are 
not in contact with the floor pan. Let the thighs rest on the seat 
cushion to the extent permitted by the foot movement. With the feet 
perpendicular to the legs, place the heels on the floor pan. If a heel 
will not contact the floor pan, place it as close to the floor pan as 
possible. Using only the control that primarily moves the seat fore and 
aft, attempt to return the seat to the full forward position. If a dummy 
leg contacts the vehicle interior before the full forward position is 
attained, position the seat at the next detent where there is no 
contact. If the seats are power seats, position the seat to avoid 
contact while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) distance 
between the vehicle interior and the point on the dummy that would first 
contact the vehicle interior.
    S16.3.3.1.9 For vehicles without adjustable seat backs, adjust the 
lower neck bracket to level the head as much as possible. For vehicles 
with adjustable seat backs, while holding the thighs in place, rotate 
the seat back forward until the transverse instrumentation platform of 
the head is level to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degrees, making 
sure that the pelvis does not interfere with the seat bight. Inspect the 
abdomen to insure that it is properly installed.
    S16.3.3.1.10 If it is not possible to orient the head level within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degrees, minimize the angle.
    S16.3.3.1.11 Measure and set the dummy's pelvic angle using the 
pelvic angle gauge (drawing TE-2504, incorporated by reference in 49 CFR 
Part 572, Subpart O, of this chapter). The angle shall be set to 20.0 
degrees <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 degrees. If this is not possible, 
adjust the pelvic angle as close to 20.0 degrees as possible while 
keeping the transverse instrumentation platform of the head as level as 
possible, as specified in S16.3.3.1.9 and S16.3.3.1.10.
    S16.3.3.1.12 If the dummy is contacting the vehicle interior after 
these

[[Page 824]]

adjustments, using only the control that primarily moves the seat fore 
and aft, move the seat rearward until there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 
in) between the contact point of the dummy and the interior of the 
vehicle or if it has a manual seat adjustment, to the next rearward 
detent position. If after these adjustments, the dummy contact point is 
more than 5 mm (0.2 in) from the vehicle interior and the seat is still 
not in its forwardmost position, move the seat forward until the contact 
point is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) from the vehicle interior, or if it 
has a manual seat adjustment, move the seat to the closest detent 
position that causes no contact, or until the seat reaches its 
forwardmost position, whichever occurs first.
    S16.3.3.2 Passenger foot positioning.
    S16.3.3.2.1 Place the passenger's feet flat on the toe board.
    S16.3.3.2.2 If the feet cannot be placed flat on the toe board, set 
them perpendicular to the leg centerlines and place them as far forward 
as possible with the heels resting on the floor pan. If either foot does 
not contact the floor pan, place the foot parallel to the floor pan and 
place the lower leg as perpendicular to the thigh as possible.
    S16.3.3.3 Passenger arm/hand positioning.
    S16.3.3.3.1 Place the dummy's upper arms in contact with the seat 
back and the torso.
    S16.3.3.3.2 Place the palms of the dummy in contact with the outside 
of the thighs.
    S16.3.3.3.3 Place the little fingers in contact with the seat 
cushion.
    S16.3.4 Driver and passenger adjustable head restraints.
    S16.3.4.1 If the head restraint has an automatic adjustment, leave 
it where the system positions the restraint after the dummy is placed in 
the seat.
    S16.3.4.2 Adjust each head restraint to its lowest position.
    S16.3.4.3 Measure the vertical distance from the top most point of 
the head restraint to the bottom most point. Locate a horizontal plane 
through the midpoint of this distance. Adjust each head restraint 
vertically so that this horizontal plane is aligned with the center of 
gravity (CG) of the dummy head.
    S16.3.4.3 If the above position is not attainable, move the vertical 
center of the head restraint to the closest detent below the center of 
the head CG.
    S16.3.4.4 If the head restraint has a fore and aft adjustment, place 
the restraint in the forwardmost position or until contact with the head 
is made, whichever occurs first.
    S16.3.5 Driver and passenger manual belt adjustment (for tests 
conducted with a belted dummy)
    S16.3.5.1 If an adjustable seat belt D-ring anchorage exists, place 
it in the manufacturer's design position for a 5th percentile adult 
female with the seat in the position specified in S16.2.10.3.
    S16.3.5.2 Place the Type 2 manual belt around the test dummy and 
fasten the latch.
    S16.3.5.3 Ensure that the dummy's head remains as level as possible, 
as specified in S16.3.2.1.9 and S16.3.2.1.10 and S16.3.3.1.9 and 
S16.3.3.1.10.
    S16.3.5.4 Remove all slack from the lap belt. Pull the upper torso 
webbing out of the retractor and allow it to retract; repeat this 
operation four times. Apply a 9 N (2 lbf) to 18 N (4 lbf) tension load 
to the lap belt. If the belt system is equipped with a tension-relieving 
device, introduce the maximum amount of slack into the upper torso belt 
that is recommended by the manufacturer. If the belt system is not 
equipped with a tension-relieving device, allow the excess webbing in 
the shoulder belt to be retracted by the retractive force of the 
retractor.
    S17 Offset frontal deformable barrier requirements using 5th 
percentile adult female test dummies. Each vehicle that is certified as 
complying with S14 shall, at each front outboard designated seating 
position, meet the injury criteria specified in S15.3 of this standard 
when the vehicle is crash tested in accordance with the procedures 
specified in S18 of this standard with the anthropomorphic test devices 
restrained by a Type 2 seat belt assembly.
    S18 Test procedure for offset frontal deformable barrier 
requirements using 5th percentile adult female dummies.
    S18.1 General provisions. Place a 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart O 5th 
percentile adult female test dummy at each front

[[Page 825]]

outboard seating position of a vehicle, in accordance with the 
procedures specified in S16.3 of this standard. Impact the vehicle 
traveling longitudinally forward at any speed, up to and including 40 
km/h (25 mph), into a fixed offset deformable barrier under the 
conditions and procedures specified in S18.2 of this standard, impacting 
only the left side of the vehicle.
    S18.2 Test conditions.
    S18.2.1 Offset frontal deformable barrier. The offset frontal 
deformable barrier shall conform to the specifications set forth in 
Subpart C of part 587 of this chapter.
    S18.2.2 General test conditions. All of the test conditions 
specified in S16.2 of this standard apply.
    S18.2.3 Dummy seating procedures. Position the anthropomorphic test 
dummies as specified in S16.3 of this standard.
    S18.2.4 Impact configuration. The test vehicle shall impact the 
barrier with the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle parallel to the 
line of travel and perpendicular to the barrier face within a tolerance 
of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees. The test vehicle shall be aligned so 
that the vehicle strikes the barrier with 40 percent overlap on the left 
side of the vehicle, with the vehicle's front engaging the barrier face 
such that the vehicle's longitudinal centerline is offset outboard of 
the edge of the barrier face by 10 percent of the vehicle's width <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>50 mm (2.0 in) as illustrated in Figure 10. The vehicle 
width is defined as the maximum dimension measured across the widest 
part of the vehicle, including bumpers and molding but excluding such 
components as exterior mirrors, flexible mud flaps, marker lamps, and 
dual rear wheel configurations.
    S19 Requirements to provide protection for infants in rear facing 
and convertible child restraints and car beds.
    S19.1 Each vehicle certified as complying with S14 shall, at the 
option of the manufacturer, meet the requirements specified in S19.2 or 
S19.3, under the test procedures specified in S20.
    S19.2 Option 1--Automatic suppression feature. Each vehicle shall 
meet the requirements specified in S19.2.1 through S19.2.3.
    S19.2.1 The vehicle shall be equipped with an automatic suppression 
feature for the passenger air bag which results in deactivation of the 
air bag during each of the static tests specified in S20.2 (using the 49 
CFR part 572 Subpart R 12-month-old CRABI child dummy in any of the 
child restraints identified in sections B and C of appendix A or A-1 of 
this standard, as appropriate and the 49 CFR part 572 subpart K Newborn 
Infant dummy in any of the car beds identified in section A of appendix 
A or A-1, as appropriate), and activation of the air bag system during 
each of the static tests specified in S20.3 (using the 49 CFR part 572 
Subpart O 5th percentile adult female dummy).
    S19.2.2 The vehicle shall be equipped with at least one telltale 
which emits light whenever the passenger air bag system is deactivated 
and does not emit light whenever the passenger air bag system is 
activated, except that the telltale(s) need not illuminate when the 
passenger seat is unoccupied. Each telltale:
    (a) Shall emit yellow light;
    (b) Shall have the identifying words ``PASSENGER AIR BAG OFF'' or 
``PASS AIR BAG OFF'' on the telltale or within 25 mm (1.0 in) of the 
telltale; and
    (c) Shall not be combined with the readiness indicator required by 
S4.5.2 of this standard.
    (d) Shall be located within the interior of the vehicle and forward 
of and above the design H-point of both the driver's and the right front 
passenger's seat in their forwardmost seating positions and shall not be 
located on or adjacent to a surface that can be used for temporary or 
permanent storage of objects that could obscure the telltale from either 
the driver's or right front passenger's view, or located where the 
telltale would be obscured from the driver's view if a rear-facing child 
restraint listed in appendix A or A-1, as appropriate, is installed in 
the right front passenger's seat.
    (e) Shall be visible and recognizable to a driver and right front 
passenger during night and day when the occupants have adapted to the 
ambient light roadway conditions.
    (f) Telltales need not be visible or recognizable when not 
activated.

[[Page 826]]

    (g) Means shall be provided for making telltales visible and 
recognizable to the driver and right front passenger under all driving 
conditions. The means for providing the required visibility may be 
adjustable manually or automatically, except that the telltales may not 
be adjustable under any driving conditions to a level that they become 
invisible or not recognizable to the driver and right front passenger.
    (h) The telltale must not emit light except when the passenger air 
bag is turned off or during a bulb check upon vehicle starting.
    S19.2.3 The vehicle shall be equipped with a mechanism that 
indicates whether the air bag system is suppressed, regardless of 
whether the passenger seat is occupied. The mechanism need not be 
located in the occupant compartment unless it is the telltale described 
in S19.2.2.
    S19.3 Option 2--Low risk deployment. Each vehicle shall meet the 
injury criteria specified in S19.4 of this standard when the passenger 
air bag is deployed in accordance with the procedures specified in 
S20.4.
    S19.4 Injury criteria for the 49 CFR part 572, Subpart R 12-month-
old CRABI test dummy.
    S19.4.1 All portions of the test dummy and child restraint shall be 
contained within the outer surfaces of the vehicle passenger 
compartment.
    S19.4.2 Head injury criteria.
    (a) For any two points in time, t<INF>1</INF> and t<INF>2</INF>, 
during the event which are separated by not more than a 15 millisecond 
time interval and where t<INF>1</INF> is less than t<INF>2</INF>, the 
head injury criterion (HIC<INF>15</INF>) shall be determined using the 
resultant head acceleration at the center of gravity of the dummy head, 
a<INF>r</INF>, expressed as a multiple of g (the acceleration of 
gravity) and shall be calculated using the expression:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18DE01.000

    (b) The maximum calculated HIC<INF>15</INF> value shall not exceed 
390.
    S19.4.3 The resultant acceleration calculated from the output of the 
thoracic instrumentation shall not exceed 50 g's, except for intervals 
whose cumulative duration is not more than 3 milliseconds.
    S19.4.4 Neck injury. When measuring neck injury, each of the 
following injury criteria shall be met.
    (a) Nij.
    (1) The shear force (Fx), axial force (Fz), and bending moment (My) 
shall be measured by the dummy upper neck load cell for the duration of 
the crash event as specified in S4.11. Shear force, axial force, and 
bending moment shall be filtered for Nij purposes at SAE J211/1 rev. 
Mar95 Channel Frequency Class 600 (see S4.7).
    (2) During the event, the axial force (Fz) can be either in tension 
or compression while the occipital condyle bending moment (Mocy) can be 
in either flexion or extension. This results in four possible loading 
conditions for Nij: tension-extension (Nte), tension-flexion (Ntf), 
compression-extension (Nce), or compression-flexion (Ncf).
    (3) When calculating Nij using equation S19.4.4(a)(4), the critical 
values, Fzc and Myc, are:
    (i) Fzc = 1460 N (328 lbf) when Fz is in tension
    (ii) Fzc = 1460 N (328 lbf) when Fz is in compression
    (iii) Myc = 43 Nm (32 lbf-ft) when a flexion moment exists at the 
occipital condyle
    (iv) Myc = 17 Nm (13 lbf-ft) when an extension moment exists at the 
occipital condyle.
    (4) At each point in time, only one of the four loading conditions 
occurs and the Nij value corresponding to that loading condition is 
computed and the three remaining loading modes shall be considered a 
value of zero. The expression for calculating each Nij loading condition 
is given by:

Nij ' (Fz / Fzc) + (Mocy / Myc)

    (5) None of the four Nij values shall exceed 1.0 at any time during 
the event.
    (b) Peak tension. Tension force (Fz), measured at the upper neck 
load cell, shall not exceed 780 N (175 lbf) at any time.
    (c) Peak compression. Compression force (Fz), measured at the upper 
neck load cell, shall not exceed 960 N (216 lbf) at any time.

[[Page 827]]

    S19.4.5 Unless otherwise indicated, instrumentation for data 
acquisition, data channel frequency class, and moment calculations are 
the same as given for the 49 CFR part 572 Subpart R 12-month-old CRABI 
test dummy.
    S20 Test procedure for S19.
    S20.1 General provisions.
    S20.1.1 Tests specifying the use of a car bed, a rear facing child 
restraint, or a convertible child restraint may be conducted using any 
such restraint listed in sections A, B, and C, respectively, of appendix 
A or A-1 of this standard, as appropriate. The car bed, rear facing 
child restraint, or convertible child restraint may be unused or have 
been previously used only for automatic suppression tests. If it has 
been used, there shall not be any visible damage prior to the test.
    S20.1.2 Unless otherwise specified, each vehicle certified to this 
option shall comply in tests conducted with the front outboard passenger 
seating position, if adjustable fore and aft, at full rearward, middle, 
and full forward positions. If the child restraint or dummy contacts the 
vehicle interior, move the seat rearward to the next detent that 
provides clearance, or if the seat is a power seat, using only the 
control that primarily moves the seat fore and aft, move the seat 
rearward while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) 
clearance between the dummy or child restraint and the vehicle interior.
    S20.1.3 If the car bed, rear facing child restraint, or convertible 
child restraint is equipped with a handle, the vehicle shall comply in 
tests conducted with the handle at both the child restraint 
manufacturer's recommended position for use in vehicles and in the 
upright position.
    S20.1.4 If the car bed, rear facing child restraint, or convertible 
child restraint is equipped with a sunshield, the vehicle shall comply 
in tests conducted with the sunshield both fully open and fully closed.
    S20.1.5 The vehicle shall comply in tests with the car bed, rear 
facing child restraint, or convertible child restraint uncovered and in 
tests with a towel or blanket weighing up to 1.0 kg (2.2 lb) placed on 
or over the restraint in any of the following positions:
    (a) with the blanket covering the top and sides of the restraint, 
and
    (b) with the blanket placed from the top of the vehicle's seat back 
to the forwardmost edge of the restraint.
    S20.1.6 Except as otherwise specified, if the car bed, rear facing 
child restraint, or convertible child restraint has an anchorage system 
as specified in S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213 and is tested in a vehicle with a 
front outboard passenger vehicle seat that has an anchorage system as 
specified in FMVSS No. 225, the vehicle shall comply in the belted tests 
with the restraint anchorage system attached to the vehicle seat 
anchorage system and the vehicle seat belt unattached. It shall also 
comply in the belted test requirements with the restraint anchorage 
system unattached to the vehicle seat anchorage system and the vehicle 
seat belt attached. The vehicle shall comply in the unbelted tests with 
the restraint anchorage system unattached to the vehicle seat anchorage 
system.
    S20.1.7 If the car bed, rear facing child restraint, or convertible 
child restraint comes equipped with a detachable base, the vehicle shall 
comply in tests conducted with the detachable base attached to the child 
restraint and with the detachable base unattached to the child 
restraint.
    S20.1.8 Do not attach any tethers.
    S20.1.9 Seat set-up. Unless otherwise stated.
    S20.1.9.1 Lumbar support adjustment. Position adjustable lumbar 
supports so that the lumbar support is in its lowest, retracted or 
deflated adjustment position.
    S20.1.9.2 Other seat adjustments. Position any adjustable parts of 
the seat that provide additional support so that they are in the lowest 
or most open adjustment position.
    S20.1.9.3 Set the seat and seat cushion in the position determined 
in S16.2.10.3.1.
    S20.1.9.4 Using only the control that primarily moves the seat in 
the fore and aft direction, determine the full rearward, middle, and 
full forward positions of the SCRP. Using any part of any seat or seat 
cushion adjustments, other than that which primarily moves the seat or 
seat cushion fore-aft, determine the SCRP mid-point height for

[[Page 828]]

each of the three fore-aft test positions, while maintaining, as closely 
as possible, the seat cushion reference line middle angle determined in 
S16.2.10.3.1.
    S20.1.9.5 The seat back angle, if adjustable, is set at the 
manufacturer's nominal design seat back angle for a 50th percentile 
adult male as specified in S8.1.3.
    S20.1.9.6 If adjustable, set the head restraint at the full down and 
full forward position.
    S20.1.10 The longitudinal centerline of a bucket seat cushion is 
defined by a vertical plane that passes through the SgRP and is parallel 
to the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle.
    S20.2 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in deactivation of the passenger air bag. Each vehicle that is 
certified as complying with S19.2 shall meet the following test 
requirements.
    S20.2.1 Belted rear facing and convertible child restraints.
    S20.2.1.1 The vehicle shall comply in tests using any child 
restraint specified in section B and section C of appendix A or A-1 of 
this standard, as appropriate, installed in the front outboard passenger 
vehicle seat in the following orientations:
    (a) With the section B and section C child restraints facing 
rearward as appropriate; and
    (b) With the section C child restraints facing forward.
    S20.2.1.2 The vehicle shall comply with the child restraint attached 
to the vehicle in the following manner:
    (a) Using the vehicle safety belts as specified in S20.2.1.5; and
    (b) If the child restraint is certified to S5.9 of Sec. 571.213, 
and the vehicle seat has an anchorage system as specified in Sec. 
571.225, using only the mechanism provided by the child restraint 
manufacturer for attachment to the lower anchorages as specified in 
S20.2.1.6.
    S20.2.1.3 Locate a vertical plane through the longitudinal 
centerline of the child restraint. This will be referred to as ``Plane 
A.''
    S20.2.1.4 For bucket seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane 
parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline through the longitudinal 
centerline of the front outboard passenger vehicle seat cushion. For 
bench seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane through the front 
outboard passenger vehicle seat parallel to the vehicle longitudinal 
centerline the same distance from the longitudinal centerline of the 
vehicle as the center of the steering wheel.
    S20.2.1.5 Installation with vehicle safety belts.
    (a) Place any adjustable seat belt anchorages at the vehicle 
manufacturer's nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male 
occupant.
    (b) Without attaching the child restraint anchorage system 
components specified in S5.9 of Sec. 571.213 to a vehicle child 
restraint anchorage system specified in Sec. 571.225, align the child 
restraint system facing rearward or forward, depending on the 
orientation being tested, such that Plane A is aligned with Plane B.
    (c) While maintaining the child restraint positions achieved in 
S20.2.1.5(b), secure the child restraint by following, to the extent 
possible, the child restraint manufacturer's directions regarding proper 
installation of the restraint for the orientation being tested. Cinch 
the vehicle belts to any tension from zero up to 134 N to secure the 
child restraint. Measure belt tension in a flat, straight section of the 
lap belt between the child restraint belt path and the contact point 
with the belt anchor or vehicle seat, on the side away from the buckle 
(to avoid interference from the shoulder portion of the belt).
    (d) Position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart R 12-month-old CRABI dummy 
in the child restraint by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating infants.
    (e) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and close all 
vehicle doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S20.2.1.6 Installation using the lower anchor bars and the child 
restraint manufacturer provided attachment mechanism.
    S20.2.1.6.1 If the attachment mechanism provided by the manufacturer 
incorporates a strap(s), use the following procedure:

[[Page 829]]

    (a) Place the child restraint on the vehicle seat facing rearward or 
forward, depending on the orientation being tested, with Plane A of the 
child restraint aligned within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm with a 
longitudinal vertical plane passing though a point midway between the 
centers of the two lower anchor bars.
    (b) Position any adjustments on the child restraint, to the extent 
possible according to the child restraint manufacturer's instructions.
    (c) Connect the lower anchor straps of the restraint to the lower 
anchor bars of the seat and remove the slack, but do not apply any load 
using these straps.
    (d) Move the child restraint rearward until it contacts the seat 
back.
    (e) Use the loading device equipped with the loading foot shown in 
Figure A1 and position it as shown in Figure A2 of appendix A and 
appendix A-1 of this section. The 15<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 degree angle 
of the loading device illustrated in Figure A2 is determined with an 
initial preload of 75<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25N.
    (f) Over a period of 90<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>30 seconds, increase 
the load to 875N<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25 N.
    (g) After achieving the 875 N load in step (f) of this section, hold 
the bar length at present position and allow the load to settle for 60 
seconds.
    (h) Following the one-minute settling period specified in step (g) 
of this section, increase the load to 875<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25 N such 
that the 875<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25 N load is achieved within 10 
seconds of the settling period.
    (i) Hold the bar length at present position and allow the load to 
settle for 120 seconds after achieving the load in step (f) of this 
section.
    (j) Following the settling period specified in step (i) of this 
section, increase the load to 875<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25 N such that 
the 875<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25 N load is achieved within 10 seconds of 
the settling period.
    (k) Observe the settling of the load and tighten the lower anchor 
straps when the load is 850<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5N or 180 seconds has 
elapsed since achieving the 875<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25 N load in step 
(f) of this section, whichever comes first. Tighten the lower anchor 
straps at the same time such that the load is reduced 15<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 N and the change occurs within 2 seconds.
    (l) Remove the loading device and position the 49 CFR part 572 
subpart R 12-month-old CRABI dummy in the child restraint by following, 
to the extent possible, the manufacturer's instructions provided with 
the child restraint for seating infants.
    (m) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and close all 
vehicle doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S20.2.1.6.2 If the mechanism provided by the manufacturer does not 
incorporate a strap(s), use the following procedure:
    (a) Place the vehicle seat in the rearmost and mid-height position.
    (b) Place the child restraint on the vehicle seat facing rearward or 
forward, depending on the orientation being tested, with Plane A of the 
child restraint aligned within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm with a 
longitudinal vertical plane passing though a point midway between the 
centers of the two lower anchor bars.
    (c) Position any adjustments on the child restraint, to the extent 
possible, according to the child restraint manufacturer's instructions.
    (d) Connect the lower anchor attachments to the lower anchor bars 
following, to the extent possible, the child restraint manufacturer's 
instructions.
    (e) Move the child restraint rearward until it contacts the seat 
back.
    (f) If the child restraint does not use a linear sliding or 
ratcheting mechanism that requires the application of force to securely 
install the child restraint, follow, to the extent possible, the CRS 
manufacturer's instructions for installing the child restraint onto the 
seat. Do not load the seat as provided in S20.2.1.6.2(g).
    (g) If the child restraint uses a linear sliding or ratcheting 
mechanism that requires the application of force to securely install the 
child restraint, within 25<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 seconds, apply a 
475<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25N force, that has no lateral component, 
aligned angularly <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 degrees with a parallel plane 
located within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>100 mm of the plane formed by the 
linear mechanism. Release the force.
    (h) Position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart R 12-month-old CRABI dummy 
in the child restraint by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating infants.

[[Page 830]]

    (i) Move the vehicle seat to the seat position being tested (full 
rear, mid, full forward).
    (j) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and close all 
vehicle doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S20.2.2 Unbelted rear facing and convertible child restraints.
    S20.2.2.1 The vehicle shall comply in tests using any child 
restraint specified in section B and section C of appendix A or A-1 of 
this standard, as appropriate.
    S20.2.2.2 Locate a vertical plane through the longitudinal 
centerline of the child restraint. This will be referred to as ``Plane 
A''.
    S20.2.2.3 For bucket seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane 
parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline through the longitudinal 
centerline of the front outboard passenger vehicle seat cushion. For 
bench seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane through the front 
outboard passenger seat parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline 
the same distance from the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle as the 
center of the steering wheel.
    S20.2.2.4 Facing rear.
    (a) Align the child restraint system facing rearward such that Plane 
A is aligned with Plane B and the child restraint is in contact with the 
seat back.
    (b) Position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart R 12-month-old CRABI dummy 
in the child restraint by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating infants.
    (c) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and close all 
vehicle doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S20.2.2.5 Facing forward.
    (a) Align the child restraint system facing forward such that Plane 
A is aligned with Plane B and the child restraint is in contact with the 
seat back.
    (b) Position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart R 12-month-old CRABI dummy 
in the child restraint by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating infants.
    (c) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and close all 
vehicle doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S20.2.3 Tests with a belted car bed.
    S20.2.3.1 The vehicle shall comply in tests using any car bed 
specified in section A of appendix A or A-1 of this standard, as 
appropriate.
    S20.2.3.2 (a) Install the car bed following, to the extent possible, 
the car bed manufacturer's directions regarding proper installation of 
the car bed. If the seat belt cannot be secured around the car bed, move 
the seat rearward to the next detent that allows the belt to be secured 
around the car bed, or if the seat is a power seat, using only the 
control that primarily moves the seat fore and aft, move the seat 
rearward the minimum distance necessary for the seat belt to be secured 
around the car bed.
    (b) Place any adjustable seat belt anchorages at the vehicle 
manufacturer's nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male 
occupant. Cinch the vehicle belts to secure the car bed.
    (c) Position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart K Newborn Infant dummy in 
the car bed by following, to the extent possible, the car bed 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the car bed for positioning 
infants.
    (d) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and close all 
vehicle doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S20.3 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in activation of the passenger air bag system.
    S20.3.1 Each vehicle certified to this option shall comply in tests 
conducted with the front outboard passenger seating position, if 
adjustable fore and aft, at the mid-height, in the full rearward and 
middle positions determined in S20.1.9.4, and the forward position 
determined in S16.3.3.1.8.
    S20.3.2 Place a 49 CFR part 572 subpart O 5th percentile adult 
female test

[[Page 831]]

dummy at the front outboard passenger seating position of the vehicle, 
in accordance with procedures specified in S16.3.3 of this standard, 
except as specified in S20.3.1, subject to the fore-aft seat positions 
in S20.3.1. Do not fasten the seat belt.
    S20.3.3 Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    S20.3.4 Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag system is 
activated.
    S20.4 Low risk deployment test. Each vehicle that is certified as 
complying with S19.3 shall meet the following test requirements.
    S20.4.1 Position the front outboard passenger vehicle seat at the 
mid-height in the full forward position determined in S20.1.9.4, and 
adjust the seat back (if adjustable independent of the seat) to the 
nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male as specified in 
S8.1.3. Position adjustable lumbar supports so that the lumbar support 
is in its lowest, retracted or deflated adjustment position. Position 
any adjustable parts of the seat that provide additional support so that 
they are in the lowest or most open adjustment position. If adjustable, 
set the head restraint at the full down and most forward position. If 
the child restraint or dummy contacts the vehicle interior, do the 
following: using only the control that primarily moves the seat in the 
fore and aft direction, move the seat rearward to the next detent that 
provides clearance; or if the seat is a power seat, move the seat 
rearward while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) 
clearance.
    S20.4.2 The vehicle shall comply in tests using any child restraint 
specified in section B and section C of appendix A or A-1 of this 
standard, as appropriate.
    S20.4.3 Locate a vertical plane through the longitudinal centerline 
of the child restraint. This will be referred to as ``Plane A''.
    S20.4.4 For bucket seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane 
parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline through the longitudinal 
centerline of the front outboard passenger seat cushion. For bench 
seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane through the front outboard 
passenger seat parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline that is 
the same distance from the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle as the 
center of the steering wheel.
    S20.4.5 Align the child restraint system facing rearward such that 
Plane A is aligned with Plane B.
    S20.4.6 If the child restraint is certified to S5.9 of Sec. 
571.213, and the vehicle seat has an anchorage system as specified in 
Sec. 571.225, attach the child restraint to the vehicle seat anchorage 
as specified in S20.2.1.6. Do not attach the top tether of the child 
restraint system. Do not attach the vehicle safety belt.
    S20.4.7 While maintaining the child restraint position achieved in 
S20.4.5, secure the child restraint by following, to the extent 
possible, the child restraint manufacturer's directions regarding proper 
installation of the restraint in the rear facing mode. Place any 
adjustable seat belt anchorages at the manufacturer's nominal design 
position for a 50th percentile adult male occupant. Cinch the vehicle 
belts to any tension from zero up to 134 N (30 lb) to secure the child 
restraint. Measure belt tension in a flat, straight section of the lap 
belt between the child restraint belt path and the contact point with 
the belt anchor or vehicle seat, on the side away from the buckle (to 
avoid interference from the shoulder portion of the belt).
    S20.4.8 Position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart R 12-month-old CRABI 
dummy in the child restraint by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating infants.
    S20.4.9 Deploy the front outboard passenger frontal air bag system. 
If the air bag system contains a multistage inflator, the vehicle shall 
be able to comply at any stage or combination of stages or time delay 
between successive stages that could occur in the presence of an infant 
in a rear facing child restraint and a 49 CFR part 572, subpart R 12-
month-old CRABI dummy positioned according to S20.4, and also with the 
seat at the mid-height, in the middle and full rearward positions 
determined in S20.1.9.4, in a rigid barrier

[[Page 832]]

crash test at speeds up to 64 km/h (40 mph).
    S21 Requirements using 3-year-old child dummies.
    S21.1 Each vehicle that is certified as complying with S14 shall, at 
the option of the manufacturer, meet the requirements specified in 
S21.2, S21.3, S21.4 or S21.5, under the test procedures specified in S22 
or S28, as applicable.
    S21.2 Option 1--Automatic suppression feature. Each vehicle shall 
meet the requirements specified in S21.2.1 through S21.2.3.
    S21.2.1 The vehicle shall be equipped with an automatic suppression 
feature for the passenger air bag which results in deactivation of the 
air bag during each of the static tests specified in S22.2 (using the 49 
CFR part 572 subpart P 3-year-old child dummy and, as applicable, any 
child restraint specified in section C and section D of appendix A or A-
1 of this standard, as appropriate), and activation of the air bag 
system during each of the static tests specified in S22.3 (using the 49 
CFR part 572 subpart O 5th percentile adult female dummy).
    S21.2.2 The vehicle shall be equipped with a telltale light meeting 
the requirements specified in S19.2.2.
    S21.2.3 The vehicle shall be equipped with a mechanism that 
indicates whether the air bag is suppressed, regardless of whether the 
passenger seat is occupied. The mechanism need not be located in the 
occupant compartment unless it is the telltale described in S21.2.2.
    S21.3 Option 2--Dynamic automatic suppression system that suppresses 
the air bag when an occupant is out of position. (This option is 
available under the conditions set forth in S27.1.) The vehicle shall be 
equipped with a dynamic automatic suppression system for the passenger 
air bag system which meets the requirements specified in S27.
    S21.4 Option 3--Low risk deployment. Each vehicle shall meet the 
injury criteria specified in S21.5 of this standard when the passenger 
air bag is deployed in accordance with both of the low risk deployment 
test procedures specified in S22.4.
    S21.5 Injury criteria for the 49 CFR part 572, subpart P 3-year-old 
child test dummy.
    S21.5.1 All portions of the test dummy shall be contained within the 
outer surfaces of the vehicle passenger compartment.
    S21.5.2 Head injury criteria.
    (a) For any two points in time, t<INF>1</INF> and t<INF>2</INF>, 
during the event which are separated by not more than a 15 millisecond 
time interval and where t<INF>1</INF> is less than t<INF>2</INF>, the 
head injury criterion (HIC<INF>15</INF>) shall be determined using the 
resultant head acceleration at the center of gravity of the dummy head, 
a<INF>r</INF>, expressed as a multiple of g (the acceleration of 
gravity) and shall be calculated using the expression:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18DE01.001

    (b) The maximum calculated HIC<INF>15</INF> value shall not exceed 
570.
    S21.5.3 The resultant acceleration calculated from the output of the 
thoracic instrumentation shall not exceed 55 g's, except for intervals 
whose cumulative duration is not more than 3 milliseconds.
    S21.5.4 Compression deflection of the sternum relative to the spine, 
as determined by instrumentation, shall not exceed 34 millimeters (1.3 
in).
    S21.5.5 Neck injury. When measuring neck injury, each of the 
following injury criteria shall be met.
    (a) Nij.
    (1) The shear force (Fx), axial force (Fz), and bending moment (My) 
shall be measured by the dummy upper neck load cell for the duration of 
the crash event as specified in S4.11. Shear force, axial force, and 
bending moment shall be filtered for Nij purposes at SAE J211/1 rev. 
Mar95 Channel Frequency Class 600 (see S4.7).
    (2) During the event, the axial force (Fz) can be either in tension 
or compression while the occipital condyle bending moment (Mocy) can be 
in either flexion or extension. This results in four possible loading 
conditions for Nij: Tension-extension (Nte), tension-flexion (Ntf), 
compression-extension (Nce), or compression-flexion (Ncf).
    (3) When calculating Nij using equation S21.5.5(a)(4), the critical 
values, Fzc and Myc, are:

[[Page 833]]

    (i) Fzc = 2120 N (477 lbf) when Fz is in tension
    (ii) Fzc = 2120 N (477 lbf) when Fz is in compression
    (iii) Myc = 68 Nm (50 lbf-ft) when a flexion moment exists at the 
occipital condyle
    (iv) Myc = 27 Nm (20 lbf-ft) when an extension moment exists at the 
occipital condyle.
    (4) At each point in time, only one of the four loading conditions 
occurs and the Nij value corresponding to that loading condition is 
computed and the three remaining loading modes shall be considered a 
value of zero. The expression for calculating each Nij loading condition 
is given by:

Nij = (Fz / Fzc) + (Mocy / Myc)

    (5) None of the four Nij values shall exceed 1.0 at any time during 
the event.
    (b) Peak tension. Tension force (Fz), measured at the upper neck 
load cell, shall not exceed 1130 N (254 lbf) at any time.
    (c) Peak compression. Compression force (Fz), measured at the upper 
neck load cell, shall not exceed 1380 N (310 lbf) at any time.
    S21.5.6 Unless otherwise indicated, instrumentation for data 
acquisition, data channel frequency class, and moment calculations are 
the same as given in 49 CFR part 572 subpart P 3-year-old child test 
dummy.
    S22 Test procedure for S21.
    S22.1 General provisions and definitions.
    S22.1.1 Tests specifying the use of a forward facing child 
restraint, including a booster seat where applicable, may be conducted 
using any such restraint listed in section C and section D of appendix A 
or A-1 of this standard, as appropriate. The child restraint may be 
unused or have been previously used only for automatic suppression 
tests. If it has been used, there shall not be any visible damage prior 
to the test. Booster seats are to be used in the manner appropriate for 
a 3-year-old child of the same height and weight as the 3-year-old child 
dummy.
    S22.1.2 Unless otherwise specified, each vehicle certified to this 
option shall comply in tests conducted with the front outboard passenger 
seating position at the mid-height, in the full rearward, middle, and 
the full forward positions determined in S22.1.7.4. If the dummy 
contacts the vehicle interior, using only the control that primarily 
moves the seat fore and aft, move the seat rearward to the next detent 
that provides clearance. If the seat is a power seat, move the seat 
rearward while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) 
clearance.
    S22.1.3 Except as otherwise specified, if the child restraint has an 
anchorage system as specified in S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213 and is tested in 
a vehicle with a front outboard passenger vehicle seat that has an 
anchorage system as specified in FMVSS No. 225, the vehicle shall comply 
with the belted test conditions with the restraint anchorage system 
attached to the vehicle seat anchorage system and the vehicle seat belt 
unattached. It shall also comply with the belted test conditions with 
the restraint anchorage system unattached to the vehicle seat anchorage 
system and the vehicle seat belt attached.
    S22.1.4 Do not attach any tethers.
    S22.1.5 The definitions provided in S16.3.1 through S16.3.10 apply 
to the tests specified in S22.
    S22.1.6 For leg and thigh angles use the following references:
    (a) Thigh--a straight line on the thigh skin between the center of 
the \5/16\ x \1/2\ in. screw (part 9001024, item 10 in drawing 210-0000 
sheet 2 of 7, complete assembly (HYB III 3 YR OLD)) and the knee bolt 
(part 210-5301 in drawing 210-5000-1 & -1, leg assembly).
    (b) Leg--a straight line on the leg skin between the center of the 
ankle bolt (part 210-5701 in drawing 210-5000-1 & -2, leg assembly) and 
the knee bolt (part 210-5301 in drawing 210-5000-1 & -2, leg assembly).
    S22.1.7 Seat set-up. Unless otherwise stated,
    S22.1.7.1 Lumbar support adjustment. Position adjustable lumbar 
supports so that the lumbar support is in its lowest, retracted or 
deflated adjustment position.
    S22.1.7.2 Other seat adjustments. Position any adjustable parts of 
the seat that provide additional support so that they are in the lowest 
or most open adjustment position.

[[Page 834]]

    S22.1.7.3 Set the seat and seat cushion in the position determined 
in S16.2.10.3.1.
    S22.1.7.4 Using only the control that primarily moves the seat in 
the fore and aft direction, determine the full rearward, middle, and 
full forward positions of the SCRP. Using any part of any seat or seat 
cushion adjustments other than that which primarily moves the seat or 
seat cushion fore-aft, determine the SCRP mid-point height for each of 
the three fore-aft test positions, while maintaining, as closely as 
possible, the seat cushion reference line angle determined in 
S16.2.10.3.1.
    S22.1.7.5 The seat back angle, if adjustable, is set at the 
manufacturer's nominal design seat back angle for a 50th percentile 
adult male as specified in S8.1.3.
    S22.1.7.6 If adjustable, set the head restraint at the full down and 
full forward position.
    S22.2 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in deactivation of the passenger air bag. Each vehicle that is 
certified as complying with S21.2 shall meet the following test 
requirements:
    22.2.1 Belted test with forward facing or booster seat child 
restraint
    S22.2.1.1 Install the restraint in the front outboard passenger 
vehicle seat in accordance, to the extent possible, with the child 
restraint manufacturer's instructions provided with the seat for use by 
children with the same height and weight as the 3-year-old child dummy.
    S22.2.1.2 Locate a vertical plane through the longitudinal 
centerline of the child restraint. This will be referred to as ``Plane 
A''.
    S22.2.1.3 For bucket seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical 
longitudinal plane through the longitudinal centerline of the seat 
cushion of the front outboard passenger vehicle seat. For bench seats, 
``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane through the front outboard 
passenger vehicle seat parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline 
the same distance from the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle as the 
center of the steering wheel.
    S22.2.1.4 The vehicle shall comply with the child restraint belted 
to the vehicle in the following manner:
    (a) Using the vehicle safety belts as specified in S22.2.1.5 with 
section C and section D child restraints of appendix A or A-1, as 
appropriate, of this section designed to be secured to the vehicle seat 
even when empty; and
    (b) If the child restraint is certified to S5.9 of Sec. 571.213, 
and the vehicle seat has an anchorage system as specified in Sec. 
571.225, using only the mechanism provided by the child restraint 
manufacturer for attachment to the lower anchorage as specified in 
S22.2.1.6.
    S22.2.1.5 Installation with vehicle safety belts.
    (a) Place any adjustable safety belt anchorages at the vehicle 
manufacturer's nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male 
occupant.
    (b) Without attaching the child restraint anchorage system 
components specified in S5.9 of Sec. 571.213 to a vehicle child 
restraint anchorage system specified in Sec. 571.225, align the child 
restraint system facing forward, such that Plane A is aligned with Plane 
B.
    (c) While maintaining the child restraint positions achieved in 
S22.2.1.5(b), secure the child restraint by following, to the extent 
possible, the child restraint manufacturer's directions regarding proper 
installation of the restraint. Cinch the vehicle belts to any tension 
from zero up to 134 N to secure the child restraint. Measure belt 
tension in a flat, straight section of the lap belt between the child 
restraint belt path and the contact point with the belt anchor or 
vehicle seat, on the side away from the buckle (to avoid interference 
from the shoulder portion of the belt).
    S22.2.1.6 Installation using the lower anchor bars and the 
attachment mechanism provided by the child restraint manufacturer.
    S22.2.1.6.1 If the mechanism provided by the manufacturer 
incorporates a strap(s), use the following procedure.
    (a) Place the child restraint on the vehicle seat facing forward, 
with Plane A of the child restraint aligned within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm with a longitudinal vertical plane passing through 
a point midway between the centers of the two lower anchor bars.
    (b) Position any adjustments on the child restraint, to the extent 
possible,

[[Page 835]]

according to the child restraint manufacturer's instructions.
    (c) Connect the lower anchor straps to the lower anchor bars and 
remove most of the slack, but do not apply any load using these straps.
    (d) Move the child restraint rearward until it contacts the seat 
back.
    (e) Do not attach any top tethers.
    (f) Use the loading device equipped with the loading foot shown in 
Figure A1 and position it as shown in Figure A2 of appendix A and 
appendix A-1 of this standard. The 15<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 degree 
angle of the loading device is determined with an initial preload of 
75<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25 N.
    (g) Over a period of 90<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>30 seconds, increase 
the load to 875<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25 N.
    (h) After achieving the 875 N load in step (g) of this section, hold 
the bar length at the present position and allow the load to settle for 
60 seconds.
    (i) Following the one-minute settling period specified in step (h) 
of this section, increase the load to 875<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 25 N 
such that the 875<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 25 N load is achieved within 10 
seconds of the settling period.
    (j) Hold the bar length at present position and allow the load to 
settle for 120 seconds after achieving the load in step (g) of this 
section.
    (k) Following the settling period specified in step (j) of this 
section, increase the load to 875<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 25 N such that 
the 875<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 25 N load is achieved within 10 seconds of 
the settling period.
    (l) Observe the settling of the load and tighten the lower anchor 
straps when the load is 850<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5N or 180 seconds has 
elapsed since achieving the 875<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 25 N load in step 
(g) of this section, whichever comes first. Tighten the lower anchor 
straps at the same time such that the load is reduced 15<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 N and the change occurs within 2 seconds.
    (m) Remove the loading device.
    S22.2.1.6.2 If the mechanism provided by the manufacturer does not 
incorporate a strap(s), use the following procedure.
    (a) Place the vehicle seat in the rear-most and mid-height position.
    (b) Place the child restraint on the vehicle seat facing forward 
with Plane A of the child restraint aligned within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm with a longitudinal vertical plane passing through 
a point midway between the centers of the two lower anchor bars.
    (c) Position any adjustments on the child restraint, to the extent 
possible, according to the child restraint manufacturer's instructions.
    (d) Connect the lower anchor attachments to the lower anchor bars 
following, to the extent possible, the child restraint manufacturer's 
instructions.
    (e) Move the child restraint rearward until it contacts the seat 
back.
    (f) Do not attach any top tethers.
    (g) If the child restraint does not use a linear sliding or 
ratcheting mechanism that requires the application of force to securely 
install the child restraint, follow, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions for installing the child restraint onto the 
seat. Do not load the seat as provided in S22.2.1.6.2(h).
    (h) If the child restraint uses a linear sliding or ratcheting 
mechanism that requires the application of force to securely install the 
child restraint, within 25<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 seconds, apply a 
475<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25N force, that has no lateral component, 
aligned angularly <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 degrees with a parallel plane 
located within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>100 mm of the plane formed by the 
linear mechanism. Release the force.
    (i) Move the vehicle seat to the seat position being tested (full 
rear, mid, full forward).
    S22.2.1.7 Forward facing child restraint.
    S22.2.1.7.1 After installation of a forward facing child restraint, 
position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart P 3-year-old child dummy in the 
child restraint such that the dummy's lower torso is centered on the 
child restraint and the dummy's spine is against the seat back of the 
child restraint. Place the arms at the dummy's sides.
    S22.2.1.7.2 Attach all belts that come with the child restraint that 
are appropriate for a child of the same height and weight as the 3-year-
old child dummy, if any, by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating children.
    S22.2.1.7.3 Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the 
``on'' position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and 
close all vehicle

[[Page 836]]

doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.1.8 Booster seat child restraint.
    S22.2.1.8.1 After installation of a booster seat child restraint, 
position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart P 3-year-old child dummy in the 
booster seat such that the dummy's lower torso is centered on the 
booster seat cushion and the dummy's back is parallel to and in contact 
with the booster seat back or, if there is no booster seat back, the 
vehicle seat back. Place the arms at the dummy's sides.
    S22.2.1.8.2 If applicable, attach all belts that come with the child 
restraint that are appropriate for a child of the same height and weight 
as the 3-year-old child dummy, if any, by following, to the extent 
possible, the manufacturer's instructions provided with the child 
restraint for seating children.
    S22.2.1.8.3 If applicable, place the Type 2 manual belt around the 
test dummy and fasten the latch. Remove all slack from the lap belt 
portion. Pull the upper torso webbing out of the retractor and allow it 
to retract; repeat this four times. Apply a 9 to 18 N (2 to 4 lb) 
tension load to the lap belt. Allow the excess webbing in the upper 
torso belt to be retracted by the retractive force of the retractor.
    S22.2.1.8.4 Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the 
``on'' position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then 
close all vehicle doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag 
is deactivated.
    S22.2.2 Unbelted tests with dummies. Place the 49 CFR part 572 
subpart P 3-year-old child dummy on the front outboard passenger vehicle 
seat in any of the following positions (without using a child restraint 
or booster seat or the vehicle's seat belts):
    S22.2.2.1 Sitting on seat with back against seat back.
    (a) Place the dummy on the front outboard passenger seat.
    (b) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in), as the center of the steering wheel. In the 
case of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal 
plane of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the 
longitudinal centerline of the seat cushion, within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in). Position the torso 
of the dummy against the seat back. Position the dummy's thighs against 
the seat cushion.
    (c) Allow the legs of the dummy to extend off the surface of the 
seat.
    (d) Rotate the dummy's upper arms down until they contact the seat 
back.
    (e) Rotate the dummy's lower arms until the dummy's hands contact 
the seat cushion.
    (f) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (g) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.2 Sitting on seat with back against reclined seat back. 
Repeat the test sequence in S22.2.2.1 with the seat back angle 25 
degrees rearward of the manufacturer's nominal design position for the 
50th percentile adult male. If the seat will not recline 25 degrees 
rearward of the nominal design position, use the closest position that 
does not exceed 25 degrees.
    S22.2.2.3 Sitting on seat with back not against seat back.
    (a) Place the dummy on the front outboard passenger seat.
    (b) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in), as the center of the steering wheel. In the 
case of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal 
plane of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the 
longitudinal centerline of the seat cushion, within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in). Position the dummy 
with the spine vertical so that the horizontal distance from the dummy's 
back to the seat back is no less than 25 mm (1.0 in) and no more than 
150 mm

[[Page 837]]

(6.0 in), as measured along the dummy's midsagittal plane at the mid-
sternum level. To keep the dummy in position, a material with a maximum 
breaking strength of 311 N (70 lb) may be used to hold the dummy.
    (c) Position the dummy's thighs against the seat cushion.
    (d) Allow the legs of the dummy to extend off the surface of the 
seat.
    (e) Position the upper arms parallel to the spine and rotate the 
dummy's lower arms until the dummy's hands contact the seat cushion.
    (f) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (g) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.4 Sitting on seat edge, spine vertical, hands by the dummy's 
sides.
    (a) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in), as the center of the steering wheel. In the 
case of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal 
plane of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the 
longitudinal centerline of the seat cushion, within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in).
    (b) Position the dummy in the seated position forward in the seat 
such that the legs are vertical and the back of the legs rest against 
the front of the seat with the spine vertical. If the dummy's feet 
contact the floor pan, rotate the legs forward until the dummy is 
resting on the seat with the feet positioned flat on the floor pan and 
the dummy spine vertical. To keep the dummy in position, a material with 
a maximum breaking strength of 311 N (70 lb) may be used to hold the 
dummy.
    (c) Place the upper arms parallel to the spine.
    (d) Lower the dummy's lower arms such that they contact the seat 
cushion.
    (e) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (f) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.5 Standing on seat, facing forward.
    (a) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in), as the center of the steering wheel rim. In the 
case of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal 
plane of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the 
longitudinal centerline of the seat cushion, within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in). Position the dummy 
in a standing position on the front outboard passenger seat cushion 
facing the front of the vehicle while placing the heels of the dummy's 
feet in contact with the seat back.
    (b) Rest the dummy against the seat back, with the arms parallel to 
the spine.
    (c) If the head contacts the vehicle roof, recline the seat so that 
the head is no longer in contact with the vehicle roof, but allow no 
more than 5 mm (0.2 in) distance between the head and the roof. If the 
seat does not sufficiently recline to allow clearance, omit the test.
    (d) If necessary use a material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) or spacer blocks to keep the dummy in position.
    (e) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (f) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.6 Kneeling on seat, facing forward.
    (a) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in), as the center of the steering wheel. In the 
case of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal

[[Page 838]]

plane of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the 
longitudinal centerline of the seat cushion, within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in).
    (b) Position the dummy in a kneeling position in the front outboard 
passenger vehicle seat with the dummy facing the front of the vehicle 
with its toes at the intersection of the seat back and seat cushion. 
Position the dummy so that the spine is vertical. Push down on the legs 
so that they contact the seat as much as possible and then release. 
Place the arms parallel to the spine.
    (c) If necessary use a material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) or spacer blocks to keep the dummy in position.
    (d) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (e) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.7 Kneeling on seat, facing rearward.
    (a) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in), as the center of the steering wheel. In the 
case of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal 
plane of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the 
longitudinal centerline of the seat cushion, within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in).
    (b) Position the dummy in a kneeling position in the front outboard 
passenger vehicle seat with the dummy facing the rear of the vehicle. 
Position the dummy such that the dummy's head and torso are in contact 
with the seat back. Push down on the legs so that they contact the seat 
as much as possible and then release. Place the arms parallel to the 
spine.
    (c) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (d) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.8 Lying on seat. This test is performed only in vehicles 
with 3 designated front seating positions.
    (a) Lay the dummy on the front outboard passenger vehicle seat such 
that the following criteria are met:
    (1) The midsagittal plane of the dummy is horizontal,
    (2) The dummy's spine is perpendicular to the vehicle's longitudinal 
axis,
    (3) The dummy's arms are parallel to its spine,
    (4) A plane passing through the two shoulder joints of the dummy is 
vertical,
    (5) The anterior of the dummy is facing the vehicle front,
    (6) The head of the dummy is positioned towards the passenger door, 
and
    (7) The horizontal distance from the topmost point of the dummy's 
head to the vehicle door is 50 to 100 mm (2-4 in).
    (8) The dummy is as far back in the seat as possible.
    (b) Rotate the thighs as much as possible toward the chest of the 
dummy and rotate the legs as much as possible against the thighs.
    (c) Move the dummy's upper left arm parallel to the vehicle's 
transverse plane and the lower left arm 90 degrees to the upper arm. 
Rotate the lower left arm about the elbow joint and toward the dummy's 
head until movement is obstructed.
    (d) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (e) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.3 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in activation of the passenger air bag system.
    S22.3.1 Each vehicle certified to this option shall comply in tests 
conducted with the front outboard passenger seating position at the mid-
height, in the full rearward, and middle positions determined in 
S22.1.7.4, and the forward position determined in S16.3.3.1.8.
    S22.3.2 Place a 49 CFR part 572 subpart O 5th percentile adult 
female test dummy at the front outboard passenger seating position of 
the vehicle, in accordance with procedures specified

[[Page 839]]

in S16.3.3 of this standard, except as specified in S22.3.1. Do not 
fasten the seat belt.
    S22.3.3 Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    S22.3.4 Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag system is 
activated.
    S22.4 Low risk deployment tests.
    S22.4.1 Each vehicle that is certified as complying with S21.4 shall 
meet the following test requirements with the 49 CFR part 572, subpart P 
3-year-old child dummy in both of the following positions: Position 1 
(S22.4.2) and Position 2 (S22.4.3).
    S22.4.1.1 Locate and mark a point on the front of the dummy's chest 
jacket on the midsagittal plane that is 114 mm (4.5 in) <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 in) along the surface of 
the skin from the top of the skin at the neck line. This is referred to 
as ``Point 1.''
    S22.4.1.2 Mark a point on the instrument panel that is 
longitudinally and transversely, as measured along the surface of the 
instrument panel, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>6 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 in) of the point that is defined by the intersection 
of the instrument panel and a line between the volumetric center of the 
smallest volume that can encompass the folded undeployed air bag and the 
volumetric center of the static fully inflated air bag.
    S22.4.1.3 Locate the vertical plane parallel to the vehicle 
longitudinal centerline through the point located in S22.4.1.2. This is 
referred to as ``Plane D.''
    S22.4.1.4 Locate the horizontal plane through the point located in 
S22.4.1.2. This is referred to as ``Plane C.''
    S22.4.2 Position 1 (chest on instrument panel).
    S22.4.2.1 Set the seat and seat cushion in the positions determined 
in S16.2.10.3.1. If the seat back is adjustable independent of the seat, 
place the seat back at the manufacturer's nominal design seat back angle 
for a 50th percentile adult male as specified in S8.1.3. Position any 
adjustable parts of the seat that provide additional support so that 
they are in the lowest or most open adjustment position. If adjustable, 
set the head restraint in the lowest and most forward position.
    S22.4.2.2 Place the dummy in the front outboard passenger seat such 
that:
    S22.4.2.2.1 The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane D within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in).
    S22.4.2.2.2 The legs are initially vertical to the floor pan. The 
legs and thighs shall be adjusted to the extent necessary for the head/
torso to contact the instrument panel as specified in S22.4.2.3.
    S22.4.2.2.3 The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands 
are in contact with the thighs.
    S22.4.2.3 Without changing the seat position and with the dummy's 
thorax instrument cavity rear face vertical, move the dummy forward 
until the dummy head/torso contacts the instrument panel. If the dummy 
loses contact with the seat cushion because of the forward movement, 
maintain the height of the dummy and the angle of the thigh with respect 
to the torso. Once contact is made, raise the dummy vertically until 
Point 1 lies in Plane C within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in). If the dummy's head contacts the windshield and 
keeps Point 1 from reaching Plane C, lower the dummy until there is no 
more than 5 mm (0.2 in) clearance between the head and the windshield. 
(The dummy shall remain in contact with the instrument panel while being 
raised or lowered, which may change the dummy's fore-aft position.)
    S22.4.2.4 If possible, position the legs of the dummy so that the 
legs are vertical and the feet rest flat on the floor pan of the 
vehicle. If the positioning against the instrument panel does not allow 
the feet to be on the floor pan, the feet shall be parallel to the floor 
pan.
    S22.4.2.5 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. The material should support the torso rather than the head. 
Support the dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full 
rotational and translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy 
and the material does not interfere with the air bag.

[[Page 840]]

    S22.4.3 Position 2 (head on instrument panel).
    S22.4.3.1 Place the front outboard passenger seat at the mid-height, 
in full rearward seating position determined in S22.1.7.4. Place the 
seat back, if adjustable independent of the seat, at the manufacturer's 
nominal design seat back angle for a 50th percentile adult male as 
specified in S8.1.3. Position any adjustable parts of the seat that 
provide additional support so that they are in the lowest or most open 
adjustment position. If adjustable, set the head restraint in the lowest 
and most forward position.
    S22.4.3.2 Place the dummy in the front outboard passenger seat such 
that:
    S22.4.3.2.1 The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane D within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in).
    S22.4.3.2.2 The legs are vertical to the floor pan, the back of the 
legs are in contact with the seat cushion, and the dummy's thorax 
instrument cavity rear face is vertical. If it is not possible to 
position the dummy with the legs in the prescribed position, rotate the 
legs forward until the dummy is resting on the seat with the feet 
positioned flat on the floor pan, and the back of the legs are in 
contact with the front of the seat cushion. Set the transverse distance 
between the longitudinal centerlines at the front of the dummy's knees 
at 86 to 91 mm (3.4 to 3.6 in), with the thighs and the legs of the 
dummy in vertical planes.
    S22.4.3.2.3 The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands 
are in contact with the thighs.
    S22.4.3.3 Using only the control that primarily moves the seat in 
the fore and aft direction, move the seat forward, while maintaining the 
thorax instrument cavity rear face orientation until any part of the 
dummy contacts the vehicle's instrument panel.
    S22.4.3.4 If dummy contact has not been made with the vehicle's 
instrument panel at the full forward seating position of the seat, slide 
the dummy forward until contact is made. Maintain the thorax instrument 
cavity rear face vertical orientation. If the dummy loses contact with 
the seat, from that point forward, maintain the height of the dummy. 
Except as provided in S22.4.3.5, maintain the angle of the thigh with 
respect to the horizontal.
    S22.4.3.5 If head/torso contact with the instrument panel has not 
been made, maintain the angle of the thighs with respect to the 
horizontal while applying a force towards the front of the vehicle on 
the spine of the dummy between the shoulder joints, perpendicular to the 
thorax instrument cavity rear face, until the head or torso comes into 
contact with the vehicle's instrument panel or until a maximum force of 
222 N (50 lb) is achieved. If the head/torso is still not in contact 
with the instrument panel, hold the femurs and release the 222 N (50 lb) 
force. While maintaining the relative angle between the torso and the 
femurs, roll the dummy forward on the seat cushion, without sliding, 
until head/torso contact with the instrument panel is achieved. If seat 
contact is lost prior to or during femur rotation out of the horizontal 
plane, constrain the dummy to rotate about the dummy H-point. If the 
dummy cannot be rolled forward on the seat due to contact of the dummy 
feet with the floor pan, extend the lower legs forward, at the knees, 
until floor pan contact is avoided.
    S22.4.3.6 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. The material should support the torso rather than the head. 
Support the dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full 
rotational and translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy 
and the material does not interfere with the air bag.
    S22.4.4 Deploy the front outboard passenger frontal air bag system. 
If the frontal air bag system contains a multistage inflator, the 
vehicle shall be able to comply with the injury criteria at any stage or 
combination of stages or time delay between successive stages that could 
occur in a rigid barrier crash test at or below 26 km/h (16 mph), under 
the test procedure specified in S22.5.
    S22.5 Test procedure for determining stages of air bag systems 
subject to low risk deployment (low speed crashes) test requirement.
    S22.5.1 The test described in S22.5.2 shall be conducted with an 
unbelted

[[Page 841]]

50th percentile adult male test dummy in the driver seating position 
according to S8 as it applies to that seating position and an unbelted 
5th percentile adult female test dummy either in the front outboard 
passenger vehicle seating position according to S16 as it applies to 
that seating position or at any fore-aft seat position on the passenger 
side.
    S22.5.2 Impact the vehicle traveling longitudinally forward at any 
speed, up to and including 26 km/h (16 mph) into a fixed rigid barrier 
that is perpendicular <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees to the line of 
travel of the vehicle under the applicable conditions of S8, S10, and 
S16 excluding S10.7, S10.8, S10.9, and S16.3.5.
    S22.5.3 Determine which inflation stage or combination of stages are 
fired and determine the time delay between successive stages. That stage 
or combination of stages, with time delay between successive stages, 
shall be used in deploying the air bag when conducting the low risk 
deployment tests described in S22.4, S24.4, and S26.
    S22.5.4 If the air bag does not deploy in the impact described in 
S22.5.2, the low risk deployment tests described in S22.4, S24.4, and 
S26 shall be conducted with all stages using the maximum time delay 
between stages.
    S23 Requirements using 6-year-old child dummies.
    S23.1 Each vehicle that is certified as complying with S14 shall, at 
the option of the manufacturer, meet the requirements specified in 
S23.2, S23.3, or S23.4, under the test procedures specified in S24 or 
S28, as applicable.
    S23.2 Option 1--Automatic suppression feature. Each vehicle shall 
meet the requirements specified in S23.2.1 through S23.2.3.
    S23.2.1 The vehicle shall be equipped with an automatic suppression 
feature for the passenger frontal air bag system which results in 
deactivation of the air bag during each of the static tests specified in 
S24.2 (using the 49 CFR part 572 subpart N 6-year-old child dummy in any 
of the child restraints specified in section D of appendix A or A-1 of 
this standard, as appropriate), and activation of the air bag system 
during each of the static tests specified in S24.3 (using the 49 CFR 
part 572 subpart O 5th percentile adult female dummy).
    S23.2.2 The vehicle shall be equipped with a telltale light meeting 
the requirements specified in S19.2.2.
    S23.2.3 The vehicle shall be equipped with a mechanism that 
indicates whether the air bag is suppressed, regardless of whether the 
passenger seat is occupied. The mechanism need not be located in the 
occupant compartment unless it is the telltale described in S23.2.2.
    S23.3 Option 2--Dynamic automatic suppression system that suppresses 
the air bag when an occupant is out of position. (This option is 
available under the conditions set forth in S27.1.) The vehicle shall be 
equipped with a dynamic automatic suppression system for the passenger 
frontal air bag system which meets the requirements specified in S27.
    S23.4 Option 3--Low risk deployment. Each vehicle shall meet the 
injury criteria specified in S23.5 of this standard when the passenger 
air bag is statically deployed in accordance with both of the low risk 
deployment test procedures specified in S24.4.
    S23.5 Injury criteria for the 49 CFR part 572 subpart N 6-year-old 
child dummy.
    S23.5.1 All portions of the test dummy shall be contained within the 
outer surfaces of the vehicle passenger compartment.
    S23.5.2 Head injury criteria.
    (a) For any two points in time, t<INF>1</INF> and t<INF>2</INF>, 
during the event which are separated by not more than a 15 millisecond 
time interval and where t<INF>1</INF> is less than t<INF>2</INF>, the 
head injury criterion (HIC<INF>15</INF>) shall be determined using the 
resultant head acceleration at the center of gravity of the dummy head, 
a<INF>r</INF>, expressed as a multiple of g (the acceleration of 
gravity) and shall be calculated using the expression:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18DE01.001

    (b) The maximum calculated HIC<INF>15</INF> value shall not exceed 
700.
    S23.5.3 The resultant acceleration calculated from the output of the 
thoracic instrumentation shall not exceed

[[Page 842]]

60 g's, except for intervals whose cumulative duration is not more than 
3 milliseconds.
    S23.5.4 Compression deflection of the sternum relative to the spine, 
as determined by instrumentation, shall not exceed 40 mm (l.6 in).
    S23.5.5 Neck injury. When measuring neck injury, each of the 
following injury criteria shall be met.
    (a) Nij.
    (1) The shear force (Fx), axial force (Fz), and bending moment (My) 
shall be measured by the dummy upper neck load cell for the duration of 
the crash event as specified in S4.11. Shear force, axial force, and 
bending moment shall be filtered for Nij purposes at SAE J211/1 rev. 
Mar95 Channel Frequency Class 600 (see S4.7).
    (2) During the event, the axial force (Fz) can be either in tension 
or compression while the occipital condyle bending moment (Mocy) can be 
in either flexion or extension. This results in four possible loading 
conditions for Nij: tension-extension (Nte), tension-flexion (Ntf), 
compression-extension (Nce), or compression-flexion (Ncf).
    (3) When calculating Nij using equation S23.5.5(a)(4), the critical 
values, Fzc and Myc, are:
    (i) Fzc = 2800 N (629 lbf) when Fz is in tension
    (ii) Fzc = 2800 N (629 lbf) when Fz is in compression
    (iii) Myc = 93 Nm (69 lbf-ft) when a flexion moment exists at the 
occipital condyle
    (iv) Myc = 37 Nm (27 lbf-ft) when an extension moment exists at the 
occipital condyle.
    (4) At each point in time, only one of the four loading conditions 
occurs and the Nij value corresponding to that loading condition is 
computed and the three remaining loading modes shall be considered a 
value of zero. The expression for calculating each Nij loading condition 
is given by:

Nij = (Fz / Fzc) + (Mocy / Myc)

    (5) None of the four Nij values shall exceed 1.0 at any time during 
the event.
    (b) Peak tension. Tension force (Fz), measured at the upper neck 
load cell, shall not exceed 1490 N (335 lbf) at any time.
    (c) Peak compression. Compression force (Fz), measured at the upper 
neck load cell, shall not exceed 1820 N (409 lbf) at any time.
    S23.5.6 Unless otherwise indicated, instrumentation for data 
acquisition, data channel frequency class, and moment calculations are 
the same as given for the 49 CFR part 572 subpart N 6-year-old child 
test dummy.
    S24 Test procedure for S23.
    S24.1 General provisions and definitions.
    S24.1.1 Tests specifying the use of a booster seat may be conducted 
using any such restraint listed in section D of appendix A or A-1 of 
this standard, as appropriate. The booster seat may be unused or have 
been previously used only for automatic suppression tests. If it has 
been used, there shall not be any visible damage prior to the test. 
Booster seats are to be used in the manner appropriate for a 6-year-old 
child of the same height and weight as the 6-year-old child dummy.
    S24.1.2 Unless otherwise specified, each vehicle certified to this 
option shall comply in tests conducted with the front outboard passenger 
seating position at the mid-height, in the full rearward seat track 
position, the middle seat track position, and the full forward seat 
track position as determined in this section. Using only the control 
that primarily moves the seat in the fore and aft direction, determine 
the full rearward, middle, and full forward positions of the SCRP. Using 
any seat or seat cushion adjustments other than that which primarily 
moves the seat fore-aft, determine the SCRP mid-point height for each of 
the three fore-aft test positions, while maintaining as closely as 
possible, the seat cushion angle determined in S16.2.10.3.1. Set the 
seat back angle, if adjustable independent of the seat, at the 
manufacturer's nominal design seat back angle for a 50th percentile 
adult male as specified in S8.1.3. If the dummy contacts the vehicle 
interior, move the seat rearward to the next detent that provides 
clearance. If the seat is a power seat, move the seat rearward while 
assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) distance between the 
vehicle interior and the point on the

[[Page 843]]

dummy that would first contact the vehicle interior.
    S24.1.3 Except as otherwise specified, if the booster seat has an 
anchorage system as specified in S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213 and is used under 
this standard in testing a vehicle with a front outboard passenger 
vehicle seat that has an anchorage system as specified in FMVSS No. 225, 
the vehicle shall comply with the belted test conditions with the 
restraint anchorage system attached to the FMVSS No. 225 vehicle seat 
anchorage system and the vehicle seat belt unattached. It shall also 
comply with the belted test conditions with the restraint anchorage 
system unattached to the FMVSS No. 225 vehicle seat anchorage system and 
the vehicle seat belt attached. The vehicle shall comply with the 
unbelted test conditions with the restraint anchorage system unattached 
to the FMVSS No. 225 vehicle seat anchorage system.
    S24.1.4 Do not attach any tethers.
    S24.1.5 The definitions provided in S16.3.1 through S16.3.10 apply 
to the tests specified in S24.
    S24.1.6 For leg and thigh angles, use the following references:
    S24.1.6.1 Thigh--a straight line on the thigh skin between the 
center of the 5/16-18 UNC-2B threaded access hole in the upper leg clamp 
(drawing 127-4004, 6 YR H3--upper leg clamp) and the knee screw (part 
9000248 in drawing 127-4000-1 & -2, leg assembly).
    S24.1.6.2 Leg--a straight line on the leg skin between the center of 
the lower leg screw (part 9001170 in drawing 127-4000-1 & -2, leg 
assembly) and the knee screw (part 9000248 in drawing 127-4000-1 & -2, 
leg assembly).
    S24.2 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in deactivation of the passenger air bag. Each vehicle that is 
certified as complying with S23.2 of FMVSS No. 208 shall meet the 
following test requirements with the child restraint in the front 
outboard passenger vehicle seat under the following conditions:
    (a) Using the vehicle safety belts as specified in S22.2.1.5 with 
section D child restraints designed to be secured to the vehicle seat 
even when empty;
    (b) If the child restraint is certified to S5.9 of Sec. 571.213, 
and the vehicle seat has an anchorage system as specified in Sec. 
571.225, using only the mechanism provided by the child restraint 
manufacturer for attachment to the lower anchorage as specified in 
S22.2.1.6; and
    (c) Without securing the child restraint with either the vehicle 
safety belts or any mechanism provided with a child restraint certified 
to S5.9 of Sec. 571.213.
    S24.2.1 Except as provided in S24.2.2, conduct all tests as 
specified in S22.2, except that the 49 CFR part 572 subpart N 6-year-old 
child dummy shall be used.
    S24.2.2 Exceptions. The tests specified in the following paragraphs 
of S22.2 need not be conducted: S22.2.1.7, S22.2.2.3, S22.2.2.5, 
S22.2.2.6, S22.2.2.7, and S22.2.2.8.
    S24.2.3 Sitting back in the seat and leaning on the front outboard 
passenger door.
    (a) Place the dummy in the seated position in the front outboard 
passenger vehicle seat. For bucket seats, position the midsagittal plane 
of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the longitudinal 
centerline of the seat cushion, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm 
(<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in). For bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the longitudinal 
centerline of the vehicle, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in), as the center of the steering wheel.
    (b) Place the dummy's back against the seat back and rest the 
dummy's thighs on the seat cushion.
    (c) Allow the legs and feet of the dummy to extend off the surface 
of the seat. If this positioning of the dummy's legs is prevented by 
contact with the instrument panel, using only the control that primarily 
moves the seat fore and aft, move the seat rearward to the next detent 
that provides clearance. If the seat is a power seat, move the seat 
rearward, while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) 
distance between the vehicle interior and the part of the dummy that was 
in contact with the vehicle interior.
    (d) Rotate the dummy's upper arms toward the seat back until they 
make contact.
    (e) Rotate the dummy's lower arms down until they contact the seat.

[[Page 844]]

    (f) Close the vehicle's passenger-side door and then start the 
vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' position, whichever 
will turn on the suppression system.
    (g) Push against the dummy's left shoulder to lean the dummy against 
the door; close all remaining doors.
    (h) Wait ten seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S24.3 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in activation of the passenger air bag system.
    S24.3.1 Each vehicle certified to this option shall comply in tests 
conducted with the front outboard passenger seating position at the mid-
height, in the full rearward and middle positions determined in S24.1.2, 
and the forward position determined in S16.3.3.1.8.
    S24.3.2 Place a 49 CFR part 572 subpart O 5th percentile adult 
female test dummy at the front outboard passenger seating position of 
the vehicle, in accordance with procedures specified in S16.3.3 of this 
standard, except as specified in S24.3.1. Do not fasten the seat belt.
    S24.3.3 Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    S24.3.4 Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag system is 
activated.
    S24.4 Low risk deployment tests.
    S24.4.1 Each vehicle that is certified as complying with S23.4 shall 
meet the following test requirements with the 49 CFR part 572, subpart N 
6-year-old child dummy in both of the following positions: Position 1 
(S24.4.2) or Position 2 (S24.4.3).
    S24.4.1.1 Locate and mark a point on the front of the dummy's chest 
jacket on the midsagittal plane that is 139 mm (5.5 in) <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1in) along the surface of 
the skin from the top of the skin at the neckline. This is referred to 
as ``Point 1.''
    S24.4.1.2 Mark a point on the instrument panel that is 
longitudinally and transversely, as measured along the surface of the 
instrument panel, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>6 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 in) of the point that is defined by the intersection 
of the instrument panel and a line between the volumetric center of the 
smallest volume that can encompass the folded undeployed air bag and the 
volumetric center of the static fully inflated air bag.
    S22.4.1.3 Locate the vertical plane parallel to the vehicle 
longitudinal centerline through the point located in S24.4.1.2. This is 
referred to as ``Plane D.''
    S24.4.1.4 Locate the horizontal plane through the point located in 
S24.4.1.2. This is referred to as ``Plane C.''
    S24.4.2 Position 1 (chest on instrument panel).
    S24.4.2.1 Set the seat and seat cushion in the positions determined 
in S16.2.10.3.1. If the seat back is adjustable independent of the seat, 
place the seat back at the manufacturer's nominal design seat back angle 
for a 50th percentile adult male as specified in S8.1.3. Position any 
adjustable parts of the seat that provide additional support so that 
they are in the lowest or most open adjustment position. If adjustable, 
set the head restraint in the lowest and most forward position.
    S24.4.2.2 Remove the legs of the dummy at the pelvic interface.
    S24.4.2.3 Place the dummy in the front outboard passenger seat such 
that:
    (a) The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane D within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in).
    (b) The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands are next 
to where the thighs would be.
    (c) Without changing the seat position and with the dummy's thorax 
instrument cavity rear face 6 degrees forward of the vertical, move the 
dummy forward until the dummy head/torso contacts the instrument panel. 
If the dummy loses contact with the seat cushion because of the forward 
movement, maintain the height of the dummy while moving the dummy 
forward. If the head contacts the windshield before head/torso contact 
with the instrument panel, maintain the thorax instrument cavity angle 
and move the dummy forward such that the head is following the angle of 
the windshield until there is head/torso contact with the instrument 
panel. Once contact is made, raise or lower the dummy vertically until 
Point 1 lies in Plane C within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in). If the dummy's

[[Page 845]]

head contacts the windshield and keeps Point 1 from reaching Plane C, 
lower the dummy until there is no more than 5 mm (0.2 in) clearance 
between the head and the windshield. (The dummy shall remain in contact 
with the instrument panel while being raised or lowered which may change 
the dummy's fore-aft position.)
    S24.4.2.4 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. The material should support the torso rather than the head. 
Support the dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full 
rotational and translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy 
and the material does not interfere with the air bag.
    S24.4.3 Position 2 (head on instrument panel).
    S24.4.3.1 Place the front outboard passenger seat at the mid-height 
full rearward seating position determined in S24.1.2. Place the seat 
back, if adjustable independent of the seat, at the manufacturer's 
nominal design seat back angle for a 50th percentile adult male as 
specified in S8.1.3. Position any adjustable parts of the seat that 
provide additional support so that they are in the lowest or most open 
adjustment position. Position an adjustable head restraint in the lowest 
and most forward position.
    S24.4.3.2 Place the dummy in the front outboard passenger seat such 
that:
    (a) The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane D within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in).
    (b) The legs are perpendicular to the floor pan, the back of the 
legs are in contact with the seat cushion, and the dummy's thorax 
instrument cavity rear face is 6 degrees forward of vertical. If it is 
not possible to position the dummy with the legs in the prescribed 
position, rotate the legs forward until the dummy is resting on the seat 
with the feet positioned flat on the floor pan and the back of the legs 
are in contact with the front of the seat cushion. Set the transverse 
distance between the longitudinal centerlines at the front of the 
dummy's knees at 112 to 117 mm (4.4 to 4.6 in), with the thighs and the 
legs of the dummy in vertical planes.
    (c) The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands are in 
contact with the thighs.
    S24.4.3.3 Using only the control that primarily moves the seat in 
the fore and aft direction, move the seat forward, while maintaining the 
thorax instrument cavity rear face orientation until any part of the 
dummy contacts the vehicle's instrument panel.
    S24.4.3.4 If dummy contact has not been made with the vehicle's 
instrument panel at the full forward seating position of the seat, slide 
the dummy forward on the seat until contact is made. Maintain the thorax 
instrument cavity rear face orientation. If the dummy loses contact with 
the seat, from that point forward maintain the height of the dummy. 
Except as provided in S24.4.3.5, maintain the angle of the thigh with 
respect to the horizontal.
    S24.4.3.5 If head/torso contact with the instrument panel has not 
been made, maintain the angle of the thighs with respect to the 
horizontal while applying a force towards the front of the vehicle on 
the spine of the dummy between the shoulder joints, perpendicular to the 
thorax instrument cavity rear face, until the head or torso comes into 
contact with the vehicle's instrument panel or until a maximum force of 
222 N (50 lb) is achieved. If the head/torso is still not in contact 
with the instrument panel, hold the femurs and release the 222 N (50 lb) 
force. While maintaining the relative angle between the torso and the 
femurs, roll the dummy forward on the seat cushion, without sliding, 
until head/torso contact with the instrument panel is achieved. If seat 
contact is lost prior to or during femur rotation out of the horizontal 
plane, constrain the dummy to rotate about the dummy H-point. If the 
dummy cannot be rolled forward on the seat due to contact of the dummy 
feet with the floor pan, extend the lower legs forward, at the knees, 
until floor pan contact is avoided.
    S24.4.3.6 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. The

[[Page 846]]

material should support the torso rather than the head. Support the 
dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full rotational and 
translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy and the material 
does not interfere with the air bag.
    S24.4.4 Deploy the front outboard passenger frontal air bag system. 
If the frontal air bag system contains a multistage inflator, the 
vehicle shall be able to comply with the injury criteria at any stage or 
combination of stages or time delay between successive stages that could 
occur in a rigid barrier crash test at or below 26 km/h (16 mph), under 
the test procedure specified in S22.5.
    S25 Requirements using an out-of-position 5th percentile adult 
female dummy at the driver position.
    S25.1 Each vehicle certified as complying with S14 shall, at the 
option of the manufacturer, meet the requirements specified in S25.2 or 
S25.3 under the test procedures specified in S26 or S28, as appropriate.
    S25.2 Option 1--Dynamic automatic suppression system that suppresses 
the air bag when the driver is out of position. (This option is 
available under the conditions set forth in S27.1.) The vehicle shall be 
equipped with a dynamic automatic suppression system for the driver air 
bag which meets the requirements specified in S27.
    S25.3 Option 2--Low risk deployment. Each vehicle shall meet the 
injury criteria specified by S15.3 of this standard, except as modified 
in S25.4, when the driver air bag is statically deployed in accordance 
with both of the low risk deployment test procedures specified in S26.
    S25.4 Neck injury criteria driver low risk deployment tests. When 
measuring neck injury in low risk deployment tests for the driver 
position, each of the following neck injury criteria shall be met.
    (a) Nij.
    (1) The shear force (Fx), axial force (Fz), and bending moment (My) 
shall be measured by the dummy upper neck load cell for the duration of 
the crash event as specified in S4.11. Shear force, axial force, and 
bending moment shall be filtered for Nij purposes at SAE J211/1 rev. Mar 
95 Channel Frequency Class 600 (see S4.7).
    (2) During the event, the axial force (Fz) can be either in tension 
or compression while the occipital condyle bending moment (Mocy) can be 
in either flexion or extension. This results in four possible loading 
conditions for Nij: tension-extension (Nte), tension-flexion (Ntf), 
compression-extension (Nce), or compression-flexion (Ncf).
    (3) When calculating Nij using equation S25.4(a)(4), the critical 
values, Fzc and Myc, are:
    (i) Fzc = 3880 N (872 lbf) when Fz is in tension
    (ii) Fzc = 3880 N (872 lbf) when Fz is in compression
    (iii) Myc = 155 Nm (114 lbf-ft) when a flexion moment exists at the 
occipital condyle
    (iv) Myc = 61 Nm (45 lbf-ft) when an extension moment exists at the 
occipital condyle.
    (4) At each point in time, only one of the four loading conditions 
occurs and the Nij value corresponding to that loading condition is 
computed and the three remaining loading modes shall be considered a 
value of zero. The expression for calculating each Nij loading condition 
is given by:

Nij = (Fz / Fzc) + (Mocy / Myc)

    (5) None of the four Nij values shall exceed 1.0 at any time during 
the event.
    (b) Peak tension. Tension force (Fz), measured at the upper neck 
load cell, shall not exceed 2070 N (465 lbf) at any time.
    (c) Peak compression. Compression force (Fz), measured at the upper 
neck load cell, shall not exceed 2520 N (566 lbf) at any time.
    (d) Unless otherwise indicated, instrumentation for data 
acquisition, data channel frequency class, and moment calculations are 
the same as given in 49 CFR part 572 subpart O 5th percentile female 
test dummy.
    S26 Procedure for low risk deployment tests of driver air bag.
    S26.1 Each vehicle that is certified as complying with S25.3 shall 
meet the requirements of S25.3 and S25.4 with the 49 CFR part 572 
subpart O 5th percentile adult female dummy in both of

[[Page 847]]

the following positions: Driver position 1 (S26.2) and Driver position 2 
(S26.3).
    S26.2 Driver position 1 (chin on module).
    S26.2.1 Adjust the steering controls so that the steering wheel hub 
is at the geometric center of the locus it describes when it is moved 
through its full range of driving positions. If there is no setting at 
the geometric center, position it one setting lower than the geometric 
center. Set the rotation of the steering wheel so that the vehicle 
wheels are pointed straight ahead.
    S26.2.2 Mark a point on the steering wheel cover that is 
longitudinally and transversely, as measured along the surface of the 
steering wheel cover, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>6 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 in) of the point that is defined by the intersection 
of the steering wheel cover and a line between the volumetric center of 
the smallest volume that can encompass the folded undeployed air bag and 
the volumetric center of the static fully inflated air bag. Locate the 
vertical plane parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline through 
the point located on the steering wheel cover. This is referred to as 
``Plane E.''
    S26.2.3 Place the seat and seat cushion in the position achieved in 
S16.2.10.3.1. If the seat or seat cushion is adjustable in the vertical 
direction by adjustments other than that which primarily moves the seat 
or seat cushion fore-aft, determine the maximum and minimum heights of 
the SCRP at this position, while maintaining the seat cushion reference 
line angle as closely as possible. Place the SCRP in the mid-height 
position. If the seat back is adjustable independent of the seat, place 
the seat back at the manufacturer's nominal design seat back angle for a 
50th percentile adult male as specified in S8.1.3. Position any 
adjustable parts of the seat that provide additional support so that 
they are in the lowest or most open adjustment position. Position an 
adjustable head restraint in the lowest and most forward position.
    S26.2.4 Place the dummy in the driver's seat such that:
    S26.2.4.1 The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane E within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in).
    S26.2.4.2 The legs are perpendicular to the floor pan and the back 
of the legs are in contact with the seat cushion. The legs may be 
adjusted if necessary to achieve the final head position.
    S26.2.4.3 The dummy's thorax instrument cavity rear face is 6 
degrees forward (toward the front of the vehicle) of the steering wheel 
angle (i.e., if the steering wheel angle is 25 degrees from vertical, 
the thorax instrument cavity rear face angle is 31 degrees).
    S26.2.4.4 The initial transverse distance between the longitudinal 
centerlines at the front of the dummy's knees is 160 to 170 mm (6.3 to 
6.7 in), with the thighs and legs of the dummy in vertical planes.
    S26.2.4.5 The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands are 
in contact with the thighs.
    S26.2.5 Maintaining the spine angle, slide the dummy forward until 
the head/torso contacts the steering wheel.
    S26.2.6 While maintaining the spine angle, adjust the height of the 
dummy so that the bottom of the chin is in the same horizontal plane as 
the highest point of the air bag module cover (dummy height can be 
adjusted using the seat height adjustments and/or spacer blocks). If the 
seat prevents the bottom of the chin from being in the same horizontal 
plane as the module cover, adjust the dummy height to as close to the 
prescribed position as possible.
    S26.2.7 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. The material should support the torso rather than the head. 
Support the dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full 
rotational and translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy 
and the material does not interfere with the air bag.
    S26.3 Driver position 2 (chin on rim).
    S26.3.1 Place the seat and seat cushion in the position achieved in 
S16.2.10.3.1. If the seat or seat cushion is adjustable in the vertical 
direction by adjustments other than that which primarily moves the seat 
or seat cushion fore-aft, determine the maximum and minimum heights of 
the SCRP at this position, while maintaining the

[[Page 848]]

seat cushion reference line angle as closely as possible. Place the SCRP 
in the mid-height position. If the seat back is adjustable independent 
of the seat, place the seat back at the manufacturer's nominal design 
seat back angle for a 50th percentile adult male as specified in S8.1.3. 
Position any adjustable parts of the seat that provide additional 
support so that they are in the lowest or most open adjustment position. 
Position an adjustable head restraint in the lowest position.
    S26.3.2 Adjust the steering controls so that the steering wheel hub 
is at the geometric center of the locus it describes when it is moved 
through its full range of driving positions. If there is no setting at 
the geometric center, position it one setting lower than the geometric 
center. Set the rotation of the steering wheel so that the vehicle 
wheels are pointed straight ahead.
    S26.3.3 Mark a point on the steering wheel cover that is 
longitudinally and transversely, as measured along the surface of the 
steering wheel cover, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>6 mm (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 in) of the point that is defined by the intersection 
of the steering wheel cover and a line between the volumetric center of 
the smallest volume that can encompass the folded undeployed air bag and 
the volumetric center of the static fully inflated air bag. Locate the 
vertical plane parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline through 
the point located on the steering wheel cover. This is referred to as 
``Plane E.''
    S26.3.4 Place the dummy in the driver's seat position such that:
    S26.3.4.1 The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane E within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in).
    S26.3.4.2 The legs are perpendicular to the floor pan and the back 
of the legs are in contact with the seat cushion. The legs may be 
adjusted if necessary to achieve the final head position.
    S26.3.4.3 The dummy's thorax instrument cavity rear face is 6 
degrees forward (toward the front of the vehicle) of the steering wheel 
angle (i.e., if the steering wheel angle is 25 degrees from vertical, 
the thorax instrument cavity rear face angle is 31 degrees).
    S26.3.4.4 The initial transverse distance between the longitudinal 
centerlines at the front of the dummy's knees is 160 to 170 mm (6.3 to 
6.7 in), with the thighs and legs of the dummy in vertical planes.
    S26.3.4.5 The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands are 
in contact with the thighs.
    S26.3.5 Maintaining the spine angle, slide the dummy forward until 
the head/torso contacts the steering wheel.
    S26.3.6 While maintaining the spine angle, position the dummy so 
that a point on the chin 40 mm (1.6 in) <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 mm 
(<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 in) below the center of the mouth (chin 
point) is, within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 
in), in contact with a point on the steering wheel rim surface closest 
to the dummy that is 10 mm (0.4 in) vertically below the highest point 
on the rim in Plane E. If the dummy's head contacts the vehicle 
windshield or upper interior before the prescribed position can be 
obtained, lower the dummy until there is no more than 5 mm (0.2 in) 
clearance between the vehicle's windshield or upper interior, as 
applicable.
    S26.3.7 If the steering wheel can be adjusted so that the chin point 
can be in contact with the rim of the uppermost portion of the steering 
wheel, adjust the steering wheel to that position. If the steering wheel 
contacts the dummy's leg(s) prior to attaining this position, adjust it 
to the next highest detent, or if infinitely adjustable, until there is 
a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) clearance between the wheel and the dummy's 
leg(s). Readjust the dummy's torso such that the thorax instrument 
cavity rear face is 6 degrees forward of the steering wheel angle. 
Position the dummy so that the chin point is in contact, or if contact 
is not achieved, as close as possible to contact with the rim of the 
uppermost portion of the steering wheel.
    S26.3.8 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. The material should support the torso rather than the head. 
Support the dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full 
rotational and translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy 
and the material does not interfere with the air bag.

[[Page 849]]

    S26.4 Deploy the driver frontal air bag system. If the frontal air 
bag system contains a multistage inflator, the vehicle shall be able to 
comply with the injury criteria at any stage or combination of stages or 
time delay between successive stages that could occur in a rigid barrier 
crash test at or below 26 km/h (16 mph), under the test procedure 
specified in S22.5.
    S27 Option for dynamic automatic suppression system that suppresses 
the air bag when an occupant is out-of-position.
    S27.1 Availability of option. This option is available for either 
air bag, singly or in conjunction, subject to the requirements of S27, 
if:
    (a) A petition for rulemaking to establish dynamic automatic 
suppression system test procedures is submitted pursuant to subpart B of 
part 552 and a test procedure applicable to the vehicle is added to S28 
pursuant to the procedures specified by that subpart, or
    (b) A test procedure applicable to the vehicle is otherwise added to 
S28.
    S27.2 Definitions. For purposes of S27 and S28, the following 
definitions apply:
    Automatic suppression zone or ASZ means a three-dimensional zone 
adjacent to the air bag cover, specified by the vehicle manufacturer, 
where the deployment of the air bag will be suppressed by the DASS if a 
vehicle occupant enters the zone under specified conditions.
    Dynamic automatic suppression system or DASS means a portion of an 
air bag system that automatically controls whether or not the air bag 
deploys during a crash by:
    (1) Sensing the location of an occupant, moving or still, in 
relation to the air bag;
    (2) Interpreting the occupant characteristics and location 
information to determine whether or not the air bag should deploy; and
    (3) Activating or suppressing the air bag system based on the 
interpretation of occupant characteristics and location information.
    S27.3 Requirements. Each vehicle shall, at each applicable front 
outboard designated seating position, when tested under the conditions 
of S28 of this standard, comply with the requirements specified in S27.4 
through S27.6.
    S27.4 Each vehicle shall be equipped with a DASS.
    S27.5 Static test requirement (low risk deployment for occupants 
outside the ASZ).
    S27.5.1 Driver (49 CFR part 572 subpart O 5th percentile female 
dummy). Each vehicle shall meet the injury criteria specified in S15.3 
of this standard when the driver air bag is deployed in accordance with 
the procedures specified in S28.1.
    S27.5.2 Passenger (49 CFR part 572 subpart P 3-year-old child dummy 
and 49 CFR part 572 subpart N 6-year-old child dummy). Each vehicle 
shall meet the injury criteria specified in S21.5 and S23.5, as 
appropriate, when the passenger air bag is deployed in accordance with 
the procedures specified in S28.2.
    S27.6 Dynamic test requirement (suppression of air bag for occupants 
inside the ASZ).
    S27.6.1 Driver. The DASS shall suppress the driver air bag before 
the head, neck, or torso of the specified test device enters the ASZ 
when the vehicle is tested under the procedures specified in S28.3.
    S27.6.2 Passenger. The DASS shall suppress the passenger air bag 
before head, neck, or torso of the specified test device enters the ASZ 
when the vehicle is tested under the procedures specified in S28.4.
    S28 Test procedure for S27 of this standard. [Reserved]
    S28.1 Driver suppression zone verification test (49 CFR part 572 
Subpart O 5th percentile female dummy). [Reserved]
    S28.2 Passenger suppression zone verification test (49 CFR part 572 
subpart P 3-year-old child dummy and 49 CFR part 572 subpart N 6-year-
old child dummies). [Reserved]
    S28.3 Driver dynamic test procedure for DASS requirements. 
[Reserved]
    S28.4 Passenger dynamic test procedure for DASS requirements. 
[Reserved]
    S29 Manufacturer option to certify vehicles to certain static 
suppression test requirements using human beings rather than test 
dummies.
    S29.1 At the option of the manufacturer, instead of using test 
dummies in conducting the tests for the following automatic suppression 
and occupant

[[Page 850]]

recognition parts of the low risk deployment test requirements, human 
beings may be used as specified. If human beings are used, they shall 
assume, to the extent possible, the final physical position specified 
for the corresponding dummies for each test.
    (a) If a manufacturer decides to certify a vehicle using a human 
being for a test of the passenger automatic suppression, it shall use 
humans for the entire series of tests, e.g., 3-year-old children for 
each test of the system involving 3-year-old test dummies. If a 
manufacturer decides to certify a vehicle using a test dummy for a test 
of the system, it shall use test dummies for the entire series of tests, 
e.g., a Hybrid III 3-year-old child dummy for each test of the system 
involving 3-year-old child test dummies.
    (b) For S19.2, instead of using the 49 CFR part 572 subpart R 12-
month-old child dummy, a human child who weighs between 8.2 and 9.1 kg 
(18 and 20 lb), and who is between 61 and 66 cm (24 and 26 in) tall may 
be used.
    (c) For S19.2, instead of using the 49 CFR part 572 subpart K 
newborn infant dummy, a human child who weighs between 8.2 and 9.1 kg 
(18 and 20 lb), and who is between 61 and 66 cm (24 and 26 in) tall may 
be used.
    (d) For S21.2 and S21.5.1, instead of using the 49 CFR part 572 
subpart P 3-year-old child dummy, a human child who weighs between 13.4 
and 18 kg (29.5 and 39.5 lb), and who is between 89 and 99 cm (35 and 39 
in) tall may be used.
    (e) For S23.2 and S23.5.1, instead of using the 49 CFR part 572 
subpart N 6-year-old child dummy, a human child who weighs between 21 
and 25.6 kg (46.5 and 56.5 lb), and who is between 114 and 124.5 cm (45 
and 49 in) tall may be used.
    (f) For S19.2, S21.2, and S23.2, instead of using the 49 CFR part 
572 subpart O 5th percentile adult female test dummy, a female who 
weighs between 46.7 and 51.25 kg (103 and 113 lb), and who is between 
139.7 and 150 cm (55 and 59 in) tall may be used.
    S29.2 Human beings shall be dressed in a cotton T-shirt, full length 
cotton trousers, and sneakers. Specified weights and heights include 
clothing.
    S29.3 A manufacturer exercising this option shall upon request:
    (a) Provide NHTSA with a method to deactivate the air bag during 
compliance testing under S20.2, S20.3, S22.2, S22.3, S24.2, and S24.3, 
and identify any parts or equipment necessary for deactivation; such 
assurance may be made by removing the air bag; and
    (b) Provide NHTSA with a method to assure that the same test results 
would be obtained if the air bag were not deactivated.

                        Figures to Sec. 571.208

                          Figure 1. [Reserved]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.084


[[Page 851]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.089


[[Page 852]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.087


[[Page 853]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.088


[[Page 854]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR28DE98.000


[[Page 855]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11JN03.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11JN03.007


[[Page 856]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27NO96.012


[[Page 857]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11JN03.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11JN03.009


[[Page 858]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11JN03.010


[[Page 859]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12MY00.011


[[Page 860]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR06JA03.001


[[Page 861]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20AU03.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19NO03.000

    Appendix A to Sec. 571.208--Selection of Child Restraint Systems

    This appendix A applies to vehicles manufactured before September 1, 
2009 and to not more than 50 percent of a manufacturer's vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2009 and before September 1, 2010, 
as specified in S14.8 of this standard. This appendix does not apply to 
vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2010.
    A. The following car bed, manufactured on or after December 1, 1999, 
may

[[Page 862]]

be used by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration to test 
the suppression system of a vehicle that has been certified as being in 
compliance with 49 CFR 571.208 S19:

            Subpart A--Car Bed Child Restraints of Appendix A
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cosco Dream Ride 02-719.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    B. Any of the following rear-facing child restraint systems 
specified in the table below, manufactured on or after December 1, 1999, 
may be used by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration to 
test the suppression or low risk deployment (LRD) system of a vehicle 
that has been certified as being in compliance with 49 CFR 571.208 S19. 
When the restraint system comes equipped with a removable base, the test 
may be run either with the base attached or without the base.

          Subpart B--Rear-Facing Child Restraints of Appendix A
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Britax Handle with Care 191.
Century Assura 4553.
Century Smart Fit 4543.
Cosco Arriva 02727.
Evenflo Discovery Adjust Right 212.
Evenflo First Choice 204.
Graco Infant 8457.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    C. Any of the following forward-facing child restraint systems, and 
forward-facing child restraint systems that also convert to rear-facing, 
manufactured on or after December 1, 1999, may be used by the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration to test the suppression or LRD 
system of a vehicle that has been certified as being in compliance with 
49 CFR 571.208 S19, or S21. (Note: Any child restraint listed in this 
subpart that does not have manufacturer instructions for using it in a 
rear-facing position is excluded from use in testing in a belted rear-
facing configuration under S20.2.1.1(a) and S20.4.2):

Subpart C--Forward-Facing and Convertible Child Restraints of Appendix A
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Century Encore 4612.
Cosco Olympian 02803.
Britax Roundabout 161.
Century STE 1000 4416.
Cosco Touriva 02519.
Evenflo Horizon V 425.
Evenflo Medallion 254.
Safety 1st Comfort Ride 22-400.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    D. Any of the following forward-facing child restraint systems and 
belt-positioning seats, manufactured on or after December 1, 1999, may 
be used by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration as test 
devices to test the suppression system of a vehicle that has been 
certified as being in compliance with 49 CFR 571.208 S21 or S23:

Subpart D--Forward-Facing Child Restraints and Belt Positioning Seats of
                               Appendix A
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Britax Roadster 9004.
Century Next Step 4920.
Cosco High Back Booster 02-442.
Evenflo Right Fit 245.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

   APPENDIX A-1 TO Sec. 571.208--SELECTION OF CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEMS

    This Appendix A-1 applies to not less than 50 percent of a 
manufacturer's vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2009 and 
before September 1, 2010, as specified in S14.8 of this standard. This 
appendix applies to all vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 
2010.
    A. The following car bed, manufactured on or after the date listed, 
may be used by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration to 
test the suppression system of a vehicle that has been certified as 
being in compliance with 49 CFR 571.208 S19:

           Subpart A--Car Bed Child Restraints of Appendix A-1
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                              Manufactured on or after
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Angel Guard Angel Ride XX2403XXX..........  September 25, 2007.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    B. Any of the following rear-facing child restraint systems 
specified in the table below, manufactured on or after

[[Page 863]]

the date listed, may be used by the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration to test the suppression or low risk deployment (LRD) 
system of a vehicle that has been certified as being in compliance with 
49 CFR 571.208 S19. When the restraint system comes equipped with a 
removable base, the test may be run either with the base attached or 
without the base.

         Subpart B--Rear-Facing Child Restraints of Appendix A-1
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                              Manufactured on or after
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Century Smart Fit 4543....................  December 1, 1999.
Cosco Arriva 22-013 PAW and base 22-999     September 25, 2007.
 WHO.
Evenflo Discovery Adjust Right 212........  December 1, 1999.
Graco Infant 8457.........................  December 1, 1999.
Graco Snugride............................  September 25, 2007.
Peg Perego Primo Viaggio SIP IMUN00US.....  September 25, 2007.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    C. Any of the following forward-facing child restraint systems, and 
forward-facing child restraint systems that also convert to rear-facing, 
manufactured on or after the date listed, may be used by the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration to test the suppression or LRD 
system of a vehicle that has been certified as being in compliance with 
49 CFR 571.208 S19, or S21. (Note: Any child restraint listed in this 
subpart that does not have manufacturer instructions for using it in a 
rear-facing position is excluded from use in testing in a belted rear-
facing configuration under S20.2.1.1(a) and S20.4.2):

Subpart C--Forward-Facing and Convertible Child Restraints of Appendix A-
                                    1
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                              Manufactured on or after
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Britax Roundabout E9L02xx.................  September 25, 2007.
Graco ComfortSport........................  September 25, 2007.
Cosco Touriva 02519.......................  December 1, 1999.
Evenflo Tribute V 379xxxx or Evenflo        September 25, 2007.
 Tribute 381xxxx.
Evenflo Medallion 254.....................  December 1, 1999.
Cosco Summit Deluxe High Back Booster 22-   September 25, 2007.
 262.
Evenflo Generations 352xxxx...............  September 25, 2007.
Graco Toddler SafeSeat Step 2.............  September 25, 2007.
Graco Platinum Cargo......................  September 25, 2007.
Cosco High Back Booster 22-209............  September 25, 2007.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    D. Any of the following forward-facing child restraint systems and 
belt positioning seats, manufactured on or after the date listed, may be 
used by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration as test 
devices to test the suppression system of a vehicle that has been 
certified as being in compliance with 49 CFR 571.208 S21 or S23:

Subpart D--Forward-Facing Child Restraints and Belt Positioning Seats of
                              Appendix A-1
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                              Manufactured on or after
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Britax Roadster 9004......................  December 1, 1999.
Graco Platinum Cargo......................  September 25, 2007.
Cosco High Back Booster 22-209............  September 25, 2007.
Evenflo Right Fit 245.....................  December 1, 1999.
Evenflo Generations 352xxxx...............  September 25, 2007.
Cosco Summit Deluxe High Back Booster 22-   September 25, 2007.
 262.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 864]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12NO08.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12NO08.010


[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.208, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.

[[Page 865]]


    Effective Date Note: At 76 FR 53652, Aug. 29, 2011, Sec. 571.208 
was amended by revising the introductory paragraph of S7.1.1.5 and 
removing S7.1.1.5(d), effective December 27, 2011. For the convenience 
of the user, the revised text is set forth as follows:


<R05>
Sec. 571.208  Standard No. 208; Occupant crash protection.

                                * * * * *

    S7.1.1.5 Passenger cars, and trucks, buses, and multipurpose 
passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 4,536 kg (10,000 lb) or less 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1995 shall meet the requirements 
of S7.1.1.5(a), S7.1.1.5(b) and S7.1.1.5(c).

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 571.208a  Optional test procedures for vehicles manufactured between 

January 27, 2004 and August 31, 2004.

    For vehicles manufactured between January 27, 2004 and August 31, 
2004, a manufacturer may, at its option, comply with certain 
requirements of Standard No. 208 in accordance with the test procedures 
set forth in this Sec. 571.208a instead of the corresponding test 
procedures in Sec. 571.208.
    S1 through S15 [Reserved] See Sec. 571.208, S1 through S15.
    S16. Test procedures for rigid barrier test requirements using 5th 
percentile adult female dummies.
    S16.1 General provisions. Crash testing to determine compliance with 
the requirements of S15 of this standard is conducted as specified in 
the following paragraphs (a) and (b).
    (a) Belted test. Place a 49 CFR part 572 subpart O 5th percentile 
adult female test dummy at each front outboard seating position of a 
vehicle, in accordance with the procedures specified in S16.3 of this 
standard. Impact the vehicle traveling longitudinally forward at any 
speed, up to and including 48 km/h (30 mph), into a fixed rigid barrier 
that is perpendicular within a tolerance of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 
degrees to the line of travel of the vehicle under the applicable 
conditions of S16.2 of this standard.
    (b) Unbelted test. Place a 49 CFR part 572 subpart O 5th percentile 
adult female test dummy at each front outboard seating position of a 
vehicle, in accordance with the procedures specified in S16.3 of this 
standard, except S16.3.5. Impact the vehicle traveling longitudinally 
forward at any speed, from 32 km/h (20 mph) to 40 km/h (25 mph), 
inclusive, into a fixed rigid barrier that is perpendicular within a 
tolerance of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees to the line of travel of 
the vehicle under the applicable conditions of S16.2 of this standard.
    S16.2 Test conditions.
    S16.2.1 The vehicle, including test devices and instrumentation, is 
loaded as in S8.1.1 of FMVSS No. 208.
    S16.2.2 Movable vehicle windows and vents are placed in the fully 
closed position, unless the vehicle manufacturer chooses to specify a 
different adjustment position prior to the time the vehicle is 
certified.
    S16.2.3 Convertibles and open-body type vehicles have the top, if 
any, in place in the closed passenger compartment configuration.
    S16.2.4 Doors are fully closed and latched but not locked.
    S16.2.5 The dummy is clothed in form fitting cotton stretch garments 
with short sleeves and above the knee length pants. A size 7\1/2\W shoe 
which meets the configuration and size specifications of MIL-S-21711E 
(see S4.7) or its equivalent is placed on each foot of the test dummy.
    S16.2.6 Limb joints are set at one g, barely restraining the weight 
of the limb when extended horizontally. Leg joints are adjusted with the 
torso in the supine position.
    S16.2.7 Instrumentation shall not affect the motion of dummies 
during impact.
    S16.2.8 The stabilized temperature of the dummy is at any level 
between 20.6 [deg]C and 22.2 [deg]C (69 [deg]F to 72 [deg]F).
    S16.2.9 Steering wheel adjustment.
    S16.2.9.1 Adjust a tiltable steering wheel, if possible, so that the 
steering wheel hub is at the geometric center of its full range of 
driving positions.
    S16.2.9.2 If there is no setting detent at the mid-position, lower 
the steering wheel to the detent just below the mid-position.
    S16.2.9.3 If the steering column is telescoping, place the steering 
column in the mid-position. If there is no mid-position, move the 
steering wheel rearward one position from the mid-position.

[[Page 866]]

    S16.2.10 Driver and passenger seat set-up.
    S16.2.10.1 Lumbar support adjustment. Position adjustable lumbar 
supports so that the lumbar support is in its lowest, retracted or 
deflated adjustment position.
    S16.2.10.2 Other seat adjustments. Position any adjustable parts of 
the seat that provide additional support so that they are in the lowest 
or most open adjustment position.
    S16.2.10.3 Seat position adjustment. If the passenger seat does not 
adjust independently of the driver seat, the driver seat shall control 
the final position of the passenger seat.
    S16.2.10.3.1 If the seat is adjustable in the fore and aft and/or 
vertical directions, move the seat to the rearmost position at the full 
down height adjustment. If the seat cushion adjusts fore and aft, 
independent of the seat back, set this adjustment to the full rearward 
position. If the seat cushion contains a height adjustment, independent 
of the seat back, set this adjustment to the full down position. Record 
a seat cushion reference angle.
    S16.2.10.3.2 Using only controls which move the seat fore and aft, 
move the seat to the full forward position. If seat adjustments other 
than fore-aft are present and the seat cushion reference angle changes 
from that measured in S16.2.10.3.1, use those adjustments to maintain as 
closely as possible the angle recorded in S16.2.10.3.1.
    S16.2.10.3.3 If the seat height is adjustable, determine the maximum 
and minimum heights at this position, while maintaining, as closely as 
possible, the angle recorded in S16.2.10.3.1. Set the seat at the 
midpoint height with the seat cushion reference angle set as closely as 
possible to the angle recorded in S16.2.10.3.1. Mark location of the 
seat for future reference.
    S16.3 Dummy seating positioning procedures. The 49 CFR part 572 
subpart O 5th percentile adult female test dummy is positioned as 
follows:
    S16.3.1 General provisions and definitions.
    S16.3.1.1 All angles are measured with respect to the horizontal 
plane unless otherwise stated.
    S16.3.1.2 The dummy's neck bracket is adjusted to align the zero 
degree index marks.
    S16.3.1.3 The term ``midsagittal plane'' refers to the vertical 
plane that separates the dummy into equal left and right halves.
    S16.3.1.4 The term ``vertical longitudinal plane'' refers to a 
vertical plane parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline.
    S16.3.1.5 The term ``vertical plane'' refers to a vertical plane, 
not necessarily parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline.
    S16.3.1.6 The term ``transverse instrumentation platform'' refers to 
the transverse instrumentation surface inside the dummy's skull casting 
to which the neck load cell mounts. This surface is perpendicular to the 
skull cap's machined inferior-superior mounting surface.
    S16.3.1.7 The term ``thigh'' refers to the femur between, but not 
including, the knee and the pelvis.
    S16.3.1.8 The term ``leg'' refers to the lower part of the entire 
leg including the knee.
    S16.3.1.9 The term ``foot'' refers to the foot including the ankle.
    S16.3.1.10 The longitudinal centerline of a bucket seat cushion is 
determined at the widest part of the seat cushion. Measure perpendicular 
to the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle.
    S16.3.1.11 For leg and thigh angles use the following references:
    S16.3.1.11.1 Thigh--a straight line on the thigh skin between the 
center of the \1/2\-13 UNC-2B tapped hole in the upper leg femur clamp 
(see drawings 880105-504 (left thigh) and 880105-505 (right thigh), 
upper leg femur clamp) and the knee pivot shoulder bolt (part 880105-527 
in drawing 880105-528R & 528L, sliding knee assy. w/o pot).
    S16.3.1.11.2 Leg--a straight line on the leg skin between the center 
of the ankle shell (parts 880105-609 & 633 in drawing 880105-660, ankle 
assembly) and the knee pivot shoulder bolt (part 880105-527 in drawing 
880105-528R & 528L, sliding knee assy. w/o pot).
    S16.3.2 Driver dummy positioning.
    S16.3.2.1 Driver torso/head/seat back angle positioning.
    S16.3.2.1.1 With the seat in the position determined in S16.2.10, 
use only

[[Page 867]]

the controls which move the seat fore and aft to place the seat in the 
rearmost position, without adjusting independent height controls. If the 
seat cushion reference angle automatically changes as the seat is moved 
from the full forward position, maintain, as closely as possible, the 
seat cushion reference angle in S16.2.10.3.1, for the final forward 
position when measuring the pelvic angle as specified in S16.3.2.1.11.
    S16.3.2.1.2 Fully recline the seat back, if adjustable. Install the 
dummy into the driver's seat, such that when the legs are positioned 120 
degrees to the thighs, the calves of the legs are not touching the seat 
cushion.
    S16.3.2.1.3 Bucket seats. Center the dummy on the seat cushion so 
that its midsagittal plane is vertical and coincides with the vertical 
longitudinal plane through the center of the seat cushion.
    S16.3.2.1.4 Bench seats. Position the midsagittal plane of the dummy 
vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline and 
aligned with the center of the steering wheel rim.
    S16.3.2.1.5 Hold the dummy's thighs down and push rearward on the 
upper torso to maximize the dummy's pelvic angle.
    S16.3.2.1.6 Place the legs at 120 degrees to the thighs. Set the 
initial transverse distance between the longitudinal centerlines at the 
front of the dummy's knees at 160 to 170 mm (6.3 to 6.7 in), with the 
thighs and legs of the dummy in vertical planes. Push rearward on the 
dummy's knees to force the pelvis into the seat so there is no gap 
between the pelvis and the seat back or until contact occurs between the 
back of the dummy's calves and the front of the seat cushion.
    S16.3.2.1.7 Gently rock the upper torso relative to the lower torso 
laterally in a side to side motion three times through a <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degree arc (approximately 51 mm (2 in) side to side) 
to reduce friction between the dummy and the seat.
    S16.3.2.1.8 If needed, extend the legs slightly so that the feet are 
not in contact with the floor pan. Let the thighs rest on the seat 
cushion to the extent permitted by the foot movement. Keeping the leg 
and the thigh in a vertical plane, place the foot in the vertical 
longitudinal plane that passes through the centerline of the accelerator 
pedal. Rotate the left thigh outboard about the hip until the center of 
the knee is the same distance from the midsagittal plane of the dummy as 
the right knee <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.2 
in). Using only controls which move the seat fore and aft, attempt to 
return the seat to the full forward position. If either of the dummy's 
legs first contacts the steering wheel, then adjust the steering wheel, 
if adjustable, upward until contact with the steering wheel is avoided. 
If the steering wheel is not adjustable, separate the knees enough to 
avoid steering wheel contact. Proceed with moving the seat forward until 
either the leg contacts the vehicle interior or the seat reaches the 
full forward position. (The right foot may contact and depress the 
accelerator and/or change the angle of the foot with respect to the leg 
during seat movement.) If necessary to avoid contact with the vehicles 
brake or clutch pedal, rotate the test dummy's left foot about the leg. 
If there is still interference, rotate the left thigh outboard about the 
hip the minimum distance necessary to avoid pedal interference. If a 
dummy leg contacts the vehicle interior before the full forward position 
is attained, position the seat at the next detent where there is no 
contact. If the seat is a power seat, move the seat fore and aft to 
avoid contact while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) 
distance between the vehicle interior and the point on the dummy that 
would first contact the vehicle interior. If the steering wheel was 
moved, return it to the position described in S16.2.9. If the steering 
wheel contacts the dummy's leg(s) prior to attaining this position, 
adjust it to the next higher detent, or if infinitely adjustable, until 
there is 5 mm (0.2 in) clearance between the wheel and the dummy's 
leg(s).
    S16.3.2.1.9 For vehicles without adjustable seat backs, adjust the 
lower neck bracket to level the head as much as possible. For vehicles 
with adjustable seat backs, while holding the thighs in place, rotate 
the seat back forward until the transverse instrumentation platform of 
the head is level

[[Page 868]]

to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degree, making sure that the pelvis 
does not interfere with the seat bight. Inspect the abdomen to ensure 
that it is properly installed. If the torso contacts the steering wheel, 
adjust the steering wheel in the following order until there is no 
contact: Telescoping adjustment, lowering adjustment, raising 
adjustment. If the vehicle has no adjustments or contact with the 
steering wheel cannot be eliminated by adjustment, position the seat at 
the next detent where there is no contact with the steering wheel as 
adjusted in S16.2.9. If the seat is a power seat, position the seat to 
avoid contact while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) 
distance between the steering wheel as adjusted in S16.2.9 and the point 
of contact on the dummy.
    S16.3.2.1.10 If it is not possible to achieve the head level within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degrees, minimize the angle.
    S16.3.2.1.11 Measure and set the dummy's pelvic angle using the 
pelvic angle gage (drawing TE-2504, incorporated by reference in 49 CFR 
part 572, subpart O, of this chapter). The angle shall be set to 20.0 
degrees <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 degrees. If this is not possible, 
adjust the pelvic angle as close to 20.0 degrees as possible while 
keeping the transverse instrumentation platform of the head as level as 
possible by adjustments specified in S16.3.2.1.9 and S16.3.2.1.10.
    S16.3.2.1.12 If the dummy is contacting the vehicle interior after 
these adjustments, move the seat rearward until there is a maximum of 5 
mm (0.2 in) between the contact point of the dummy and the interior of 
the vehicle or if it has a manual seat adjustment, to the next rearward 
detent position. If after these adjustments, the dummy contact point is 
more than 5 mm (0.2 in) from the vehicle interior and the seat is still 
not in its forwardmost position, move the seat forward until the contact 
point is 5 mm (0.2 in) or less from the vehicle interior, or if it has a 
manual seat adjustment, move the seat to the closest detent position 
without making contact, or until the seat reaches its forwardmost 
position, whichever occurs first.
    S16.3.2.2 Driver foot positioning.
    S16.3.2.2.1 If the vehicle has an adjustable accelerator pedal, 
adjust it to the full forward position. Rest the right foot of the test 
dummy on the undepressed accelerator pedal with the rearmost point of 
the heel on the floor pan in the plane of the pedal. If the foot cannot 
be placed on the accelerator pedal, set it initially perpendicular to 
the leg and then place it as far forward as possible in the direction of 
the pedal centerline with the rearmost point of the heel resting on the 
floor pan. If the vehicle has an adjustable accelerator pedal and the 
right foot is not touching the accelerator pedal when positioned as 
above, move the pedal rearward until it touches the right foot. If the 
accelerator pedal in the full rearward position still does not touch the 
foot, leave the pedal in that position.
    S16.3.2.2.2 If the ball of the foot does not contact the pedal, 
change the angle of the foot relative to the leg such that the toe of 
the foot contacts the undepressed accelerator pedal.
    S16.3.2.2.3 Place the left foot on the toe-board with the rearmost 
point of the heel resting on the floor pan as close as possible to the 
point of intersection of the planes described by the toe-board and floor 
pan, and not on the wheel-well projection or foot rest.
    S16.3.2.2.4 If the left foot cannot be positioned on the toe board, 
place the foot perpendicular to the lower leg centerline as far forward 
as possible with the heel resting on the floor pan.
    S16.3.2.2.5 If necessary to avoid contact with the vehicle's brake 
or clutch pedal, rotate the test dummy's left foot about the lower leg. 
If there is still pedal interference, rotate the left leg outboard about 
the hip the minimum distance necessary to avoid the pedal interference. 
If the left foot does not contact the floor pan, place the foot parallel 
to the floor and place the leg as perpendicular to the thigh as 
possible.
    S16.3.2.3 Driver arm/hand positioning.
    S16.3.2.3.1 Place the dummy's upper arms adjacent to the torso with 
the arm centerlines as close to a vertical longitudinal plane as 
possible.
    S16.3.2.3.2 Place the palms of the dummy in contact with the outer 
part of the steering wheel rim at its horizontal centerline with the 
thumbs over the steering wheel rim.

[[Page 869]]

    S16.3.2.3.3 If it is not possible to position the thumbs inside the 
steering wheel rim at its horizontal centerline, then position them 
above and as close to the horizontal centerline of the steering wheel 
rim as possible.
    S16.3.2.3.4 Lightly tape the hands to the steering wheel rim so that 
if the hand of the test dummy is pushed upward by a force of not less 
than 9 N (2 lb) and not more than 22 N (5 lb), the tape releases the 
hand from the steering wheel rim.
    S16.3.3 Passenger dummy positioning.
    S16.3.3.1 Passenger torso/head/seat back angle positioning.
    S16.3.3.1.1 With the seat in the position determined in S16.2.10, 
use only the controls which move the seat fore and aft to place the seat 
in the rearmost position, without adjusting independent height controls. 
If the seat cushion reference angle automatically changes as the seat is 
moved from the full forward position, maintain as closely as possible 
the seat cushion reference angle in S16.2.10.3.1, for the final forward 
position when measuring the pelvic angle as specified in S16.3.3.1.11.
    S16.3.3.1.2 Fully recline the seat back, if adjustable. Install the 
dummy into the passenger's seat, such that when the legs are 120 degrees 
to the thighs, the calves of the legs are not touching the seat cushion.
    S16.3.3.1.3 Bucket seats. Center the dummy on the seat cushion so 
that its midsagittal plane is vertical and coincides with the vertical 
longitudinal plane through the center of the seat cushion.
    S16.3.3.1.4 Bench seats. Position the midsagittal plane of the dummy 
vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline and the 
same distance from the vehicle's longitudinal centerline as the 
midsagittal plane of the driver dummy.
    S16.3.3.1.5 Hold the dummy's thighs down and push rearward on the 
upper torso to maximize the dummy's pelvic angle.
    S16.3.3.1.6 Place the legs at 120 degrees to the thighs. Set the 
initial transverse distance between the longitudinal centerlines at the 
front of the dummy's knees at 160 to 170 mm (6.3 to 6.7 in), with the 
thighs and legs of the dummy in vertical planes. Push rearward on the 
dummy's knees to force the pelvis into the seat so there is no gap 
between the pelvis and the seat back or until contact occurs between the 
back of the dummy's calves and the front of the seat cushion.
    S16.3.3.1.7 Gently rock the upper torso relative to the lower torso 
laterally side to side three times through a <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 
degree arc (approximately 51 mm (2 in) side to side).
    S16.3.3.1.8 If needed, extend the legs slightly so that the feet are 
not in contact with the floor pan. Let the thighs rest on the seat 
cushion to the extent permitted by the foot movement. With the feet 
perpendicular to the legs, place the heels on the floor pan. If a heel 
will not contact the floor pan, place it as close to the floor pan as 
possible. Using only controls which move the seat fore and aft, attempt 
to return the seat to the full forward position. If a dummy leg contacts 
the vehicle interior before the full forward position is attained, 
position the seat at the next detent where there is no contact. If the 
seats are power seats, position the seat to avoid contact while assuring 
that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) distance between the vehicle 
interior and the point on the dummy that would first contact the vehicle 
interior.
    S16.3.3.1.9 For vehicles without adjustable seat backs, adjust the 
lower neck bracket to level the head as much as possible. For vehicles 
with adjustable seat backs, while holding the thighs in place, rotate 
the seat back forward until the transverse instrumentation platform of 
the head is level to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degrees, making 
sure that the pelvis does not interfere with the seat bight. Inspect the 
abdomen to insure that it is properly installed.
    S16.3.3.1.10 If it is not possible to orient the head level within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degrees, minimize the angle.
    S16.3.3.1.11 Measure and set the dummy's pelvic angle using the 
pelvic angle gage (drawing TE-2504, incorporated by reference in 49 CFR 
part 572, subpart O, of this chapter). The angle shall be set to 20.0 
degrees <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2.5 degrees. If this is not possible, 
adjust the pelvic angle as close to 20.0 degrees as possible while 
keeping the transverse instrumentation platform of the head as

[[Page 870]]

level as possible as specified in S16.3.3.1.9 and S16.3.3.1.10.
    S16.3.3.1.12 If the dummy is contacting the vehicle interior after 
these adjustments, move the seat rearward until there is a maximum of 5 
mm (0.2 in) between the contact point of the dummy and the interior of 
the vehicle or if it has a manual seat adjustment, to the next rearward 
detent position. If after these adjustments the dummy contact point is 
more than 5 mm (0.2 in) from the vehicle interior and the seat is still 
not in its forward most position, move the seat forward until the 
contact point is 5 mm (0.2 in) or less from the vehicle interior, or if 
it has a manual seat adjustment, move the seat to the closest detent 
position without making contact, or until the seat reaches its forward 
most position, whichever occurs first.
    S16.3.3.2 Passenger foot positioning.
    S16.3.3.2.1 Place the passenger's feet flat on the toe board.
    S16.3.3.2.2 If the feet cannot be placed flat on the toe board, set 
them perpendicular to the leg center lines and place them as far forward 
as possible with the heels resting on the floor pan.
    S16.3.3.3 Passenger arm/hand positioning.
    S16.3.3.3.1 Place the dummy's upper arms in contact with the seat 
back and the torso.
    S16.3.3.3.2 Place the palms of the dummy in contact with the outside 
of the thighs.
    S16.3.3.3.3 Place the little fingers in contact with the seat 
cushion.
    S16.3.4 Driver and passenger adjustable head restraints.
    S16.3.4.1 If the head restraint has an automatic adjustment, leave 
it where the system positions the restraint after the dummy is placed in 
the seat.
    S16.3.4.2 Adjust each head restraint to its lowest position.
    S16.3.4.3 Measure the vertical distance from the top most point of 
the head restraint to the bottom most point. Locate a horizontal plane 
through the midpoint of this distance. Adjust each head restraint 
vertically so that this horizontal plane is aligned with the center of 
gravity (CG) of the dummy head.
    S16.3.4.4 If the above position is not attainable, move the vertical 
center of the head restraint to the closest detent below the center of 
the head CG.
    S16.3.4.5 If the head restraint has a fore and aft adjustment, place 
the restraint in the forwardmost position or until contact with the head 
is made, whichever occurs first.
    S16.3.5 Driver and passenger manual belt adjustment (for tests 
conducted with a belted dummy)
    S16.3.5.1 If an adjustable seat belt D-ring anchorage exists, place 
it in the manufacturer's design position for a 5th percentile adult 
female with the seat in the position specified in S16.2.10.3.
    S16.3.5.2 Place the Type 2 manual belt around the test dummy and 
fasten the latch.
    S16.3.5.3 Ensure that the dummy's head remains as level as possible, 
as specified in S16.3.2.1.9 and S16.3.2.1.10 and S16.3.3.1.9 and 
S16.3.3.1.10.
    S16.3.5.4 Remove all slack from the lap belt. Pull the upper torso 
webbing out of the retractor and allow it to retract; repeat this 
operation four times. Apply a 9 N (2 lbf) to 18 N (4 lbf) tension load 
to the lap belt. If the belt system is equipped with a tension-relieving 
device, introduce the maximum amount of slack into the upper torso belt 
that is recommended by the manufacturer. If the belt system is not 
equipped with a tension-relieving device, allow the excess webbing in 
the shoulder belt to be retracted by the retractive force of the 
retractor.
    S17 through S19 [Reserved]. See Sec. 571.208, S17 through S19.
    S20 Test procedure for S19 of FMVSS No. 208.
    S20.1 General provisions.
    S20.1.1 Tests specifying the use of a car bed, a rear facing child 
restraint, or a convertible child restraint may be conducted using any 
such restraint listed in sections A, B, and C of appendix A of FMVSS No. 
208 respectively. The car bed, rear facing child restraint, or 
convertible child restraint may be unused or have been previously used 
only for automatic suppression tests. If it has been used, there shall 
not be any visible damage prior to the test.
    S20.1.2 Each vehicle certified to this option shall comply in tests 
conducted with the right front outboard seating position, if adjustable 
fore and aft, at

[[Page 871]]

full rearward, middle, and full forward positions. If the child 
restraint or dummy contacts the vehicle interior, move the seat rearward 
to the next detent that provides clearance. If the seat is a power seat, 
move the seat rearward while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm 
(0.2 in) clearance.
    S20.1.3 If the car bed, rear facing child restraint, or convertible 
child restraint is equipped with a handle, the vehicle shall comply in 
tests conducted with the handle at both the child restraint 
manufacturer's recommended position for use in vehicles and in the 
upright position.
    S20.1.4 If the car bed, rear facing child restraint, or convertible 
child restraint is equipped with a sunshield, the vehicle shall comply 
in tests conducted with the sunshield both fully open and fully closed.
    S20.1.5 The vehicle shall comply in tests with the car bed, rear 
facing child restraint, or convertible child restraint uncovered and in 
tests with a towel or blanket weighing up to 1.0 kg (2.2 lb) placed on 
or over the restraint in any of the following positions:
    (a) with the blanket covering the top and sides of the restraint, 
and
    (b) with the blanket placed from the top of the vehicle's seat back 
to the forwardmost edge of the restraint.
    S20.1.6 Except as otherwise specified, if the car bed, rear facing 
child restraint, or convertible child restraint has an anchorage system 
as specified in S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213 and is tested in a vehicle with a 
right front outboard vehicle seat that has an anchorage system as 
specified in FMVSS No. 225, the vehicle shall comply with the belted 
test conditions with the restraint anchorage system attached to the 
vehicle seat anchorage system and the vehicle seat belt unattached. It 
shall also comply with the belted test conditions with the restraint 
anchorage system unattached to the vehicle seat anchorage system and the 
vehicle seat belt attached. The vehicle shall comply with the unbelted 
test conditions with the restraint anchorage system unattached to the 
vehicle seat anchorage system.
    S20.1.7 If the car bed, rear facing child restraint, or convertible 
child restraint comes equipped with a detachable base, the vehicle shall 
comply in tests conducted with the detachable base attached to the child 
restraint and with the detachable base unattached to the child 
restraint.
    S20.1.8 Do not attach any tethers.
    S20.1.9 Seat set-up. Unless otherwise stated,
    S20.1.9.1 Lumbar support adjustment. Position adjustable lumbar 
supports so that the lumbar support is in its lowest, retracted or 
deflated adjustment position.
    S20.1.9.2 Other seat adjustments. Position any adjustable parts of 
the seat that provide additional support so that they are in the lowest 
or most open adjustment position.
    S20.1.9.3 If the seat cushion adjusts fore and aft, independent of 
the seat back, set this adjustment to the full rearward position.
    S20.1.9.4 If the seat height is adjustable, determine the maximum 
and minimum heights at the full rearward, middle, and full forward 
positions. Set the seat at the mid-point height for each of the three 
fore-aft test positions.
    S20.1.9.5 The seat back angle, if adjustable, is set at the 
manufacturer's nominal design seat back angle for a 50th percentile 
adult male as specified in S8.1.3 of FMVSS No. 208.
    S20.1.9.6 If adjustable, set the head restraint at the full down and 
full forward position.
    S20.1.10 The longitudinal centerline of a bucket seat cushion is 
determined at the widest part of the seat cushion. Measure perpendicular 
to the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle.
    S20.2 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in deactivation of the passenger air bag. Each vehicle that is 
certified as complying with S19.2 of FMVSS No. 208 shall meet the 
following test requirements.
    S20.2.1 Belted rear facing and convertible child restraints.
    S20.2.1.1 The vehicle shall comply in tests using any child 
restraint specified in section B and section C of appendix A of FMVSS 
No. 208.
    S20.2.1.2 Locate a vertical plane through the longitudinal 
centerline of the child restraint. This will be referred to as 
``Plane.''
    S20.2.1.3 For bucket seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane 
parallel to

[[Page 872]]

the vehicle longitudinal centerline through the longitudinal centerline 
of the right front outboard vehicle seat cushion. For bench seats, 
``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane through the right front outboard 
vehicle seat parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline the same 
distance from the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle as the center 
of the steering wheel.
    S20.2.1.4 Facing rear.
    (a) The vehicle shall comply in both of the following positions, if 
applicable:
    (1) Without attaching the child restraint anchorage system as 
specified in S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213 to a vehicle seat anchorage system 
specified in FMVSS No. 225, align the child restraint system facing 
rearward such that Plane A is aligned with Plane B.
    (2) If the child restraint is certified to S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213, 
and the vehicle seat has an anchorage system as specified in FMVSS No. 
225, attach the child restraint to the vehicle seat anchorage instead of 
aligning the planes. Do not attach the vehicle safety belt.
    (b) While maintaining the child restraint positions achieved in 
S20.2.1.4(a), secure the child restraint by following, to the extent 
possible, the child restraint manufacturer's directions regarding proper 
installation of the restraint in the rear facing mode.
    (c) Place any adjustable seat belt anchorages at the vehicle 
manufacturer's nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male 
occupant. Cinch the vehicle belts to any tension from zero up to 134 N 
(30 lb) to secure the child restraint. Measure belt tension in a flat, 
straight section of the lap belt between the child restraint belt path 
and the contact point with the belt anchor or vehicle seat, on the side 
away from the buckle (to avoid interference from the shoulder portion of 
the belt).
    (d) Position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart R 12-month-old CRABI dummy 
in the child restraint by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating infants.
    (e) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and close all 
vehicle doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S20.2.1.5 Facing forward (convertible restraints only).
    (a) The vehicle shall comply in both of the following positions, if 
applicable:
    (1) Without attaching the child restraint anchorage system as 
specified in S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213 to a vehicle seat anchorage system 
specified in FMVSS No. 225, align the child restraint system facing 
forward such that Plane A is aligned with Plane B.
    (2) If the child restraint is certified to S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213, 
and the vehicle seat has an anchorage system as specified in FMVSS No. 
225, attach the child restraint to the vehicle seat anchorage instead of 
aligning the planes. Do not attach the vehicle safety belt.
    (b) While maintaining the child restraint positions achieved in 
S20.2.1.5(a), secure the child restraint by following, to the extent 
possible, the child restraint manufacturer's directions regarding proper 
installation of the restraint in the forward facing mode.
    (c) Place any adjustable seat belt anchorages at the vehicle 
manufacturer's nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male 
occupant. Cinch the vehicle belts to any tension from zero up to 134 N 
(30 lb) to secure the child restraint. Measure belt tension in a flat, 
straight section of the lap belt between the child restraint belt path 
and the contact point with the belt anchor or vehicle seat, on the side 
away from the buckle (to avoid interference from the shoulder portion of 
the belt).
    (d) Position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart R 12-month-old CRABI dummy 
in the child restraint by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating infants.
    (e) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and close all 
vehicle doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S20.2.2 Unbelted rear facing and convertible child restraints.
    S20.2.2.1 The vehicle shall comply in tests using any child 
restraint specified in section B and section C of appendix A of FMVSS 
No. 208.

[[Page 873]]

    S20.2.2.2 Locate a vertical plane through the longitudinal 
centerline of the child restraint. This will be referred to as ``Plane 
A''.
    S20.2.2.3 For bucket seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane 
parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline through the longitudinal 
centerline of the right front outboard vehicle seat cushion. For bench 
seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane through the right front 
outboard seat parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline the same 
distance from the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle as the center 
of the steering wheel.
    S20.2.2.4 Facing rear.
    (a) Align the child restraint system facing rearward such that Plane 
A is aligned with Plane B and the child restraint is in contact with the 
seat back.
    (b) Position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart R 12-month-old CRABI dummy 
in the child restraint by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating infants.
    (c) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and close all 
vehicle doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S20.2.2.5 Facing forward.
    (a) Align the child restraint system facing forward such that Plane 
A is aligned with Plane B and the child restraint is in contact with the 
seat back.
    (b) Position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart R 12-month-old CRABI dummy 
in the child restraint by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating infants.
    (c) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and close all 
vehicle doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S20.2.3 Tests with a belted car bed.
    S20.2.3.1 The vehicle shall comply in tests using any car bed 
specified in section A of appendix A of FMVSS No. 208.
    S20.2.3.2(a) Install the car bed by following, to the extent 
possible, the car bed manufacturer's directions regarding proper 
installation of the car bed.
    (b) Place any adjustable seat belt anchorages at the vehicle 
manufacturer's nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male 
occupant. Cinch the vehicle belts to secure the car bed.
    (c) Position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart K Newborn Infant dummy in 
the car bed by following, to the extent possible, the car bed 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the car bed for positioning 
infants.
    (d) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and close all 
vehicle doors. Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S20.3 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in activation of the passenger air bag system.
    S20.3.1 Each vehicle certified to this option shall comply in tests 
conducted with the right front outboard seating position, if adjustable 
fore and aft, at the full rearward, middle, and, subject to S16.3.3.1.8, 
full forward positions. All tests are conducted with the seat height, if 
adjustable, in the mid-height position.
    S20.3.2 Place a 49 CFR part 572 subpart O 5th percentile adult 
female test dummy at the right front outboard seating position of the 
vehicle, in accordance with procedures specified in S16.3.3 of this 
standard, except as specified in S20.3.1, subject to the fore-aft seat 
positions in S20.3.1. Do not fasten the seat belt.
    S20.3.3 Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    S20.3.4 Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag system is 
activated.
    S20.4 Low risk deployment test. Each vehicle that is certified as 
complying with S19.3 of FMVSS No. 208 shall meet the following test 
requirements.
    S20.4.1 Position the right front outboard vehicle seat in the full 
forward seat track position, adjust the seat height (if adjustable) to 
the mid-height position, and adjust the seat back (if adjustable) to the 
nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male as

[[Page 874]]

specified in S8.1.3 of FMVSS No. 208. Position adjustable lumbar 
supports so that the lumbar support is in its lowest, retracted or 
deflated adjustment position. Position any adjustable parts of the seat 
that provide additional support so that they are in the lowest or most 
open adjustment position. If the seat cushion adjusts fore and aft, 
independent of the seat back, set this adjustment to the full rearward 
position. If adjustable, set the head restraint at the full down 
position. If the child restraint or dummy contacts the vehicle interior, 
move the seat rearward to the next detent that provides clearance. If 
the seat is a power seat, move the seat rearward while assuring that 
there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) clearance.
    S20.4.2 The vehicle shall comply in tests using any child restraint 
specified in section B and section C of appendix A to FMVSS No. 208.
    S20.4.3 Locate a vertical plane through the longitudinal centerline 
of the child restraint. This will be referred to as ``Plane A''.
    S20.4.4 For bucket seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane 
parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline through the geometric 
center of the right front outboard seat cushion. For bench seats, 
``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane through the right front outboard 
seat parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline that is the same 
distance from the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle as the center 
of the steering wheel.
    S20.4.5 Align the child restraint system facing rearward such that 
Plane A is aligned with Plane B.
    S20.4.6 If the child restraint is certified to S5.9 of FMVSS No. 
213, and the vehicle seat has an anchorage system as specified in FMVSS 
No. 225, attach the child restraint to the vehicle seat anchorage 
instead of aligning the planes. Do not attach the vehicle safety belt.
    S20.4.7 While maintaining the child restraint position achieved in 
S20.4.5, secure the child restraint by following, to the extent 
possible, the child restraint manufacturer's directions regarding proper 
installation of the restraint in the rear facing mode. Place any 
adjustable seat belt anchorages at the manufacturer's nominal design 
position for a 50th percentile adult male occupant. Cinch the vehicle 
belts to any tension from zero up to 134 N (30 lb) to secure the child 
restraint. Measure belt tension in a flat, straight section of the lap 
belt between the child restraint belt path and the contact point with 
the belt anchor or vehicle seat, on the side away from the buckle (to 
avoid interference from the shoulder portion of the belt).
    S20.4.8 Position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart R 12-month-old CRABI 
dummy in the child restraint by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating infants.
    S20.4.9 Deploy the right front outboard frontal air bag system. If 
the air bag system contains a multistage inflator, the vehicle shall be 
able to comply at any stage or combination of stages or time delay 
between successive stages that could occur in the presence of an infant 
in a rear facing child restraint and a 49 CFR part 572, subpart R 12-
month-old CRABI dummy positioned according to S20.4 in a rigid barrier 
crash test at speeds up to 64 km/h (40 mph).
    S21 [Reserved] See Sec. 571.208, S21.
    S22 Test procedure for S21 of FMVSS No. 208.
    S22.1 General provisions and definitions.
    S22.1.1 Tests specifying the use of a forward facing child 
restraint, including a booster seat where applicable, may be conducted 
using any such restraint listed in section C and section D of appendix A 
of FMVSS No. 208, respectively. The child restraint may be unused or 
have been previously used only for automatic suppression tests. If it 
has been used, there shall not be any visible damage prior to the test. 
Booster seats are to be used in the manner appropriate for a 3-year-old 
child of the same height and weight as the 3-year-old child dummy.
    S22.1.2 Unless otherwise specified, each vehicle certified to this 
option shall comply in tests conducted with the right front outboard 
seating position at the full rearward, middle, and the full forward 
positions. If the dummy contacts the vehicle interior, move the seat 
rearward to the next detent that provides clearance. If the

[[Page 875]]

seat is a power seat, move the seat rearward while assuring that there 
is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) clearance.
    S22.1.3 Except as otherwise specified, if the child restraint has an 
anchorage system as specified in S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213 and is tested in 
a vehicle with a right front outboard vehicle seat that has an anchorage 
system as specified in FMVSS No. 225, the vehicle shall comply with the 
belted test conditions with the restraint anchorage system attached to 
the vehicle seat anchorage system and the vehicle seat belt unattached. 
It shall also comply with the belted test conditions with the restraint 
anchorage system unattached to the vehicle seat anchorage system and the 
vehicle seat belt attached.
    S22.1.4 Do not attach any tethers.
    S22.1.5 The definitions provided in S16.3.1 through S16.3.10 apply 
to the tests specified in S22.
    S22.1.6 For leg and thigh angles use the following references:
    (a) Thigh--a straight line on the thigh skin between the center of 
the \5/16\ x \1/2\ in. screw (part 9001024, item 10 in drawing 210-0000 
sheet 2 of 7, complete assembly (HYB III 3 YR OLD)) and the knee bolt 
(part 210-5301 in drawing 210-5000-1 & -1, leg assembly).
    (b) Leg--a straight line on the leg skin between the center of the 
ankle bolt (part 210-5701 in drawing 210-5000-1 & -2, leg assembly) and 
the knee bolt (part 210-5301 in drawing 210-5000-1 & -2, leg assembly).
    S22.1.7 Seat set-up. Unless otherwise stated,
    S22.1.7.1 Lumbar support adjustment. Position adjustable lumbar 
supports so that the lumbar support is in its lowest, retracted or 
deflated adjustment position.
    S22.1.7.2 Other seat adjustments. Position any adjustable parts of 
the seat that provide additional support so that they are in the lowest 
or most open adjustment position.
    S22.1.7.3 If the seat cushion adjusts fore and aft, independent of 
the seat back, set this adjustment to the full rearward position.
    S22.1.7.4 If the seat height is adjustable, determine the maximum 
and minimum heights at the full rearward seat track position, the middle 
seat track position, and the full forward seat track position. Set the 
seat at the mid-point height for each of the three fore-aft test 
positions.
    S22.1.7.5 The seat back angle, if adjustable, is set at the 
manufacturer's nominal design seat back angle for a 50th percentile 
adult male as specified in S8.1.3 of FMVSS No. 208.
    S22.1.7.6 If adjustable, set the head restraint at the full down and 
full forward position.
    S22.2 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in deactivation of the passenger air bag. Each vehicle that is 
certified as complying with S21.2 of FMVSS No. 208 shall meet the 
following test requirements:
    S22.2.1 Belted test with forward facing child restraints or booster 
seats.
    S22.2.1.1 Install the restraint in the right front outboard seat in 
accordance, to the extent possible, with the child restraint 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the seat for use by children 
with the same height and weight as the 3-year-old child dummy.
    S22.2.1.2 Locate a vertical plane through the longitudinal 
centerline of the child restraint. This will be referred to as ``Plane 
A''.
    S22.2.1.3 For bucket seats, ``Plane B'' refers to a vertical 
longitudinal plane through the longitudinal centerline of the seat 
cushion of the right front outboard vehicle seat. For bench seats, 
``Plane B'' refers to a vertical plane through the right front outboard 
vehicle seat parallel to the vehicle longitudinal centerline the same 
distance from the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle as the center 
of the steering wheel.
    22.2.1.4 The vehicle shall comply in both of the following 
positions, if applicable:
    (a) Without attaching the child restraint anchorage system as 
specified in S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213 to a vehicle seat anchorage system 
specified in FMVSS No. 225 and without attaching any tethers, align the 
child restraint system facing forward such that Plane A is aligned with 
Plane B.
    (b) If the child restraint is certified to S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213, 
and the vehicle seat has an anchorage system as specified in FMVSS No. 
225, attach the

[[Page 876]]

child restraint to the vehicle seat anchorage instead of aligning the 
planes. Do not attach the vehicle safety belt.
    S22.2.1.5 Forward facing child restraint.
    S22.2.1.5.1 Place any adjustable seat belt anchorages at the vehicle 
manufacturer's nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male 
occupant. Cinch the vehicle belts to any tension from zero up to 134 N 
(30 lb) to secure the child restraint. Measure belt tension in a flat, 
straight section of the lap belt between the child restraint belt path 
and the contact point with the belt anchor or vehicle seat, on the side 
away from the buckle (to avoid interference from the shoulder portion of 
the belt).
    S22.2.1.5.2 Position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart P 3-year-old child 
dummy in the child restraint such that the dummy's lower torso is 
centered on the child restraint and the dummy's spine is against the 
seat back of the child restraint. Place the arms at the dummy's sides.
    S22.2.1.5.3 Attach all belts that come with the child restraint that 
are appropriate for a child of the same height and weight as the 3-year-
old child dummy, if any, by following, to the extent possible, the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the child restraint for 
seating children.
    S22.2.1.6 Booster seat.
    S22.2.1.6.1 Place any adjustable seat belt anchorages at the vehicle 
manufacturer's nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male 
occupant. For booster seats designed to be secured to the vehicle seat 
even when empty, cinch the vehicle belts to any tension from zero up to 
134 N (30 lb) to secure the booster seat. Measure belt tension in a 
flat, straight section of the lap belt between the child restraint belt 
path and the contact point with the belt anchor or vehicle seat, on the 
side away from the buckle (to avoid interference from the shoulder 
portion of the belt).
    S22.2.1.6.2 Position the 49 CFR part 572 subpart P 3-year-old child 
dummy in the booster seat such that the dummy's lower torso is centered 
on the booster seat cushion and the dummy's back is parallel to and in 
contact with the booster seat back or, if there is no booster seat back, 
the vehicle seat back. Place the arms at the dummy's sides.
    S22.2.1.6.3 If applicable, attach all belts that come with the child 
restraint that are appropriate for a child of the same height and weight 
as the 3-year-old child dummy, if any, by following, to the extent 
possible, the manufacturer's instructions provided with the child 
restraint for seating children.
    S22.2.1.6.4 If applicable, place the Type 2 manual belt around the 
test dummy and fasten the latch. Remove all slack from the lap belt 
portion. Pull the upper torso webbing out of the retractor and allow it 
to retract; repeat this four times. Apply a 9 to 18 N (2 to 4 lb) 
tension load to the lap belt. Allow the excess webbing in the upper 
torso belt to be retracted by the retractive force of the retractor.
    S22.2.1.7 Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the 
``on'' position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then 
close all vehicle doors.
    S22.2.1.8 Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is 
deactivated.
    S22.2.2 Unbelted tests with dummies. Place the 49 CFR part 572 
subpart P 3-year-old child dummy on the right front outboard seat in any 
of the following positions (without using a child restraint or booster 
seat or the vehicle's seat belts):
    S22.2.2.1 Sitting on seat with back against seat back
    (a) Position the dummy in the seated position and place it on the 
right front outboard seat.
    (b) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline as the center of the steering wheel. In the case 
of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal plane 
of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the longitudinal 
centerline of the seat cushion. Position the torso of the dummy against 
the seat back. Position the dummy's thighs against the seat cushion.
    (c) Allow the legs of the dummy to extend off the surface of the 
seat.

[[Page 877]]

    (d) Rotate the dummy's upper arms down until they contact the seat 
back.
    (e) Rotate the dummy's lower arms until the dummy's hands contact 
the seat cushion.
    (f) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (g) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.2 Sitting on seat with back against reclined seat back. 
Repeat the test sequence in S22.2.2.1 with the seat back angle 25 
degrees rearward of the manufacturer's nominal design position for the 
50th percentile adult male. If the seat will not recline 25 degrees 
rearward of the nominal design position, use the closest position that 
does not exceed 25 degrees.
    S22.2.2.3 Sitting on seat with back not against seat back.
    (a) Position the dummy in the seated position and place it on the 
right front outboard seat.
    (b) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline as the center of the steering wheel. In the case 
of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal plane 
of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the longitudinal 
centerline of the seat cushion. Position the dummy with the spine 
vertical so that the horizontal distance from the dummy's back to the 
seat back is no less than 25 mm (1.0 in) and no more than 150 mm (6.0 
in), as measured along the dummy's midsagittal plane at the mid-sternum 
level. To keep the dummy in position, a material with a maximum breaking 
strength of 311 N (70 lb) may be used to hold the dummy.
    (c) Position the dummy's thighs against the seat cushion.
    (d) Allow the legs of the dummy to extend off the surface of the 
seat.
    (e) Position the upper arms parallel to the spine and rotate the 
dummy's lower arms until the dummy's hands contact the seat cushion.
    (f) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (g) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.4 Sitting on seat edge, spine vertical, hands by the dummy's 
sides.
    (a) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline as the center of the steering wheel. In the case 
of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal plane 
of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the longitudinal 
centerline of the seat cushion.
    (b) Position the dummy in the seated position forward in the seat 
such that the legs are vertical and the back of the legs rest against 
the front of the seat with the spine vertical. If the dummy's feet 
contact the floor pan, rotate the legs forward until the dummy is 
resting on the seat with the feet positioned flat on the floor pan and 
the dummy spine vertical. To keep the dummy in position, a material with 
a maximum breaking strength of 311 N (70 lb) may be used to hold the 
dummy.
    (c) Place the upper arms parallel to the spine.
    (d) Lower the dummy's lower arms such that they contact the seat 
cushion.
    (e) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (f) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.5 Standing on seat, facing forward.
    (a) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline as the center of the steering wheel rim. In the 
case of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal 
plane of the

[[Page 878]]

dummy vertically such that it coincides with the longitudinal centerline 
of the seat cushion. Position the dummy in a standing position on the 
right front outboard seat cushion facing the front of the vehicle while 
placing the heels of the dummy's feet in contact with the seat back.
    (b) Rest the dummy against the seat back, with the arms parallel to 
the spine.
    (c) If the head contacts the vehicle roof, recline the seat so that 
the head is no longer in contact with the vehicle roof, but allow no 
more than 5 mm (0.2 in) distance between the head and the roof. If the 
seat does not sufficiently recline to allow clearance, omit the test.
    (d) If necessary use a material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) or spacer blocks to keep the dummy in position.
    (e) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (f) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.6 Kneeling on seat, facing forward.
    (a) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline as the center of the steering wheel. In the case 
of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal plane 
of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the longitudinal 
centerline of the seat cushion.
    (b) Position the dummy in a kneeling position in the right front 
outboard seat with the dummy facing the front of the vehicle with its 
toes at the intersection of the seat back and seat cushion. Position the 
dummy so that the spine is vertical. Push down on the legs so that they 
contact the seat as much as possible and then release. Place the arms 
parallel to the spine.
    (c) If necessary use a material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) or spacer blocks to keep the dummy in position.
    (d) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (e) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.7 Kneeling on seat, facing rearward.
    (a) In the case of vehicles equipped with bench seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline as the center of the steering wheel. In the case 
of vehicles equipped with bucket seats, position the midsagittal plane 
of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with the longitudinal 
centerline of the seat cushion.
    (b) Position the dummy in a kneeling position in the right front 
outboard seat with the dummy facing the rear of the vehicle. Position 
the dummy such that the dummy's head and torso are in contact with the 
seat back. Push down on the legs so that they contact the seat as much 
as possible and then release. Place the arms parallel to the spine.
    (c) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (d) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.2.2.8 Lying on seat. This test is performed only in vehicles 
with 3 designated front seating positions.
    (a) Lay the dummy on the right front outboard seat such that the 
following criteria are met:
    (1) The midsagittal plane of the dummy is horizontal,
    (2) The dummy's spine is perpendicular to the vehicle's longitudinal 
axis,
    (3) The dummy's arms are parallel to its spine,
    (4) A plane passing through the two shoulder joints of the dummy is 
vertical,
    (5) The anterior of the dummy is facing the vehicle front,
    (6) The head of the dummy is positioned towards the passenger door, 
and

[[Page 879]]

    (7) The horizontal distance from the topmost point of the dummy's 
head to the vehicle door is 50 to 100 mm (2-4 in).
    (8) The dummy is as far back in the seat as possible.
    (b) Rotate the thighs as much as possible toward the chest of the 
dummy and rotate the legs as much as possible against the thighs.
    (c) Move the dummy's upper left arm parallel to the vehicle's 
transverse plane and the lower left arm 90 degrees to the upper arm. 
Rotate the lower left arm about the elbow joint and toward the dummy's 
head until movement is obstructed.
    (d) Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    (e) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S22.3 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in activation of the passenger air bag system.
    S22.3.1 Each vehicle certified to this option shall comply in tests 
conducted with the right front outboard seating position at the full 
rearward, middle, and, subject to S16.3.3.1.8, full forward positions. 
All tests are conducted with the seat height, if adjustable, in the mid-
height position.
    S22.3.2 Place a 49 CFR part 572 subpart O 5th percentile adult 
female test dummy at the right front outboard seating position of the 
vehicle, in accordance with procedures specified in S16.3.3 of this 
standard, except as specified in S22.3.1. Do not fasten the seat belt.
    S22.3.3 Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    S22.3.4 Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag system is 
activated.
    S22.4 Low risk deployment tests.
    S22.4.1 Each vehicle that is certified as complying with S21.4 shall 
meet the following test requirements with the 49 CFR part 572, subpart P 
3-year-old child dummy in both of the following positions: Position 1 
(S22.4.2) and Position 2 (S22.4.3).
    S22.4.1.1 Locate and mark a point on the front of the dummy's chest 
jacket on the midsaggital plane which is 114 mm (4.5 in) <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 in) along the surface of 
the skin from the top of the skin at the neck line. This is referred to 
as ``Point 1.''
    S22.4.1.2 Locate the vertical plane parallel to the vehicle 
longitudinal centerline through the geometric center of the opening 
through which the right front air bag deploys into the occupant 
compartment. This is referred to as ``Plane D.''
    S22.4.1.3 Locate the horizontal plane through the geometric center 
of the opening through which the right front air bag deploys into the 
occupant compartment. This is referred to as ``Plane C.''
    S22.4.2 Position 1 (chest on instrument panel).
    S22.4.2.1 If a seat is adjustable in the fore and aft and/or 
vertical directions, move the seat to the rear-most seating position and 
full-down height adjustment. If the seat cushion adjusts fore and aft, 
independent of the entire seat, adjust the seat cushion to the full-
rearward position. If the seat back is adjustable, place the seat back 
at the manufacturer's nominal design seat back angle for a 50th 
percentile adult male as specified in S8.1.3 of FMVSS No. 208. Position 
any adjustable parts of the seat that provide additional support so that 
they are in the lowest or most open adjustment position. If adjustable, 
set the head restraint in the lowest position.
    S22.4.2.2 Place the dummy in the front passenger seat such that:
    S22.4.2.2.1 The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane D.
    S22.4.2.2.2 The legs are initially vertical to the floor pan. The 
legs and thighs shall be adjusted to the extent necessary for the head/
torso to contact the instrument panel as specified in S22.4.2.3.
    S22.4.2.2.3 The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands 
are in contact with the thighs.
    S22.4.2.3 Without changing the seat position and with the dummy's 
thorax instrument cavity rear face vertical, move the dummy forward 
until the

[[Page 880]]

dummy head/torso contacts the instrument panel. If the dummy loses 
contact with the seat cushion because of the forward movement, maintain 
the height of the dummy and the angle of the thigh with respect to the 
torso. Once contact is made, raise the dummy vertically until Point 1 
lies in Plane C. If the dummy's head contacts the windshield and keeps 
Point 1 from reaching Plane C, lower the dummy until there is no more 
than 5 mm (0.2 in) clearance between the head and the windshield. (The 
dummy shall remain in contact with the instrument panel while being 
raised or lowered, which may change the dummy's fore-aft position.)
    S22.4.2.4 If possible, position the legs of the dummy so that the 
legs are vertical and the feet rest flat on the floor pan of the 
vehicle. If the positioning against the instrument panel does not allow 
the feet to be on the floor pan, the feet shall be parallel to the floor 
pan.
    S22.4.2.5 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. The material should support the torso rather than the head. 
Support the dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full 
rotational and translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy 
and the material does not interfere with the air bag.
    S22.4.3 Position 2 (head on instrument panel).
    S22.4.3.1 Place the passenger seat in the full rearward seating 
position. Place the seat back at the manufacturer's nominal design seat 
back angle for a 50th percentile adult male as specified in S8.1.3 of 
FMVSS No. 208. If adjustable in the vertical direction, place the seat 
in the mid-height position. If the seat cushion adjusts fore and aft, 
independent of the entire seat, adjust the seat cushion to the full 
rearward position. Position any adjustable parts of the seat that 
provide additional support so that they are in the lowest or most open 
adjustment position. If adjustable, set the head restraint in the lowest 
position.
    S22.4.3.2 Place the dummy in the front passenger seat such that:
    S22.4.3.2.1 The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane D.
    S22.4.3.2.2 The legs are vertical to the floor pan, the back of the 
legs are in contact with the seat cushion, and the dummy's thorax 
instrument cavity rear face is vertical. If it is not possible to 
position the dummy with the legs in the prescribed position, rotate the 
legs forward until the dummy is resting on the seat with the feet 
positioned flat on the floor pan, and the back of the legs are in 
contact with the front of the seat cushion. Set the transverse distance 
between the longitudinal centerlines at the front of the dummy's knees 
at 86 to 91 mm (3.4 to 3.6 in), with the thighs and the legs of the 
dummy in vertical planes.
    S22.4.3.2.3 The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands 
are in contact with the thighs.
    S22.4.3.3 Move the seat forward, while maintaining the thorax 
instrument cavity rear face orientation until any part of the dummy 
contacts the vehicle's instrument panel.
    S22.4.3.4 If dummy contact has not been made with the vehicle's 
instrument panel at the full forward seating position of the seat, slide 
the dummy forward until contact is made. Maintain the thorax instrument 
cavity rear face vertical orientation, the height of the dummy, and the 
angle of the thigh with respect to the horizontal.
    S22.4.3.5 If head/torso contact with the instrument panel has not 
been made, maintain the angle of the thighs with respect to the 
horizontal while applying a force towards the front of the vehicle on 
the spine of the dummy between the shoulder joints until the head or 
torso comes into contact with the vehicle's instrument panel.
    S22.4.3.6 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. The material should support the torso rather than the head. 
Support the dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full 
rotational and translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy 
and the material does not interfere with the air bag.
    S22.4.4 Deploy the right front outboard frontal air bag system. If 
the frontal air bag system contains a multistage inflator, the vehicle 
shall

[[Page 881]]

be able to comply with the injury criteria at any stage or combination 
of stages or time delay between successive stages that could occur in a 
rigid barrier crash test at or below 26 km/h (16 mph), under the test 
procedure specified in S22.5.
    S22.5 Test procedure for determining stages of air bag systems 
subject to low risk deployment (low speed crashes) test requirement.
    S22.5.1 The test described in S22.5.2 shall be conducted with an 
unbelted 50th percentile adult male test dummy in the driver seating 
position according to S8 of FMVSS No. 208 as it applies to that seating 
position and an unbelted 5th percentile adult female test dummy either 
in the right front seating position according to S16 as it applies to 
that seating position or at any fore-aft seat position on the passenger 
side.
    S22.5.2 Impact the vehicle traveling longitudinally forward at any 
speed, up to and including 26 km/h (16 mph) into a fixed rigid barrier 
that is perpendicular <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees to the line of 
travel of the vehicle under the applicable conditions of S8 and S10 of 
FMVSS No. 208, and S16 of this standard excluding S10.7, S10.8 and S10.9 
of FMVSS No. 208 and S16.3.5 of this standard.
    S22.5.3 Determine which inflation stage or combination of stages are 
fired and determine the time delay between successive stages. That stage 
or combination of stages, with time delay between successive stages, 
shall be used in deploying the air bag when conducting the low risk 
deployment tests described in S22.4, S24.4, and S26.
    S22.5.4 If the air bag does not deploy in the impact described in 
S22.5.2, the low risk deployment tests described in S22.4, S24.4, and 
S26 shall be conducted with all stages using the maximum time delay 
between stages.
    S23 [Reserved]. See Sec. 571.208, S23.
    S24 Test procedure for S23 of FMVSS No. 208.
    S24.1 General provisions and definitions.
    S24.1.1 Tests specifying the use of a booster seat may be conducted 
using any such restraint listed in section D of appendix A of FMVSS No. 
208. The booster seat may be unused or have been previously used only 
for automatic suppression. If it has been used, there shall not be any 
visible damage prior to the test. Booster seats are to be used in the 
manner appropriate for a 6-year-old child of the same height and weight 
as the 6-year-old child dummy.
    S24.1.2 Unless otherwise specified, each vehicle certified to this 
option shall comply in tests conducted with the right front outboard 
seating position at the full rearward seat track position, the middle 
seat track position, and the full forward seat track position. If the 
dummy contacts the vehicle interior, move the seat rearward to the next 
detent that provides clearance. If the seat is a power seat, move the 
seat rearward while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) 
distance between the vehicle interior and the point on the dummy that 
would first contact the vehicle interior. All tests are conducted with 
the seat height, if adjustable, in the mid-height position, and with the 
seat back angle, if adjustable, at the manufacturer's nominal design 
seat back angle for a 50th percentile adult male as specified in S8.1.3 
of FMVSS No. 208.
    S24.1.3 Except as otherwise specified, if the booster seat has an 
anchorage system as specified in S5.9 of FMVSS No. 213 and is tested in 
a vehicle with a right front outboard vehicle seat that has an anchorage 
system as specified in FMVSS No. 225, the vehicle shall comply with the 
belted test conditions with the restraint anchorage system attached to 
the vehicle seat anchorage system and the vehicle seat belt unattached. 
It shall also comply with the belted test conditions with the restraint 
anchorage system unattached to the vehicle seat anchorage system and the 
vehicle seat belt attached. The vehicle shall comply with the unbelted 
test conditions with the restraint anchorage system unattached to the 
vehicle seat anchorage system.
    S24.1.4 Do not attach any tethers.
    S24.1.5 The definitions provided in S16.3.1 through S16.3.10 apply 
to the tests specified in S24.
    S24.1.6 For leg and thigh angles, use the following references:
    S24.1.6.1 Thigh--a straight line on the thigh skin between the 
center of the 5/16-18 UNC-2B threaded access hole in the upper leg clamp 
(drawing 127-4004, 6

[[Page 882]]

YR H3--upper leg clamp) and the knee screw (part 9000248 in drawing 127-
4000-1 & -2, leg assembly).
    S24.1.6.2 Leg--a straight line on the leg skin between the center of 
the lower leg screw (part 9001170 in drawing 127-4000-1 & -2, leg 
assembly) and the knee screw (part 9000248 in drawing 127-4000-1 & -2, 
leg assembly).
    S24.2 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in deactivation of the passenger air bag. Each vehicle that is 
certified as complying with S23.2 of FMVSS No. 208 shall meet the 
following test requirements.
    S24.2.1 Except as provided in S24.2.2, conduct all tests as 
specified in S22.2, except that the 49 CFR part 572 subpart N 6-year-old 
child dummy shall be used.
    S24.2.2 Exceptions. The tests specified in the following paragraphs 
of S22.2 need not be conducted: S22.2.1.5, S22.2.2.3, S22.2.2.5, 
S22.2.2.6, S22.2.2.7, and S22.2.2.8.
    S24.2.3 Sitting back in the seat and leaning on the right front 
passenger door.
    (a) Position the dummy in the seated position and place the dummy in 
the right front outboard seat. For bucket seats, position the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically such that it coincides with 
the longitudinal center line of the seat cushion. For bench seats, 
position the midsagittal plane of the dummy vertically and parallel to 
the vehicle's longitudinal centerline and the same distance from the 
longitudinal centerline of the vehicle as the center of the steering 
wheel.
    (b) Place the dummy's back against the seat back and rest the 
dummy's thighs on the seat cushion.
    (c) Allow the legs and feet of the dummy to extend off the surface 
of the seat. If this positioning of the dummy's legs is prevented by 
contact with the instrument panel, move the seat rearward to the next 
detent that provides clearance. If the seat is a power seat, move the 
seat rearward, while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) 
distance between the vehicle interior and the part of the dummy that was 
in contact with the vehicle interior.
    (d) Rotate the dummy's upper arms toward the seat back until they 
make contact.
    (e) Rotate the dummy's lower arms down until they contact the seat.
    (f) Close the vehicle's passenger-side door and then start the 
vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' position, whichever 
will turn on the suppression system.
    (g) Push against the dummy's left shoulder to lean the dummy against 
the door; close all remaining doors.
    (h) Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag is deactivated.
    S24.3 Static tests of automatic suppression feature which shall 
result in activation of the passenger air bag system.
    S24.3.1 Each vehicle certified to this option shall comply in tests 
conducted with the right front outboard seating position at the full 
rearward seat track position, the middle seat track position, and, 
subject to S16.3.3.1.8, the full forward seat track position. All tests 
are conducted with the seat height, if adjustable, in the mid-height 
position.
    S24.3.2 Place a 49 CFR part 572 subpart O 5th percentile adult 
female test dummy at the right front outboard seating position of the 
vehicle, in accordance with procedures specified in S16.3.3 of this 
standard, except as specified in S24.3.1. Do not fasten the seat belt.
    S24.3.3 Start the vehicle engine or place the ignition in the ``on'' 
position, whichever will turn on the suppression system, and then close 
all vehicle doors.
    S24.3.4 Wait 10 seconds, then check whether the air bag system is 
activated.
    S24.4 Low risk deployment tests.
    S24.4.1 Each vehicle that is certified as complying with S23.4 of 
FMVSS No. 208 shall meet the following test requirements with the 49 CFR 
part 572 subpart N 6-year-old child dummy in both of the following 
positions: Position 1 (S24.4.2) or Position 2 (S24.4.3).
    S24.4.1.1 Locate and mark a point on the front of the dummy's chest 
jacket on the midsagittal plane which is 139 mm (5.5 in) <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 in) along the surface of 
the skin from the top of the skin at the neckline. This is referred to 
as ``Point 1.''
    S24.4.1.2 Locate the vertical plane parallel to the vehicle 
longitudinal

[[Page 883]]

centerline through the geometric center of the opening through which the 
right front air bag deploys into the occupant compartment. This is 
referred to as ``Plane D.''
    S24.4.1.3 Locate the horizontal plane through the geometric center 
of the opening through which the right front air bag deploys into the 
occupant compartment. This is referred to as ``Plane C.''
    S24.4.2 Position 1 (chest on instrument panel).
    S24.4.2.1 If a seat is adjustable in the fore and aft and/or 
vertical directions, move the seat to the rearmost seating position and 
full down height adjustment. If the seat cushion adjusts fore and aft, 
independent of the entire seat, adjust the seat cushion to the full 
rearward position. If the seat back is adjustable, place the seat back 
at the manufacturer's nominal design seat back angle for a 50th 
percentile adult male as specified in S8.1.3. Position any adjustable 
parts of the seat that provide additional support so that they are in 
the lowest or most open adjustment position. Position an adjustable head 
restraint in the lowest position.
    S24.4.2.2 Remove the legs of the dummy at the pelvic interface.
    S24.4.2.3 Place the dummy in the front passenger seat such that:
    (a) The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane D.
    (b) The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands are next 
to where the thighs would be.
    (c) Without changing the seat position and with the dummy's thorax 
instrument cavity rear face 6 degrees forward of the vertical, move the 
dummy forward until the dummy head/torso contacts the instrument panel. 
If the dummy loses contact with the seat cushion because of the forward 
movement, maintain the height of the dummy while moving the dummy 
forward. If the head contacts the windshield before head/torso contact 
with the instrument panel, maintain the thorax instrument cavity angle 
and move the dummy forward such that the head is following the angle of 
the windshield until there is head/torso contact with the instrument 
panel. Once contact is made, raise or lower the dummy vertically until 
Point 1 lies in Plane C. If the dummy's head contacts the windshield and 
keeps Point 1 from reaching Plane C, lower the dummy until there is no 
more than 5 mm (0.2 in) clearance between the head and the windshield. 
(The dummy shall remain in contact with the instrument panel while being 
raised or lowered which may change the dummy's fore-aft position.)
    S24.4.2.4 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. The material should support the torso rather than the head. 
Support the dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full 
rotational and translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy 
and the material does not interfere with the air bag.
    S24.4.3 Position 2 (head on instrument panel).
    S24.4.3.1 Place the passenger seat in the full rearward seating 
position. Place the seat back at the manufacturer's nominal design seat 
back angle for a 50th percentile adult male as specified in S8.1.3 of 
FMVSS No. 208. If adjustable in the vertical direction, place the seat 
in the mid-height position. If the seat cushion adjusts fore and aft, 
independent of the entire seat, adjust the seat cushion to the full 
rearward position. Position any adjustable parts of the seat that 
provide additional support so that they are in the lowest or most open 
adjustment position. Position an adjustable head restraint in the lowest 
position.
    S24.4.3.2 Place the dummy in the front passenger seat such that:
    (a) The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane D.
    (b) The legs are perpendicular to the floor pan, the back of the 
legs are in contact with the seat cushion, and the dummy's thorax 
instrument cavity rear face is 6 degrees forward of vertical. If it is 
not possible to position the dummy with the legs in the prescribed 
position, rotate the legs forward until the dummy is resting on the seat 
with the feet positioned flat on the floor pan and the back of the legs 
are in contact with the front of the seat cushion. Set the transverse 
distance between the longitudinal centerlines at the front of the 
dummy's knees at 112 to 117 mm (4.4. to 4.6 in),

[[Page 884]]

with the thighs and the legs of the dummy in vertical planes.
    (c) The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands are in 
contact with the thighs. S24.4.3.3 Move the seat forward, while 
maintaining the thorax instrument cavity rear face orientation until any 
part of the dummy contacts the vehicle's instrument panel.
    S24.4.3.4 If dummy contact has not been made with the vehicle's 
instrument panel at the full forward seating position of the seat, slide 
the dummy forward on the seat until contact is made. Maintain the thorax 
instrument cavity rear face orientation, the height of the dummy, and 
the angle of the thigh with respect to the horizontal.
    S24.4.3.5 If head/torso contact has not been made with the 
instrument panel, maintain the angle of the thighs with respect to the 
horizontal while applying a force towards the front of the vehicle on 
the spine of the dummy between the shoulder joints until the head/torso 
comes into contact with the vehicle's instrument panel.
    S24.4.3.6 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. Material should support the torso rather than the head. 
Support the dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full 
rotational and translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy 
and the material does not interfere with the air bag.
    S24.4.4 Deploy the right front outboard frontal air bag system. If 
the frontal air bag system contains a multistage inflator, the vehicle 
shall be able to comply with the injury criteria at any stage or 
combination of stages and at any time delay between successive stages 
that could occur in a rigid barrier crash at speeds up to 26 km/h (16 
mph) under the test procedure specified in S22.5.
    S25 [Reserved]. See Sec. 571.208, S25.
    S26 Procedure for low risk deployment tests of driver air bag.
    S26.1 Each vehicle that is certified as complying with S25.3 of 
FMVSS No. 208 shall meet the requirements of S25.3 and S25.4 with the 49 
CFR part 572 subpart O 5th percentile adult female dummy in both of the 
following positions: Driver position 1 (S26.2) and Driver position 2 
(S26.3).
    S26.2 Driver position 1 (chin on module).
    S26.2.1 Adjust the steering controls so that the steering wheel hub 
is at the geometric center of the locus it describes when it is moved 
through its full range of driving positions. If there is no setting at 
the geometric center, position it one setting lower than the geometric 
center. Set the rotation of the steering wheel so that the vehicle 
wheels are pointed straight ahead.
    S26.2.2 Locate the vertical plane parallel to the vehicle 
longitudinal axis which passes through the geometric center of the 
opening through which the driver air bag deploys into the occupant 
compartment. This is referred to as ``Plane E.''
    S26.2.3 Place the seat in the full rearward seating position. If 
adjustable in the vertical direction, place the seat in the mid-height 
position. If the seat cushion adjusts fore and aft, independent of the 
entire seat, adjust the seat cushion to the full rearward position. If 
the seat back is adjustable, place the seat back at the manufacturer's 
nominal design seat back angle for a 50th percentile adult male as 
specified in S8.1.3 of FMVSS No. 208. If the seat cushion contains an 
independent seat cushion angle adjustment mechanism, adjust the seat 
cushion angle to the middle of the range of seat cushion angles. 
Position any adjustable parts of the seat that provide additional 
support so that they are in the lowest or most open adjustment position. 
Position an adjustable head restraint in the lowest position.
    S26.2.4 Place the dummy in the driver's seat such that:
    S26.2.4.1 The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane E.
    S26.2.4.2 The legs are perpendicular to the floor pan and the back 
of the legs are in contact with the seat cushion. The legs may be 
adjusted if necessary to achieve the final head position.
    S26.2.4.3 The dummy's thorax instrument cavity rear face is 6 
degrees forward (toward the front of the vehicle) of the steering wheel 
angle (i.e., if the steering wheel angle is 25 degrees from

[[Page 885]]

vertical, the thorax instrument cavity rear face angle is 31 degrees).
    S26.2.4.4 The initial transverse distance between the longitudinal 
centerlines at the front of the dummy's knees is 160 to 170 mm (6.3 to 
6.7 in), with the thighs and legs of the dummy in vertical planes.
    S26.2.4.5 The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands are 
in contact with the thighs.
    S26.2.5 Maintaining the spine angle, slide the dummy forward until 
the head/torso contacts the steering wheel.
    S26.2.6 While maintaining the spine angle, adjust the height of the 
dummy so that the bottom of the chin is in the same horizontal plane as 
the highest point of the air bag module cover (dummy height can be 
adjusted using the seat height adjustments and/or spacer blocks). If the 
seat prevents the bottom of the chin from being in the same horizontal 
plane as the module cover, adjust the dummy height to as close to the 
prescribed position as possible.
    S26.2.7 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. The material should support the torso rather than the head. 
Support the dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full 
rotational and translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy 
and the material does not interfere with the air bag.
    S26.3 Driver position 2 (chin on rim).
    S26.3.1 Place the seat in the full rearward seating position. If 
adjustable in the vertical direction, place the seat in the mid-height 
position. If the seat cushion adjusts fore and aft, independent of the 
entire seat, adjust the seat cushion to the full rearward position. If 
the seatback is adjustable, place the seat back at the manufacturer's 
nominal design seat back angle for a 50th percentile adult male as 
specified in S8.1.3 of FMVSS No. 208. If the seat cushion contains an 
independent seat cushion angle adjustment mechanism, adjust the seat 
cushion angle to the middle of the range of seat cushion angles. 
Position any adjustable parts of the seat that provide additional 
support so that they are in the lowest or most open adjustment position. 
Position an adjustable head restraint in the lowest position.
    S26.3.2 Adjust the steering controls so that the steering wheel hub 
is at the geometric center of the locus it describes when it is moved 
through its full range of driving positions. If there is no setting at 
the geometric center, position it one setting lower than the geometric 
center. Set the rotation of the steering wheel so that the vehicle 
wheels are pointed straight ahead.
    S26.3.3 Locate the vertical plane parallel to the vehicle 
longitudinal axis which passes through the geometric center of the 
opening through which the driver air bag deploys into the occupant 
compartment. This is referred to as ``Plane E.''
    S26.3.4 Place the dummy in the driver's seat position such that:
    S26.3.4.1 The midsagittal plane is coincident with Plane E.
    S26.3.4.2 The legs are perpendicular to the floor pan and the back 
of the legs are in contact with the seat cushion. The legs may be 
adjusted if necessary to achieve the final head position.
    S26.3.4.3 The dummy's thorax instrument cavity rear face is 6 
degrees forward (toward the front of the vehicle) of the steering wheel 
angle (i.e., if the steering wheel angle is 25 degrees from vertical, 
the thorax instrument cavity rear face angle is 31 degrees).
    S26.3.4.4 The initial transverse distance between the longitudinal 
centerlines at the front of the dummy's knees is 160 to 170 mm (6.3 to 
6.7 in), with the thighs and legs of the dummy in vertical planes.
    S26.3.4.5 The upper arms are parallel to the torso and the hands are 
in contact with the thighs.
    S26.3.5 Maintaining the spine angle, slide the dummy forward until 
the head/torso contacts the steering wheel.
    S26.3.6 While maintaining the spine angle, position the dummy so 
that a point on the chin 40 mm below the center of the mouth (chin 
point) is in contact with the rim of the uppermost portion of the 
steering wheel. If the dummy's head contacts the vehicle windshield or 
upper interior before the prescribed position can be obtained, lower the 
dummy until there is no more than

[[Page 886]]

5 mm (0.2 in) clearance between the vehicle's windshield or upper 
interior, as applicable.
    S26.3.7 If the steering wheel can be adjusted so that the chin point 
can be in contact with the rim of the uppermost portion of the steering 
wheel, adjust the steering wheel to that position and readjust the spine 
angle to coincide with the steering wheel angle. Position the dummy so 
that the chin point is in contact with the rim of the uppermost portion 
of the steering wheel.
    S26.3.8 If necessary, material with a maximum breaking strength of 
311 N (70 lb) and spacer blocks may be used to support the dummy in 
position. The material should support the torso rather than the head. 
Support the dummy so that there is minimum interference with the full 
rotational and translational freedom for the upper torso of the dummy 
and the material does not interfere with the air bag.
    S26.4 Deploy the left front outboard frontal air bag system. If the 
air bag system contains a multistage inflator, the vehicle shall be able 
to comply with the injury criteria at any stage or combination of stages 
or time delay between successive stages that could occur in a rigid 
barrier crash at speeds up to 26 km/h (16 mph) under the test procedure 
specified in S22.5.
    S27 through S29 [Reserved] See Sec. 571.208, S27 through S29.

[69 FR 3840, Jan. 27, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 571.209  Standard No. 209; Seat belt assemblies.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard specifies requirements for seat 
belt assemblies.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to seat belt assemblies for 
use in passenger cars, multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and 
buses.
    S3. Definitions. Adjustment hardware means any or all hardware 
designed for adjusting the size of a seat belt assembly to fit the user, 
including such hardware that may be integral with a buckle, attachment 
hardware, or retractor.
    Attachment hardware means any or all hardware designed for securing 
the webbing of a seat belt assembly to a motor vehicle.
    Automatic-locking retractor means a retractor incorporating 
adjustment hardware by means of a positive self-locking mechanism which 
is capable when locked of withstanding restraint forces.
    Buckle means a quick release connector which fastens a person in a 
seat belt assembly.
    Emergency-locking retractor means a retractor incorporating 
adjustment hardware by means of a locking mechanism that is activated by 
vehicle acceleration, webbing movement relative to the vehicle, or other 
automatic action during an emergency and is capable when locked of 
withstanding restraint forces.
    Hardware means any metal or rigid plastic part of a seat belt 
assembly.
    Load-limiter means a seat belt assembly component or feature that 
controls tension on the seat belt to modulate the forces that are 
imparted to occupants restrained by the belt assembly during a crash.
    Nonlocking retractor means a retractor from which the webbing is 
extended to essentially its full length by a small external force, which 
provides no adjustment for assembly length, and which may or may not be 
capable of sustaining restraint forces at maximum webbing extension.
    Pelvic restraint means a seat belt assembly or portion thereof 
intended to restrain movement of the pelvis.
    Retractor means a device for storing part or all of the webbing in a 
seat belt assembly.
    Seat back retainer means the portion of some seat belt assemblies 
designed to restrict forward movement of a seat back.
    Seat belt assembly means any strap, webbing, or similar device 
designed to secure a person in a motor vehicle in order to mitigate the 
results of any accident, including all necessary buckles and other 
fasteners, and all hardware designed for installing such seat belt 
assembly in a motor vehicle.
    Strap means a narrow nonwoven material used in a seat belt assembly 
in place of webbing.
    Type 1 seat belt assembly is a lap belt for pelvic restraint.

[[Page 887]]

    Type 2 seat belt assembly is a combination of pelvic and upper torso 
restraints.
    Type 2a shoulder belt is an upper torso restraint for use only in 
conjunction with a lap belt as a Type 2 seat belt assembly.
    Upper torso restraint means a portion of a seat belt assembly 
intended to restrain movement of the chest and shoulder regions.
    Webbing means a narrow fabric woven with continuous filling yarns 
and finished selvages.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1(a) Incorporation by reference. SAE Recommended Practice J211-1 
rev. December 2003, ``Instrumentation for Impact Test--Part 1--
Electronic Instrumentation,'' is incorporated by reference in S5.2(j) 
and is hereby made part of this Standard. This incorporation by 
reference was approved by the Director of the Federal Register in 
accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR Part 51. Copies of SAE 
Recommended Practice J211-1 rev. December 2003, ``Instrumentation for 
Impact Test--Part 1--Electronic Instrumentation'' may be obtained from 
the Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, 
Warrendale, PA 15096-0001. Copies may be inspected at the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Technical Information Services, 
400 Seventh Street, SW., Plaza Level, Room 403, Washington, DC 20590, or 
at the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). For 
information on the availability of this material at NARA, call (202) 
741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/federal--register/code--of--
federal--regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    (b) Single occupancy. A seat belt assembly shall be designed for use 
by one, and only one, person at any one time.
    (c) Upper torso restraint. A Type 2 seat belt assembly shall provide 
upper torso restraint without shifting the pelvic restraint into the 
abdominal region. An upper torso restraint shall be designed to minimize 
vertical forces on the shoulders and spine. Hardware for upper torso 
restraint shall be so designed and located in the seat belt assembly 
that the possibility of injury to the occupant is minimized.
    A Type 2a shoulder belt shall comply with applicable requirements 
for a Type 2 seat belt assembly in S4.1 to S4.4, inclusive.
    (d) Hardware. All hardware parts which contact under normal usage a 
person, clothing, or webbing shall be free from burrs and sharp edges.
    (e) Release. A Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly shall be provided 
with a buckle or buckles readily accessible to the occupant to permit 
his easy and rapid removal from the assembly. Buckle release mechanism 
shall be designed to minimize the possibility of accidental release. A 
buckle with release mechanism in the latched position shall have only 
one opening in which the tongue can be inserted on the end of the buckle 
designed to receive and latch the tongue.
    (f) Attachment hardware. A seat belt assembly shall include all 
hardware necessary for installation in a motor vehicle in accordance 
with Society of Automotive Engineers Recommended Practice J800c, ``Motor 
Vehicle Seat Belt Installation,'' November 1973. However, seat belt 
assemblies designed for installation in motor vehicles equipped with 
seat belt assembly anchorages that do not require anchorage nuts, 
plates, or washers, need not have such hardware, but shall have \7/16\-
20 UNF-2A or \1/2\-13UNC-2A attachment bolts or equivalent metric 
hardware. The hardware shall be designed to prevent attachment bolts and 
other parts from becoming disengaged from the vehicle while in service. 
Reinforcing plates or washers furnished for universal floor, 
installations shall be of steel, free from burrs and sharp edges on the 
peripheral edges adjacent to the vehicle, at least 1.5 mm in thickness 
and at least 2580 mm\2\ in projected area. The distance between any edge 
of the plate and the edge of the bolt hole shall be at least 15 mm. Any 
corner shall be rounded to a radius of not less than 6 mm or cut so that 
no corner angle is less than 135[deg] and no side is less than 6 mm in 
length.
    (g) Adjustment. (1) A Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly shall be 
capable of adjustment to fit occupants whose dimensions and weight range 
from those

[[Page 888]]

of a 5th-percentile adult female to those of a 95th-percentile adult 
male. The seat belt assembly shall have either an automatic-locking 
retractor, an emergency-locking retractor, or an adjusting device that 
is within the reach of the occupant.
    (2) A Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly for use in a vehicle 
having seats that are adjustable shall conform to the requirements of 
S4.1(g)(1) regardless of seat position. However, if a seat has a back 
that is separately adjustable, the requirements of S4.1(g)(1) need be 
met only with the seat back in the manufacturer's nominal design riding 
position.
    (3) The adult occupants referred to in S4.1(g)(1) shall have the 
following measurements:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                    5th percen- tile     95th percentile
                                      adult female         adult male
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Weight..........................  46.3 kg.............  97.5 kg.
Erect sitting height............  785 mm..............  965 mm.
Hip breadth (sitting)...........  325 mm..............  419 mm.
Hip circumference (sitting).....  925 mm..............  1199 mm.
Waist circumference (sitting)...  599 mm..............  1080 mm.
Chest depth.....................  190 mm..............  267 mm.
Chest circumference:
  Nipple........................  775 mm..............  1130 mm.
  Upper.........................  757 mm..............  1130 mm.
  Lower.........................  676 mm..............  1130 mm.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (h) Webbing. The ends of webbing in a seat belt assembly shall be 
protected or treated to prevent raveling. The end of webbing in a seat 
belt assembly having a metal-to-metal buckle that is used by the 
occupant to adjust the size of the assembly shall not pull out of the 
adjustment hardware at maximum size adjustment. Provision shall be made 
for essentially unimpeded movement of webbing routed between a seat back 
and seat cushion and attached to a retractor located behind the seat.
    (i) Strap. A strap used in a seat belt assembly to sustain restraint 
forces shall comply with the requirements for webbing in S4.2, and if 
the strap is made from a rigid material, it shall comply with applicable 
requirements in S4.2, S4.3, and S4.4.
    (j) Marking. Each seat belt assembly shall be permanently and 
legibly marked or labeled with year of manufacture, model, and name or 
trademark of manufacturer or distributor, or of importer if manufactured 
outside the United States. A model shall consist of a single combination 
of webbing having a specific type of fiber weave and construction, and 
hardware having a specific design. Webbings of various colors may be 
included under the same model, but webbing of each color shall comply 
with the requirements for webbing in S4.2.
    (k) Installation instructions. A seat belt assembly, other than a 
seat belt assembly installed in a motor vehicle by an automobile 
manufacturer, shall be accompanied by an instruction sheet providing 
sufficient information for installing the assembly in a motor vehicle. 
The installation instructions shall state whether the assembly is for 
universal installation or for installation only in specifically stated 
motor vehicles, and shall include at least those items specified in SAE 
Recommended Practice J800c, ``Motor Vehicle Seat Belt Installations,'' 
November 1973. If the assembly is for use only in specifically stated 
motor vehicles, the assembly shall either be permanently and legibly 
marked or labeled with the following statement, or the instruction sheet 
shall include the following statement:

    This seat belt assembly is for use only in [insert specific seating 
position(s), e.g., ``front right''] in [insert specific vehicle make(s) 
and model(s)].

    (l) Usage and maintenance instructions. A seat belt assembly or 
retractor shall be accompanied by written instructions for the proper 
use of the assembly, stressing particularly the importance of wearing 
the assembly snugly and properly located on the body, and on the 
maintenance f the assembly and periodic inspection of all components. 
The instructions shall show the proper manner of threading webbing in 
the hardware of seat belt assemblies in which the webbing is not 
permanently fastened. Instructions for a nonlocking retractor shall 
include a caution that the webbing must be fully extended from the 
retractor during use of the seat belt assembly unless the retractor is 
attached to the free end of webbing which is not subjected to any 
tension during restraint of an occupant by the assembly. Instructions 
for Type 2a shoulder belt shall include a warning

[[Page 889]]

that the shoulder belt is not to be used without a lap belt.
    (m) Workmanship. Seat belt assemblies shall have good workmanship in 
accordance with good commercial practice.
    S4.2 Requirements for webbing.
    (a) Width. The width of the webbing in a seat belt assembly shall be 
not less than 46 mm, except for portions that do not touch a 95th 
percentile adult male with the seat in any adjustment position and the 
seat back in the manufacturer's nominal design riding position when 
measured under the conditions prescribed in S5.1(a).
    (b) Breaking strength. The webbing in a seat belt assembly shall 
have not less than the following breaking strength when tested by the 
procedures specified in S5.1(b): Type 1 seat belt assembly--26,689 N; 
Type 2 seat belt assembly--22,241 N for webbing in pelvic restraint and 
17,793 N for webbing in upper torso restraint.
    (c) Elongation. Except as provided in S4.5, the webbing in a seat 
belt assembly shall not extend to more than the following elongation 
when subjected to the specified forces in accordance with the procedure 
specified in S5.1(c): Type 1 seat belt assembly--20 percent at 11,120 N; 
Type 2 seat belt assembly 30 percent at 11,120 N for webbing in pelvic 
restraint and 40 percent at 11,120 N for webbing in upper torso 
restraint.
    (d) Resistance to abrasion. The webbing of a seat belt assembly, 
after being subjected to abrasion as specified in S5.1(d) or S5.3(c), 
shall have a breaking strength of not less than 75 percent of the 
breaking strength listed in S4.2(b) for that type of belt assembly.
    (e) Resistance to light. The webbing in a seat belt assembly after 
exposure to the light of a carbon arc and tested by the procedure 
specified in S5.1(e) shall have a breaking strength not less than 60 
percent of the strength before exposure to the carbon arc and shall have 
a color retention not less than No. 2 on the Geometric Gray Scale 
published by the American Association of Textile Chemists and Colorists, 
Post Office Box 886, Durham, NC.
    (f) Resistance to micro-organisms. The webbing in a seat belt 
assembly after being subjected to micro-organisms and tested by the 
procedures specified in S5.1(f) shall have a breaking strength not less 
than 85 percent of the strength before subjection to micro-organisms.
    S4.3 Requirements for hardware.
    (a) Corrosion resistance. (1) Attachment hardware of a seat belt 
assembly after being subjected to the conditions specified in S5.2(a) 
shall be free of ferrous corrosion on significant surfaces except for 
permissible ferrous corrosion at peripheral edges or edges of holes on 
underfloor reinforcing plates and washers. Alternatively, such hardware 
at or near the floor shall be protected against corrosion by at least an 
electrodeposited coating of nickel, or copper and nickel with at least a 
service condition number of SC2, and other attachment hardware shall be 
protected by an electrodeposited coating of nickel, or copper and nickel 
with a service condition number of SC1, in accordance with American 
Society for Testing and Materials B456-79, ``Standard Specification for 
Electrodeposited Coatings of Copper Plus Nickel Plus Chromium and Nickel 
Plus Chromium,'' but such hardware shall not be racked for 
electroplating in locations subjected to maximum stress.
    (2) Surfaces of buckles, retractors and metallic parts, other than 
attachment hardware, of a seat belt assembly after subjection to the 
conditions specified in S5.2(a) shall be free of ferrous or nonferrous 
corrosion which may be transferred, either directly or by means of the 
webbing, to the occupant or his clothing when the assembly is worn. 
After test, buckles shall conform to applicable requirements in 
paragraphs (d) to (g) of this section.
    (b) Temperature resistance. Plastic or other nonmetallic hardware 
parts of a seat belt assembly when subjected to the conditions specified 
in S5.2(b) shall not warp or otherwise deteriorate to cause the assembly 
to operate improperly or fail to comply with applicable requirements in 
this section and S4.4.
    (c) Attachment hardware. (1) Eye bolts, shoulder bolts, or other 
bolt used to secure the pelvic restraint of seat belt assembly to a 
motor vehicle shall withstand a force of 40,034 N when tested by the 
procedure specified in S5.2(c)(1), except that attachment bolts

[[Page 890]]

of a seat belt assembly designed for installation in specific models of 
motor vehicles in which the ends of two or more seat belt assemblies 
cannot be attached to the vehicle by a single bolt shall have breaking 
strength of not less than 22,241 N.
    (2) Other attachment hardware designed to receive the ends of two 
seat belt assemblies shall withstand a tensile force of at least 26,689 
N without fracture of a section when tested by the procedure specified 
in S5.2(c)(2).
    (3) A seat belt assembly having single attachment hooks of the 
quick-disconnect type for connecting webbing to an eye bolt shall be 
provided with a retaining latch or keeper which shall not move more than 
2 mm in either the vertical or horizontal direction when tested by the 
procedure specified in S5.2(c)(3).
    (d) Buckle release. (1) The buckle of a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt 
assembly shall release when a force of not more than 133 N is applied.
    (2) A buckle designed for pushbutton application of buckle release 
force shall have a minimum area of 452 mm\2\ with a minimum linear 
dimension of 10 mm for applying the release force, or a buckle designed 
for lever application of buckle release force shall permit the insertion 
of a cylinder 10 mm in diameter and 38 mm in length to at least the 
midpoint of the cylinder along the cylinder's entire length in the 
actuation portion of the buckle release. A buckle having other design 
for release shall have adequate access for two or more fingers to 
actuate release.
    (3) The buckle of a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly shall not 
release under a compressive force of 1779 N applied as prescribed in 
paragraph S5.2(d)(3). The buckle shall be operable and shall meet the 
applicable requirement of paragraph S4.4 after the compressive force has 
been removed.
    (e) Adjustment force. The force required to decrease the size of a 
seat belt assembly shall not exceed 49 N when measured by the procedure 
specified in S5.2(e).
    (f) Tilt-lock adjustment. The buckle of a seat belt assembly having 
tilt-lock adjustment shall lock the webbing when tested by the procedure 
specified in S5.2(f) at an angle of not less than 30 degrees between the 
base of the buckle and the anchor webbing.
    (g) Buckle latch. The buckle latch of a seat belt assembly when 
tested by the procedure specified in S5.2(g) shall not fail, nor gall or 
wear to an extent that normal latching and unlatching is impaired, and a 
metal-to-metal buckle shall separate when in any position of partial 
engagement by a force of not more than 22 N.
    (h) Nonlocking retractor. The webbing of a seat belt assembly shall 
extend from a nonlocking retractor within 6 mm of maximum length when a 
tension is applied as prescribed in S5.2(h). A nonlocking retractor on 
upper torso restraint shall be attached to the nonadjustable end of the 
assembly, the reel of the retractor shall be easily visible to an 
occupant while wearing the assembly, and the maximum retraction force 
shall not exceed 5 N in any strap or webbing that contacts the shoulder 
when measured by the procedure specified in S5.2(h), unless the 
retractor is attached to the free end of webbing which is not subjected 
to any tension during restraint of an occupant by the assembly.
    (i) Automatic-locking retractor. The webbing of a seat belt assembly 
equipped with an automatic locking retractor, when tested by the 
procedure specified in S5.2(i), shall not move more than 25 mm between 
locking positions of the retractor, and shall be retracted with a force 
under zero acceleration of not less than 3 N when attached to pelvic 
restraint, and not less that 2 N nor more than 5 N in any strap or 
webbing that contacts the shoulders of an occupant when the retractor is 
attached to upper torso restraint. An automatic locking retractor 
attached to upper torso restraint shall not increase the restraint on 
the occupant of the seat belt assembly during use in a vehicle traveling 
over rough roads as prescribed in S5.2(i).
    (j) Emergency-locking retractor.
    (1) For seat belt assemblies manufactured before February 22, 2007. 
Except for manufacturers that, at the manufacturer's option, voluntarily 
choose to comply with S4.3(j)(2) during this period (with said option 
irrevocably selected prior to, or at the time of, certification of the 
seat belt assembly), an

[[Page 891]]

emergency-locking retractor of a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly, 
when tested in accordance with the procedures specified in paragraph 
S5.2(j)(1)--
    (i) Shall lock before the webbing extends 25 mm when the retractor 
is subjected to an acceleration of 7 m/s\2\ (0.7 g);
    (ii) Shall not lock, if the retractor is sensitive to webbing 
withdrawal, before the webbing extends 51 mm when the retractor is 
subjected to an acceleration of 3 m/s\2\ (0.3 g) or less;
    (iii) Shall not lock, if the retractor is sensitive to vehicle 
acceleration, when the retractor is rotated in any direction to any 
angle of 15[deg] or less from its orientation in the vehicle;
    (iv) Shall exert a retractive force of at least 3 N under zero 
acceleration when attached only to the pelvic restraint;
    (v) Shall exert a retractive force of not less than 1 N and not more 
than 5 N under zero acceleration when attached only to an upper torso 
restraint;
    (vi) Shall exert a retractive force not less than 1 N and not more 
than 7 N under zero acceleration when attached to a strap or webbing 
that restrains both the upper torso and the pelvis.
    (2) For seat belt assemblies manufactured on or after February 22, 
2007 and for manufacturers opting for early compliance. An emergency-
locking retractor of a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly, when tested 
in accordance with the procedures specified in paragraph S5.2(j)(2)--
    (i) Shall under zero acceleration loading--
    (A) Exert a retractive force of not less than 1 N and not more than 
7 N when attached to a strap or webbing that restrains both the upper 
torso and the pelvis;
    (B) Exert a retractive force not less than 3 N when attached only to 
the pelvic restraint; and
    (C) Exert a retractive force of not less than 1 N and not more than 
5 N when attached only to an upper torso restraint.
    (D) For a retractor sensitive to vehicle acceleration, lock when 
tilted at any angle greater than 45 degrees from the angle at which it 
is installed in the vehicle or meet the requirements of S4.3(j)(2)(ii).
    (E) For a retractor sensitive to vehicle acceleration, not lock when 
the retractor is rotated in any direction to any angle of 15 degrees or 
less from its orientation in the vehicle.
    (ii) Shall lock before the webbing payout exceeds the maximum limit 
of 25 mm when the retractor is subjected to an acceleration of 0.7 g 
under the applicable test conditions of S5.2(j)(2)(iii)(A) or (B). The 
retractor is determined to be locked when the webbing belt load tension 
is at least 35 N.
    (iii) For a retractor sensitive to webbing withdrawal, shall not 
lock before the webbing payout extends to the minimum limit of 51 mm 
when the retractor is subjected to an acceleration no greater than 0.3 g 
under the test condition of S5.2(j)(2)(iii)(C).
    (k) Performance of retractor. A retractor used on a seat belt 
assembly after subjection to the tests specified in S5.2(k) shall comply 
with applicable requirements in paragraphs (h) to (j) of this section 
and S4.4, except that the retraction force shall be not less than 50 
percent of its original retraction force.
    S4.4 Requirements for assembly performance.
    (a) Type I seat belt assembly. Except as provided in S4.5, the 
complete seat belt assembly including webbing, straps, buckles, 
adjustment and attachment hardware, and retractors shall comply with the 
following requirements when tested by the procedures specified in 
S5.3(a):
    (1) The assembly loop shall withstand a force of not less than 
22,241 N; that is, each structural component of the assembly shall 
withstand a force of not less than 11,120 N.
    (2) The assembly loop shall extend not more than 7 inches or 178 mm 
when subjected to a force of 22,241 N; that is, the length of the 
assembly between anchorages shall not increase more than 356 mm.
    (3) Any webbing cut by the hardware during test shall have a 
breaking strength at the cut of not less than 18,683 N.
    (4) Complete fracture through any solid section of metal attachment 
hardware shall not occur during test.

[[Page 892]]

    (b) Type 2 seat belt assembly. Except as provided in S4.5, the 
components of a Type 2 seat belt assembly including webbing, straps, 
buckles, adjustment and attachment hardware, and retractors shall comply 
with the following requirements when tested by the procedure specified 
in S5.3(b):
    (1) The structural components in the pelvic restraint shall 
withstand a force of not less than 11,120 N.
    (2) The structural components in the upper torso restraint shall 
withstand a force of not less than 6,672 N.
    (3) The structural components in the assembly that are common to 
pelvic and upper torso restraints shall withstand a force of not less 
than 13,345 N.
    (4) The length of the pelvic restraint between anchorages shall not 
increase more than 508 mm when subjected to a force of 11,120 N.
    (5) The length of the upper torso restraint between anchorages shall 
not increase more than 508 mm when subjected to a force of 6,672 N.
    (6) Any webbing cut by the hardware during test shall have a 
breaking strength of not less than 15,569 N at a cut in webbing of the 
pelvic restraint, or not less than 12,455 N at a cut in webbing of the 
upper torso restraint.
    (7) Complete fracture through any solid section of metal attachment 
hardware shall not occur during test.
    S4.5 Load-limiter. (a) A Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly that 
includes a load-limiter is not required to comply with the elongation 
requirements of S4.2(c), S4.4(a)(2), S4.4(b)(4) or S4.4(b)(5).
    (b) A seat belt assembly that includes a load limiter and that does 
not comply with the elongation requirements of this standard may be 
installed in motor vehicles at any designated seating position that is 
subject to the requirements of S5.1 of Standard No. 208 (Sec. 571.208).
    S4.6 Manual belts subject to crash protection requirements of 
Standard No. 208.
    (a)(1) A manual seat belt assembly, which is subject to the 
requirements of S5.1 of Standard No. 208 (49 CFR 571.208) by virtue of 
any provision of Standard No. 208 other than S4.1.2.1(c)(2) of that 
standard, does not have to meet the requirements of S4.2(a)-(f) and S4.4 
of this standard.
    (2) A manual seat belt assembly subject to the requirements of S5.1 
of Standard No. 208 (49 CFR 571.208) by virtue of S4.1.2.1(c)(2) of 
Standard No. 208 does not have to meet the elongation requirements of 
S4.2(c), S4.4(a)(2), S4.4(b)(4), and S4.4(b)(5) of this standard.
    S5. Demonstration procedures.
    S5.1 Webbing--(a) Width. The width of webbing from three seat belt 
assemblies shall be measured after conditioning for at least 24 hours in 
an atmosphere having relative humidity between 48 and 67 percent and a 
temperature of 23[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]C. The tension 
during measurement of width shall be not more than 22 N on webbing from 
a Type 1 seat belt assembly, and 9786 N <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>450 N on 
webbing from a Type 2 seat belt assembly. The width of webbing from a 
Type 2 seat belt assembly may be measured during the breaking strength 
test described in paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) Breaking strength. Webbing from three seat belt assemblies shall 
be conditioned in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section and 
tested for breaking strength in a testing machine of capacity verified 
to have an error of not more than one percent in the range of the 
breaking strength of the webbing in accordance with American Society for 
Testing and Materials E4-79 ``Standard Methods of Load Verification of 
Testing Machines.'' The machine shall be equipped with split drum grips 
illustrated in Figure 1, having a diameter between 51 and 102 mm. The 
rate of grip separation shall be between 51 and 102 mm per minute. The 
distance between the centers of the grips at the start of the test shall 
be between 102 and 254 mm. After placing the specimen in the grips, the 
webbing shall be stretched continuously at a uniform rate to failure. 
Each value shall be not less than the applicable breaking strength 
requirement in S4.2(b), but the median value shall be used for 
determining the retention of breaking strength in paragraphs (d), (e) 
and (f) of this section.
    (c) Elongation. Elongation shall be measured during the breaking 
strength test described in paragraph (b) of this section by the 
following procedure: A preload between 196 N and 245 N shall

[[Page 893]]

be placed on the webbing mounted in the grips of the testing machine and 
the needle points of an extensometer, in which the points remain 
parallel during test, are inserted in the center of the specimen. 
Initially the points shall be set at a known distance apart between 102 
and 203 mm. When the force on the webbing reaches the value specified in 
S4.2(c), the increase in separation of the points of the extensometer 
shall be measured and the percent elongation shall be calculated to the 
nearest 0.5 percent. Each value shall be not more than the appropriate 
elongation requirement in S4.2(c).
    (d) Resistance to abrasion. The webbing from three seat belt 
assemblies shall be tested for resistance to abrasion by rubbing over 
the hexagon bar prescribed in Figure 2 in the following manner: The 
webbing shall be mounted in the apparatus shown schematically in Figure 
2. One end of the webbing (A) shall be attached to a mass (B) of 2.35 kg 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>.05 kg, except that a mass of 1.5 kg <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>.05 kg shall be used for webbing in pelvic and upper 
torso restraints of a belt assembly used in a child restraint system. 
The webbing shall be passed over the two new abrading edges of the 
hexagon bar (C) and the other end attached to an oscillating drum (D) 
which has a stroke of 330 mm. Suitable guides shall be used to prevent 
movement of the webbing along the axis of hexagonal bar C. Drum D shall 
be oscillated for 5,000 strokes or 2,500 cycles at a rate of 60 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 strokes per minute or 30 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 
cycles per minute. The abraded webbing shall be conditioned as 
prescribed in paragraph (a) of this section and tested for breaking 
strength by the procedure described in paragraph (b) of this section. 
The median values for the breaking strengths determined on abraded and 
unabraded specimens shall be used to calculate the percentage of 
breaking strength retained.
    (e) Resistance to light. Webbing at least 508 mm in length from 
three seat belt assemblies shall be suspended vertically on the inside 
of the specimen track in a Type E carbon-arc light exposure apparatus 
described in Standard Practice for Generating Light-Exposure Apparatus 
(Carbon-Arc Type) With and Without Water for Exposure of Nonmetallic 
Materials, ASTM Designation: G23 81, published by the American Society 
for Testing and Materials, except that the filter used for 100 percent 
polyester yarns shall be chemically strengthened soda-lime glass with a 
transmittance of less than 5 percent for wave lengths equal to or less 
than 305 nanometers and 90 percent or greater transmittance for wave 
lengths of 375 to 800 nanometers. The apparatus shall be operated 
without water spray at an air temperature of 60[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 [deg]Celsius ( [deg]C) measured at a point 25 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 mm outside the specimen rack and midway in height. The 
temperature sensing element shall be shielded from radiation. The 
specimens shall be exposed to light from the carbon-arc for 100 hours 
and then conditioned as prescribed in paragraph (a) of this section. The 
colorfastness of the exposed and conditioned specimens shall be 
determined on the Geometric Gray Scale issued by the American 
Association of Textile Chemists and Colorists. The breaking strength of 
the specimens shall be determined by the procedure prescribed in 
paragraph (b) of this section. The median values for the breaking 
strengths determined on exposed and unexposed specimens shall be used to 
calculate the percentage of breaking strength retained.
    (f) Resistance to micro-organisms. Webbing at least 508 millimeters 
(mm) in length from three seat belt assemblies shall first be 
preconditioned in accordance with appendix A(1) and (2) of American 
Association of Textile Chemists and Colorists Test Method 381, 
``Fungicides Evaluation on Textiles; Mildew and Rot Resistance of 
Textiles,'' and then subjected to Test I, ``Soil Burial Test'' of that 
test method. After soil-burial for a period of 2 weeks, the specimen 
shall be washed in water, dried and conditioned as prescribed in 
paragraph (a) of this section. The breaking strengths of the specimens 
shall be determined by the procedure prescribed in paragraph (b) of this 
section. The median values for the breaking strengths determined on 
exposed and unexposed specimens shall be used to calculate the 
percentage of breaking strength retained.

    Note: This test shall not be required on webbing made from material 
which is inherently resistant to micro-organisms.


[[Page 894]]


    S5.2 Hardware.
    (a) Corrosion resistance. Three seat belt assemblies shall be tested 
in accordance with American Society for Testing and Materials B11773, 
``Standard Method of Salt Spray (Fog) Testing.'' Any surface coating or 
material not intended for permanent retention on the metal parts during 
service life shall be removed prior to preparation of the test specimens 
for testing. The period of test shall be 50 hours for all attachment 
hardware at or near the floor, consisting of two periods of 24 hours 
exposure to salt spray followed by 1 hour drying and 25 hours for all 
other hardware, consisting of one period of 24 hours exposure to salt 
spray followed by 1 hour drying. In the salt spray test chamber, the 
parts from the three assemblies shall be oriented differently, selecting 
those orientations most likely to develop corrosion on the larger areas. 
At the end of test, the seat belt assembly shall be washed thoroughly 
with water to remove the salt. After drying for at least 24 hours under 
standard laboratory conditions specified in S5.1(a) attachment hardware 
shall be examined for ferrous corrosion on significant surfaces, that 
is, all surfaces that can be contacted by a sphere 19 mm in diameter, 
and other hardware shall be examined for ferrous and nonferrous 
corrosion which may be transferred, either directly or by means of the 
webbing, to a person or his clothing during use of a seat belt assembly 
incorporating the hardware.
    Note: When attachment and other hardware are permanently fastened, 
by sewing or other means, to the same piece of webbing, separate 
assemblies shall be used to test the two types of hardware. The test for 
corrosion resistance shall not be required for attachment hardware made 
from corrosion-resistant steel containing at least 11.5 percent chromium 
or for attachment hardware protected with an electrodeposited coating of 
nickel, or copper and nickel, as prescribed in S4.3(a). The assembly 
that has been used to test the corrosion resistance of the buckle shall 
be used to measure adjustment force, tilt-lock adjustment, and buckle 
latch in paragraphs (e), (f), and (g), respectively, of this section, 
assembly performance in S5.3 and buckle release force in paragraph (d) 
of this section.
    (b) Temperature resistance. Three seat belt assemblies having 
plastic or nonmetallic hardware or having retractors shall be subjected 
to the conditions prescribed in Procedure D of American Society for 
Testing and Materials D756-78, ``Standard Practice for Determination of 
Weight and Shape Changes of Plastics under Accelerated Service 
Conditions.'' The dimension and weight measurement shall be omitted. 
Buckles shall be unlatched and retractors shall be fully retracted 
during conditioning. The hardware parts after conditioning shall be used 
for all applicable tests in S4.3 and S4.4.
    (c) Attachment hardware. (1) Attachment bolts used to secure the 
pelvic restraint of a seat belt assembly to a motor vehicle shall be 
tested in a manner similar to that shown in Figure 3. The load shall be 
applied at an angle of 45[deg] to the axis of the bolt through 
attachment hardware from the seat belt assembly, or through a special 
fixture which simulates the loading applied by the attachment hardware. 
The attachment hardware or simulated fixture shall be fastened by the 
bolt to the anchorage shown in Figure 3, which has a standard \7/16\-
20UNF-2B or \1/2\-UNF-2B or metric equivalent threaded hole in a 
hardened steel plate at least 10 mm in thickness. The bolt shall be 
installed with two full threads exposed from the fully seated position. 
The appropriate force required by S4.3(c) shall be applied. A bolt from 
each of three seat belt assemblies shall be tested.
    (2) Attachment hardware, other than bolts, designed to receive the 
ends of two seat belt assemblies shall be subjected to a tensile force 
of 26,689 N in a manner simulating use. The hardware shall be examined 
for fracture after the force is released. Attachment hardware from three 
seat belt assemblies shall be tested.
    (3) Single attachment hook for connecting webbing to any eye bolt 
shall be tested in the following manner: The hook shall be held rigidly 
so that the retainer latch or keeper, with cotter pin or other locking 
device in place, is in a horizontal position as shown in Figure 4. A 
force of 667 N <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 N shall be applied vertically as 
near as possible to the free end of the retainer latch, and the movement 
of the latch by this force at the point of application shall be 
measured. The vertical force shall be released, and a force of 667 N 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>9 N

[[Page 895]]

shall be applied horizontally as near as possible to the free end of the 
retainer latch. The movement of the latch by this force at the point of 
load application shall be measured. Alternatively, the hook may be held 
in other positions, provided the forces are applied and the movements of 
the latch are measured at the points indicated in Figure 4. A single 
attachment hook from each of three seat belt assemblies shall be tested.
    (d) Buckle release. (1) Three seat belt assemblies shall be tested 
to determine compliance with the maximum buckle release force 
requirements, following the assembly test in S5.3. After subjection to 
the force applicable for the assembly being tested, the force shall be 
reduced and maintained at 667 N on the assembly loop of a Type 1 seat 
belt assembly, 334 N on the components of a Type 2 seat belt assembly. 
The buckle release force shall be measured by applying a force on the 
buckle in a manner and direction typical of those which would be 
employed by a seat belt occupant. For push button-release buckles, the 
force shall be applied at least 3 mm from the edge of the push button 
access opening of the buckle in a direction that produces maximum 
releasing effect. For lever-release buckles, the force shall be applied 
on the centerline of the buckle lever or finger tab in a direction that 
produces maximum releasing effect.
    (2) The area for application of release force on pushbutton actuated 
buckle shall be measured to the nearest 30 mm\2\. The cylinder specified 
in S4.3(d) shall be inserted in the actuation portion of a lever 
released buckle for determination of compliance with the requirement. A 
buckle with other release actuation shall be examined for access of 
release by fingers.
    (3) The buckle of a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly shall be 
subjected to a compressive force of 1779 N applied anywhere on a test 
line that is coincident with the center line of the belt extended 
through the buckle or on any line that extends over the center of the 
release mechanism and intersects the extended centerline of the belt at 
an angle of 60[deg]. The load shall be applied by using a curved 
cylindrical bar having a cross section diameter of 19 mm and a radius of 
curvature of 152 mm, placed with its longitudinal center line along the 
test line and its center directly above the point or the buckle to which 
the load will be applied. The buckle shall be latched, and a tensile 
force of 334 N shall be applied to the connected webbing during the 
application of the compressive force. Buckles from three seat belt 
assemblies shall be tested to determine compliance with paragraph 
S4.3(d)(3).
    (e) Adjustment Force. Three seat belt assemblies shall be tested for 
adjustment force on the webbing at the buckle, or other manual adjusting 
device normally used to adjust the size of the assembly. With no load on 
the anchor end, the webbing shall be drawn through the adjusting device 
at a rate of 508 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>50 mm per minute and the 
maximum force shall be measured to the nearest 1 N after the first 25 mm 
of webbing movement. The webbing shall be precycled 10 times prior to 
measurement.
    (f) Tilt-lock adjustment. This test shall be made on buckles or 
other manual adjusting devices having tilt-lock adjustment normally used 
to adjust the size of the assembly. Three buckles or devices shall be 
tested. The base of the adjustment mechanism and the anchor end of the 
webbing shall be oriented in planes normal to each other. The webbing 
shall be drawn through the adjustment mechanism in a direction to 
increase belt length at a rate of 508 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>50 mm per 
minute while the plane of the base is slowly rotated in a direction to 
lock the webbing. Rotation shall be stopped when the webbing locks, but 
the pull on the webbing shall be continued until there is a resistance 
of at least 89 N. The locking angle between the anchor end of the 
webbing and the base of the adjustment mechanism shall be measured to 
the nearest degree. The webbing shall be precycled 10 times prior to 
measurement.
    (g) Buckle latch. The buckles from three seat belt assemblies shall 
be opened fully and closed at least 10 times. Then the buckles shall be 
clamped or firmly held against a flat surface so as to permit normal 
movement of buckle part, but with the metal mating plate (metal-to-metal 
buckles) or of webbing end (metal-to-

[[Page 896]]

webbing buckles) withdrawn from the buckle. The release mechanism shall 
be moved 200 times through the maximum possible travel against its stop 
with a force of 133 N <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>13 N at a rate not to exceed 
30 cycles per minute. The buckle shall be examined to determine 
compliance with the performance requirements of S4.3(g). A metal-to-
metal buckle shall be examined to determine whether partial engagement 
is possible by means of any technique representative of actual use. If 
partial engagement is possible, the maximum force of separation when in 
such partial engagement shall be determined.
    (h) Nonlocking retractor. After the retractor is cycled 10 times by 
full extension and retraction of the webbing, the retractor and webbing 
shall be suspended vertically and a force of 18 N shall be applied to 
extend the webbing from the retractor. The force shall be reduced to 13 
N when attached to a pelvic restraint, or to 5 N per strap or webbing 
that contacts the shoulder of an occupant when retractor is attached to 
an upper torso restraint. The residual extension of the webbing shall be 
measured by manual rotation of the retractor drum or by disengaging the 
retraction mechanism. Measurements shall be made on three retractors. 
The location of the retractor attached to upper torso restraint shall be 
examined for visibility of reel during use of seat belt assembly in a 
vehicle.

    Note: This test shall not be required on a nonlocking retractor 
attached to the free end of webbing which is not subjected to any 
tension during restraint of an occupant by the assembly.

    (i) Automatic-locking retractor. Three retractors shall be tested in 
a manner to permit the retraction force to be determined exclusive of 
the gravitational forces on hardware or webbing being retracted. The 
webbing shall be fully extended from the retractor. While the webbing is 
being retracted, the average force or retraction within plus or minus 51 
mm of 75 percent extension (25 percent retraction) shall be determined 
and the webbing movement between adjacent locking segments shall be 
measured in the same region of extension. A seat belt assembly with 
automatic locking retractor in upper torso restraint shall be tested in 
a vehicle in a manner prescribed by the installation and usage 
instructions. The retraction force on the occupant of the seat belt 
assembly shall be determined before and after traveling for 10 minutes 
at a speed of 24 kilometers per hour (km/h) or more over a rough road 
(e.g., Belgian block road) where the occupant is subjected to 
displacement with respect to the vehicle in both horizontal and vertical 
directions. Measurements shall be made with the vehicle stopped and the 
occupant in the normal seated position.
    (j) Emergency-locking retractor.
    (1) For seat belt assemblies manufactured before February 22, 2007. 
Except for manufacturers that elect to comply with S4.3(j)(2) and the 
corresponding test procedures of S5.2(j)(2), a retractor shall be tested 
in a manner that permits the retraction force to be determined exclusive 
of the gravitational forces on hardware or webbing being retracted. The 
webbing shall be fully extended from the retractor, passing over or 
through any hardware or other material specified in the installation 
instructions. While the webbing is being retracted, the lowest force of 
retraction within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>51 mm of 75 percent extension 
shall be determined. A retractor that is sensitive to webbing withdrawal 
shall be subjected to an acceleration of 3 m/s\2\ (0.3 g) within a 
period of 50 milliseconds (ms) while the webbing is at 75 percent 
extension, to determine compliance with S4.3(j)(1)(ii). The retractor 
shall be subjected to an acceleration of 7 m/s\2\ (0.7 g) within a 
period of 50 ms, while the webbing is at 75 percent extension, and the 
webbing movement before locking shall be measured under the following 
conditions: For a retractor sensitive to webbing withdrawal, the 
retractor shall be accelerated in the direction of webbing retraction 
while the retractor drum's central axis is oriented horizontally and at 
angles of 45[deg], 90[deg], 135[deg], and 180[deg] to the horizontal 
plane. For a retractor sensitive to vehicle acceleration, the retractor 
shall be:
    (i) Accelerated in the horizontal plane in two directions normal to 
each other, while the retractor drum's central axis is oriented at the 
angle at which it is installed in the vehicle; and

[[Page 897]]

    (ii) Accelerated in three directions normal to each other while the 
retractor drum's central axis is oriented at angles of 45[deg], 90[deg], 
135[deg], and 180[deg] from the angle at which it is installed in the 
vehicle, unless the retractor locks by gravitational force when tilted 
in any direction to any angle greater than 45[deg] from the angle at 
which it is installed in the vehicle.
    (2) For seat belt assemblies manufactured on or after February 22, 
2007 and for manufacturers opting for early compliance. A retractor 
shall be tested in a manner that permits the retraction force to be 
determined exclusive of the gravitational forces on the hardware or 
webbing being retracted.
    (i) Retraction force: The webbing shall be extended fully from the 
retractor, passing over and through any hardware or other material 
specified in the installation instructions. While the webbing is being 
retracted, measure the lowest force of retraction within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>51 mm of 75 percent extension.
    (ii) Gravitational locking: For a retractor sensitive to vehicle 
acceleration, rotate the retractor in any direction to an angle greater 
than 45 degrees from the angle at which it is installed in the vehicle. 
Apply a force to the webbing greater than the minimum force measured in 
S5.2(j)(2)(i) to determine compliance with S4.3(j)(2)(i)(D).
    (iii) Dynamic tests: Each acceleration pulse shall be recorded using 
an accelerometer having a full scale range of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 g 
and processed according to the practices set forth in SAE Recommended 
Practice J211-1 rev. December 2003, ``Instrumentation for Impact Test--
Part 1--Electronic Instrumentation,'' Channel Frequency Class 60. The 
webbing shall be positioned at 75 percent extension, and the 
displacement shall be measured using a displacement transducer. For 
tests specified in S5.2(j)(2)(iii)(A) and (B), the 0.7 g acceleration 
pulse shall be within the acceleration-time corridor shown in Figure 8 
of this standard.
    (A) For a retractor sensitive to vehicle acceleration--
    (1) The retractor drum's central axis shall be oriented at the angle 
at which it is installed in the vehicle <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 
degrees. Accelerate the retractor in the horizontal plane in two 
directions normal to each other and measure the webbing payout; and
    (2) If the retractor does not meet the 45-degree tilt-lock 
requirement of S4.3(j)(2)(i)(D), accelerate the retractor in three 
directions normal to each other while the retractor drum's central axis 
is oriented at angles of 45, 90, 135, and 180 degrees from the angle at 
which it is installed in the vehicle and measure webbing payout.
    (B) For a retractor sensitive to webbing withdrawal--
    (1) The retractor drum's central axis shall be oriented horizontally 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 degrees. Accelerate the retractor in the 
direction of webbing retraction and measure webbing payout; and
    (2) The retractor drum's central axis is oriented at angles of 45, 
90, 135, and 180 degrees to the horizontal plane. Accelerate the 
retractor in the direction of the webbing retraction and measure the 
webbing payout.
    (C) A retractor that is sensitive to webbing withdrawal shall be 
subjected to an acceleration no greater than 0.3 g occurring within a 
period of the first 50 ms and sustaining an acceleration no greater than 
0.3 g throughout the test, while the webbing is at 75 percent extension. 
Measure the webbing payout.
    (k) Performance of retractor. After completion of the corrosion-
resistance test described in paragraph (a) of this section, the webbing 
shall be fully extended and allowed to dry for at least 24 hours under 
standard laboratory conditions specified in S5.1(a). The retractor shall 
be examined for ferrous and nonferrous corrosion which may be 
transferred, either directly or by means of the webbing, to a person or 
his clothing during use of a seat belt assembly incorporating the 
retractor, and for ferrous corrosion on significant surfaces if the 
retractor is part of the attachment hardware. The webbing shall be 
withdrawn manually and allowed to retract for 25 cycles. The retractor 
shall be mounted in an apparatus capable of extending the webbing fully, 
applying a force of 89 N at full extension, and allowing the webbing to 
retract freely and completely. The webbing shall be withdrawn from the 
retractor and allowed to retract repeatedly in this apparatus until 
2,500 cycles are completed. The retractor

[[Page 898]]

and webbing shall then be subjected to the temperature resistance test 
prescribed in paragraph (b) of this section. The retractor shall be 
subjected to 2,500 additional cycles of webbing withdrawal and 
retraction. Then, the retractor and webbing shall be subjected to dust 
in a chamber similar to one illustrated in Figure 8 containing about 0.9 
kg of coarse grade dust conforming to the specification given in Society 
of Automotive Engineering Recommended Practice J726, ``Air Cleaner Test 
Code'' Sept. 1979. The dust shall be agitated every 20 minutes for 5 
seconds by compressed air, free of oil and moisture, at a gage pressure 
of 550 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>55 kPa entering through an orifice 1.5 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 mm in diameter. The webbing shall be extended 
to the top of the chamber and kept extended at all times except that the 
webbing shall be subjected to 10 cycles of complete retraction and 
extension within 1 to 2 minutes after each agitation of the dust. At the 
end of 5 hours, the assembly shall be removed from the chamber. The 
webbing shall be fully withdrawn from the retractor manually and allowed 
to retract completely for 25 cycles. An automatic-locking retractor or a 
nonlocking retractor attached to pelvic restraint shall be subjected to 
5,000 additional cycles of webbing withdrawal and retraction. An 
emergency locking retractor or a nonlocking retractor attached to upper 
torso restraint shall be subjected to 45,000 additional cycles of 
webbing withdrawal and retraction between 50 and 100 per cent extension. 
The locking mechanism of an emergency locking retractor shall be 
actuated at least 10,000 times within 50 to 100 percent extension of 
webbing during the 50,000 cycles. At the end of test, compliance of the 
retractors with applicable requirements in S4.3 (h), (i), and (j) shall 
be determined. Three retractors shall be tested for performance.
    S5.3 Assembly performance--(a) Type 1 seat belt assembly. Three 
complete seat belt assemblies, including webbing, straps, buckles, 
adjustment and attachment hardware, and retractors, arranged in the form 
of a loop as shown in Figure 5, shall be tested in the following manner:
    (1) The testing machine shall conform to the requirements specified 
in S5.1(b). A double-roller block shall be attached to one head of the 
testing machine. This block shall consist of two rollers 102 mm in 
diameter and sufficiently long so that no part of the seat belt assembly 
touches parts of the block other than the rollers during test. The 
rollers shall be mounted on antifriction bearings and spaced 305 mm 
between centers, and shall have sufficient capacity so that there is no 
brinelling, bending or other distortion of parts which may affect the 
results. An anchorage bar shall be fastened to the other head of the 
testing machine.
    (2) The attachment hardware furnished with the seat belt assembly 
shall be attached to the anchorage bar. The anchor points shall be 
spaced so that the webbing is parallel in the two sides of the loop. The 
attaching bolts shall be parallel to, or at an angle of 45[deg] or 
90[deg] to the webbing, whichever results in an angle nearest to 90[deg] 
between webbing and attachment hardware except that eye bolts shall be 
vertical, and attaching bolts or nonthreaded anchorages of a seat belt 
assembly designed for use in specific models of motor vehicles shall be 
installed to produce the maximum angle in use indicated by the 
installation instructions, utilizing special fixtures if necessary to 
simulate installation in the motor vehicle. Rigid adapters between 
anchorage bar and attachment hardware shall be used if necessary to 
locate and orient the adjustment hardware. The adapters shall have a 
flat support face perpendicular to the threaded hole for the attaching 
bolt and adequate in area to provide full support for the base of the 
attachment hardware connected to the webbing. If necessary, a washer 
shall be used under a swivel plate or other attachment hardware to 
prevent the webbing from being damaged as the attaching bolt is 
tightened.
    (3) The length of the assembly loop from attaching bolt to attaching 
bolt shall be adjusted to about 1295 mm, or as near thereto as possible. 
A force of 245 N shall be applied to the loop to remove any slack in 
webbing at hardware. The force shall be removed and the heads of the 
testing machine shall

[[Page 899]]

be adjusted for an assembly loop between 1220 and 1270 mm in length. The 
length of the assembly loop shall then be adjusted by applying a force 
between 89 and 98 N to the free end of the webbing at the buckle, or by 
the retraction force of an automatic-locking or emergency-locking 
retractor. A seat belt assembly that cannot be adjusted to this length 
shall be adjusted as closely as possible. An automatic-locking or 
emergency locking retractor when included in a seat belt assembly shall 
be locked at the start of the test with a tension on the webbing 
slightly in excess of the retractive force in order to keep the 
retractor locked. The buckle shall be in a location so that it does not 
touch the rollers during test, but to facilitate making the buckle 
release test in S5.2(d) the buckle should be between the rollers or near 
a roller in one leg.
    (4) The heads of the testing machine shall be separated at a rate 
between 51 and 102 mm per minute until a force of 22,241 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>222 N is applied to the assembly loop. The extension of 
the loop shall be determined from measurements of head separation before 
and after the force is applied. The force shall be decreased to 667 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>45 N and the buckle release force measured as 
prescribed in S5.2(d).
    (5) After the buckle is released, the webbing shall be examined for 
cutting by the hardware. If the yarns are partially or completely 
severed in a line for a distance of 10 percent or more of the webbing 
width, the cut webbing shall be tested for breaking strength as 
specified in S5.1(b) locating the cut in the free length between grips. 
If there is insufficient webbing on either side of the cut to make such 
a test for breaking strength, another seat belt assembly shall be used 
with the webbing repositioned in the hardware. A tensile force of 11,120 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>111 N shall be applied to the components or a 
force of 22,241 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>222 N shall be applied to the 
assembly loop. After the force is removed, the breaking strength of the 
cut webbing shall be determined as prescribed above.
    (6) If a Type 1 seat belt assembly includes an automatic-locking 
retractor or an emergency-locking retractor, the webbing and retractor 
shall be subjected to a tensile force of 11,120 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>111 N with the webbing fully extended from the 
retractor.
    (7) If a seat belt assembly has a buckle in which the tongue is 
capable of inverted insertion, one of the three assemblies shall be 
tested with the tongue inverted.
    (b) Type 2 seat belt assembly. Components of three seat belt 
assemblies shall be tested in the following manner:
    (1) The pelvic restraint between anchorages shall be adjusted to a 
length between 1220 and 1270 mm, or as near this length as possible if 
the design of the pelvic restraint does not permit its adjustment to 
this length. An automatic-locking or emergency-locking retractor when 
included in a seat belt assembly shall be locked at the start of the 
test with a tension on the webbing slightly in excess of the retractive 
force in order to keep the retractor locked. The attachment hardware 
shall be oriented to the webbing as specified in paragraph (a)(2) of 
this section and illustrated in Figure 5. A tensile force 11,120 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>111 N shall be applied on the components in any 
convenient manner and the extension between anchorages under this force 
shall be measured. The force shall be reduced to 334 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>22 N and the buckle release force measured as prescribed 
in S5.2(d).
    (2) The components of the upper torso restraint shall be subjected 
to a tensile force of 6,672 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>67 N following the 
procedure prescribed above for testing pelvic restraint and the 
extension between anchorages under this force shall be measured. If the 
testing apparatus permits, the pelvic and upper torso restraints may be 
tested simultaneously. The force shall be reduced to 334 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>22 N and the buckle release force measured as prescribed 
in S5.2(d).
    (3) Any component of the seat belt assembly common to both pelvic 
and upper torso restraint shall be subjected to a tensile force of 
13,344 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>134 N.
    (4) After the buckle is released in tests of pelvic and upper torso 
restraints, the webbing shall be examined for cutting by the hardware. 
If the yarns are partially or completely severed in a line for a 
distance of 10 percent or more of the webbing width, the

[[Page 900]]

cut webbing shall be tested for breaking strength as specified in 
S5.1(b) locating the cut in the free length between grips. If there is 
insufficient webbing on either side of the cut to make such a test for 
breaking strength, another seat belt assembly shall be used with the 
webbing repositioned in the hardware. The force applied shall be 11,120 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>111 N for components of pelvic restraint, and 
6,672 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>67 N for components of upper torso 
restraint. After the force is removed, the breaking strength of the cut 
webbing shall be determined as prescribed above.
    (5) If a Type 2 seat belt assembly includes an automatic-locking 
retractor or an emergency-locking retractor the webbing and retractor 
shall be subjected to a tensile force of 11,120 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>111 N with the webbing fully extended from the 
retractor, or to a tensile force of 6,672 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>67 N 
with the webbing fully extended from the retractor if the design of the 
assembly permits only upper torso restraint forces on the retractor.
    (6) If a seat belt assembly has a buckle in which the tongue is 
capable of inverted insertion, one of the three assemblies shall be 
tested with the tongue inverted.
    (c) Resistance to buckle abrasion. Seat belt assemblies shall be 
tested for resistance to abrasion by each buckle or manual adjusting 
device normally used to adjust the size of the assembly. The webbing of 
the assembly to be used in this test shall be exposed for 4 hours to an 
atmosphere having relative humidity of 65 per cent and temperature of 18 
[deg]C. The webbing shall be pulled back and forth through the buckle or 
manual adjusting device as shown schematically in Figure 7. The anchor 
end of the webbing (A) shall be attached to a mass (B) of 1.4 kg. The 
webbing shall pass through the buckle (C), and the other end (D) shall 
be attached to a reciprocating device so that the webbing forms an angle 
of 8[deg] with the hinge stop (E). The reciprocating device shall be 
operated for 2,500 cycles at a rate of 18 cycles per minute with a 
stroke length of 203 mm. The abraded webbing shall be tested for 
breaking strength by the procedure described in paragraph S5.1(b).
    S5.4 Tolerances on angles. Unless a range of angles is specified or 
a tolerance is otherwise explicitly provided, all angles and 
orientations of seat belt assemblies and components specified in this 
standard shall have a tolerance of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>3 degrees.

[[Page 901]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.090


[[Page 902]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.091


[[Page 903]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.093


[[Page 904]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR22AU05.016


[44 FR 72139, Dec. 13, 1979]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.209 see the List of CFR Sections Affected which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.


<R05>
Sec. 571.210  Standard No. 210; Seat belt assembly anchorages.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard establishes requirements for 
seat belt assembly anchorages to insure their proper location for 
effective occupant restraint and to reduce the likelihood of their 
failure.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, buses, and school buses.
    S3. Definitions.
    School bus torso belt adjusted height means the vertical height 
above the seating reference point (SgRP) of the horizontal plane 
containing a segment of the torso belt centerline located 25 mm to 75 mm 
forward of the torso belt height adjuster device, when the torso belt 
retractor is locked and the torso belt is pulled away from the seat back 
by applying a 20 N horizontal force in the forward direction through the 
webbing at a location 100 mm or more forward of the adjustment device as 
shown in Figure 5.
    School bus torso belt anchor point means the midpoint of the torso 
belt width where the torso belt first contacts the uppermost torso belt 
anchorage. Seat belt anchorage means any component, other than the 
webbing or straps, involved in transferring seat belt loads to the 
vehicle structure, including, but not limited to, the attachment 
hardware, seat frames, seat pedestals, the vehicle structure itself, and 
any part of the vehicle whose failure causes separation of the belt from 
the vehicle structure.
    Small occupant seating position is as defined in 49 CFR 571.222.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1 Type.
    S4.1.1 Seat belt anchorages for a Type 1 or a Type 2 seat belt 
assembly shall be installed for each designated seating position for 
which a Type 1 or a Type 2 seat belt assembly is required by Standard 
No. 208 (49 CFR 571.208). Seat belt anchorages for a Type 2 seat belt 
assembly shall be installed for each designated seating position for

[[Page 905]]

which a Type 2 seat belt assembly is required by Standard No. 208 (49 
CFR 571.208).
    S4.1.2 (a) Notwithstanding the requirement of S4.1.1, each vehicle 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1987 that is equipped with an 
automatic restraint at the front right outboard designated seating 
position, which automatic restraint cannot be used for securing a child 
restraint system or cannot be adjusted by the vehicle owner to secure a 
child restraint system solely through the use of attachment hardware 
installed as an item of original equipment by the vehicle manufacturer, 
shall have, at the manufacturer's option, either anchorages for a Type 1 
seat belt assembly installed at that position or a Type 1 or Type 2 seat 
belt assembly installed at that position. If a manufacturer elects to 
install anchorages for a Type 1 seat belt assembly to comply with this 
requirement, those anchorages shall consist of, at a minimum, holes 
threaded to accept bolts that comply with S4.1(f) of Standard No. 209 
(49 CFR 571.209).
    (b) The requirement in S4.1.1 of this standard that seat belt 
anchorages for a Type 1 or a Type 2 seat belt assembly shall be 
installed for certain designated seating positions does not apply to any 
such seating positions that are equipped with a seat belt assembly that 
meets the frontal crash protection requirements of S5.1 of Standard No. 
208 (49 CFR 571.208).
    S4.1.3 School bus passenger seats.
    S4.1.3.1 For school buses manufactured on or after October 21, 2011, 
seat belt anchorages for school bus passenger seats must be attached to 
the school bus seat structure, including seats with wheelchair positions 
or side emergency doors behind them. Seats with no other seats behind 
them, no wheelchair positions behind them and no side emergency door 
behind them are excluded from the requirement that the seat belt 
anchorages must be attached to the school bus seat structure. For school 
buses with a GVWR less than or equal to 4,536 kg (10,000 pounds), the 
seat belt shall be Type 2 as defined in S3. of FMVSS No. 209 (49 CFR 
571.209). For school buses with a GVWR greater than 4,536 kg (10,000 
pounds), the seat belt shall be Type 1 or Type 2 as defined in S3. of 
FMVSS No. 209 (49 CFR 571.209).
    S4.1.3.2 Type 2 seat belt anchorages on school buses manufactured on 
or after October 21, 2011 must meet the following location requirements.
    (a) For a small occupant seating position of a flexible occupancy 
seat, as defined in 49 CFR 571.222, the school bus torso belt anchor 
point must be 400 mm or more vertically above the seating reference 
point (SgRP) or adjustable to 400 mm or more vertically above the SgRP. 
For all other seating positions, the school bus torso belt anchor point 
must be 520 mm or more vertically above the SgRP or adjustable to 520 mm 
or more vertically above the SgRP. The school bus torso belt adjusted 
height at each seating position shall be adjustable to no more than 280 
mm vertically above the SgRP in the lowest position and no less than the 
required vertical height of the school bus torso belt anchor point for 
that seating position in the highest position. (See Figure 4.)
    (b) The minimum lateral distance between the vertical centerline of 
the bolt holes or the centroid of any other means of attachment to the 
structure specified in 4.1.3.1, simultaneously achievable by all seating 
positions, must be:
    (i) 280 mm for seating positions in a flexible occupancy seat in a 
maximum occupancy configuration, as defined in 49 CFR 571.222; and
    (ii) 330 mm for all other seating positions.
    S4.1.3.3 School buses with a GVWR less than or equal to 4,536 kg 
(10,000 pounds) must meet the requirements of S4.2.2 of this standard.
    S4.1.3.4 School buses with a GVWR greater than 4,536 kg (10,000 
pounds) manufactured on or after October 21, 2011, with Type 1 seat belt 
anchorages, must meet the strength requirements specified in S4.2.1 of 
this standard.
    S4.1.3.5 School buses with a GVWR greater than 4,536 kg (10,000 
pounds) manufactured on or after October 21, 2011, with Type 2 seat belt 
anchorages, must meet the strength requirements specified in S4.2.2 of 
this standard.
    S4.2 Strength.

[[Page 906]]

    S4.2.1 Except as provided in S4.2.5, and except for side-facing 
seats, the anchorages, attachment hardware, and attachment bolts for any 
of the following seat belt assemblies shall withstand a 5,000 pound 
force when tested in accordance with S5.1 of this standard:
    (a) Type 1 seat belt assembly; and
    (b) Lap belt portion of either a Type 2 or automatic seat belt 
assembly, if such seat belt assembly is equipped with a detachable upper 
torso belt.
    S4.2.2 Except as provided in S4.2.5, and except for side facing 
seats, the anchorages, attachment hardware, and attachment bolts for any 
of the following seat belt assemblies shall withstand a 3,000 pound 
force applied to the lap belt portion of the seat belt assembly 
simultaneously with a 3,000 pound force applied to the shoulder belt 
portion of the seat belt assembly, when tested in accordance with S5.2 
of this standard:
    (a) Type 2 and automatic seat belt assemblies that are installed to 
comply with Standard No. 208 (49 CFR 571.208); and
    (b) Type 2 and automatic seat belt assemblies that are installed at 
a seating position required to have a Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt 
assembly by Standard No. 208 (49 CFR 571.208).
    S4.2.3 Permanent deformation or rupture of a seat belt anchorage or 
its surrounding area is not considered to be a failure, if the required 
force is sustained for the specified time.
    S4.2.4 Anchorages, attachment hardware, and attachment bolts shall 
be tested by simultaneously loading them in accordance with the 
applicable procedures set forth in S5 of this standard if the anchorages 
are either:
    (a) For designated seating positions that are common to the same 
occupant seat and that face in the same direction, or
    (b) For laterally adjacent designated seating positions that are not 
common to the same occupant seat, but that face in the same direction, 
if the vertical centerline of the bolt hole for at least one of the 
anchorages for one of those designated seating positions is within 305 
mm of the vertical center line of the bolt hole for an anchorage for one 
of the adjacent seating positions.
    S4.2.5 The attachment hardware of a seat belt assembly, which is 
subject to the requirements of S5.1 of Standard No. 208 (49 CFR 571.208) 
by virtue of any provision of Standard No. 208 other than S4.1.2.1(c)(2) 
of that standard, does not have to meet the requirements of S4.2.1 and 
S4.2.2 of this standard.
    S4.3 Location. As used in this section, ``forward'' means the 
direction in which the seat faces, and other directional references are 
to be interpreted accordingly. Anchorages for seat belt assemblies that 
meet the frontal crash protection requirements of S5.1 of Standard No. 
208 (49 CFR 571.208) are exempt from the location requirements of this 
section.
    S4.3.1 Seat belt anchorages for Type 1 seat belt assemblies and the 
pelvic portion of Type 2 seat belt assemblies.
    S4.3.1.1 In an installation in which the seat belt does not bear 
upon the seat frame:
    (a) If the seat is a nonadjustable seat, then a line from the 
seating reference point to the nearest contact point of the belt with 
the anchorage shall extend forward from the anchorage at an angle with 
the horizontal of not less than 30 degrees and not more than 75 degrees.
    (b) If the seat is an adjustable seat, then a line from a point 64 
mm forward of and 10 mm above the seating reference point to the nearest 
contact point of the belt with the anchorage shall extend forward from 
the anchorage at an angle with the horizontal of not less than 30 
degrees and not more than 75 degrees.
    S4.3.1.2 In an installation in which the belt bears upon the seat 
frame, the seat belt anchorage, if not on the seat structure, shall be 
aft of the rearmost belt contact point on the seat frame with the seat 
in the rearmost position. The line from the seating reference point to 
the nearest belt contact point on the seat frame, with the seat 
positioned at the seating reference point, shall extend forward from 
that contact point at an angle with the horizontal of not less than 30 
degrees and not more than 75 degrees.

[[Page 907]]

    S4.3.1.3 In an installation in which the seat belt attaches to the 
seat structure, the line from the seating reference point to the nearest 
contact point of the belt with the hardware attaching it to the seat 
structure shall extend forward from that contact point at an angle with 
the horizontal of not less than 30 degrees and not more than 75 degrees.
    S4.3.1.4 Anchorages for an individual seat belt assembly shall be 
located at least 165 mm apart laterally, measured between the vertical 
center line of the bolt holes or, for designs using other means of 
attachment to the vehicle structure, between the centroid of such means.
    S4.3.2 Seat belt anchorages for the upper torso portion of Type 2 
seat belt assemblies. Adjust the seat to its full rearward and downward 
position and adjust the seat back to its most upright position. Except a 
small occupant seating position as defined in 49 CFR 571.222, with the 
seat and seat back so positioned, as specified by subsection (a) or (b) 
of this section, the upper end of the upper torso restraint shall be 
located within the acceptable range shown in Figure 1, with reference to 
a two-dimensional drafting template described in Society of Automotive 
Engineers (SAE) Standard J826, revised May 1987, ``Devices for Use in 
Defining and Measuring Vehicle Seating Accommodation'' (incorporated by 
reference, see Sec. 571.5). The template's ``H'' point shall be at the 
design ``H'' point of the seat for its full rearward and full downward 
position, as defined in Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) 
Recommended Practice J1100, revised June 1984, ``Motor Vehicle 
Dimensions'' (incorporated by reference, see Sec. 571.5), and the 
template's torso line shall be at the same angle from the vertical as 
the seat back.
    (a) For fixed anchorages, compliance with this section shall be 
determined at the vertical centerline of the bolt holes or, for designs 
using another means of attachment to the vehicle structure, at the 
centroid of such means.
    (b) Except for seating positions on school bus bench seats, 
compliance with this section shall be determined with adjustable 
anchorages at the midpoint of the adjustment range of all adjustable 
positions. For seating positions on school bus bench seats, place 
adjustable anchorages and torso belt height adjusters in their uppermost 
position.
    S5. Test procedures. Each vehicle shall meet the requirements of 
S4.2 of this standard when tested according to the following procedures. 
Where a range of values is specified, the vehicle shall be able to meet 
the requirements at all points within the range. For the testing 
specified in these procedures, the anchorage shall be connected to 
material whose breaking strength is equal to or greater than the 
breaking strength of the webbing for the seat belt assembly installed as 
original equipment at that seating position. The geometry of the 
attachment duplicates the geometry, at the initiation of the test, of 
the attachment of the originally installed seat belt assembly.
    S5.1 Seats with Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt anchorages. With the seat 
in its rearmost position, apply a force of 22,241 N in the direction in 
which the seat faces to a pelvic body block as described in Figure 2A, 
in a plane parallel to the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle for 
forward and rear facing seats, and in a plane perpendicular to the 
longitudinal centerline of the vehicle for side facing seats, with an 
initial force application angle of not less than 5 degrees or more than 
15 degrees above the horizontal. Apply the force at the onset rate of 
not more than 222,411 N per second. Attain the 22,241 N force in not 
more than 30 seconds and maintain it for 10 seconds. At the 
manufacturer's option, the pelvic body block described in Figure 2B may 
be substituted for the pelvic body block described in Figure 2A to apply 
the specified force to the center set(s) of anchorages for any group of 
three or more sets of anchorages that are simultaneously loaded in 
accordance with S4.2.4 of this standard.
    S5.2 Seats with Type 2 or automatic seat belt anchorages.  With the 
seat in its rearmost position, apply forces of 13,345 N in the direction 
in which the seat faces simultaneously to a pelvic body block, as 
described in Figure 2A, and an upper torso body block, as described in 
Figure 3, in a plane parallel to the longitudinal centerline of the

[[Page 908]]

vehicle for forward and rear facing seats, and in a plane perpendicular 
to the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle for side facing seats, 
with an initial force application angle of not less than 5 degrees nor 
more than 15 degrees above the horizontal. Apply the forces at the onset 
rate of not more than 133,447 N per second. Attain the 13,345 N force in 
not more than 30 seconds and maintain it for 10 seconds. At the 
manufacturer's option, the pelvic body block described in Figure 2B may 
be substituted for the pelvic body block described in Figure 2A to apply 
the specified force to the center set(s) of anchorages for any group of 
three or more sets of anchorages that are simultaneously loaded in 
accordance with S4.2.4 of this standard.

[[Page 909]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.094


[[Page 910]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.005


[[Page 911]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.006

    S6. Owner's Manual Information. The owner's manual in each vehicle 
with a gross vehicle weight rating of 4,536 kg or less manufactured 
after September 1, 1987 shall include:
    (a) A section explaining that all child restraint systems are 
designed to be secured in vehicle seats by lap belts or the lap belt 
portion of a lap-shoulder belt. The section shall also explain that 
children could be endangered in a crash if their child restraints are 
not properly secured in the vehicle.
    (b) In a vehicle with rear designated seating positions, a statement 
alerting vehicle owners that, according to accident statistics, children 
are safer when properly restrained in the rear seating positions than in 
the front seating positions.

[[Page 912]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21OC08.058


[[Page 913]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR29OC10.001


[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.210 see the List of CFR Sections Affected which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.

[[Page 914]]


<R05>
Sec. 571.211  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 571.212  Standard No. 212; Windshield mounting.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes windshield retention 
requirements for motor vehicles during crashes.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce crash 
injuries and fatalities by providing for retention of the vehicle 
windshield during a crash, thereby utilizing fully the penetration-
resistance and injury-avoidance properties of the windshield glazing 
material and preventing the ejection of occupants from the vehicle.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, and to 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses having a gross 
vehicle weight rating of 4536 kilograms or less. However, it does not 
apply to forward control vehicles, walk-in van-type vehicles, or to 
open-body type vehicles with fold-down or removable windshields.
    S4. Definition. Passive restraint system means a system meeting the 
occupant crash protection requirements of S5. of Standard No. 208 by 
means that require no action by vehicle occupants.
    S5. Requirements. When the vehicle travelling longitudinally forward 
at any speed up to and including 48 kilometers per hour impacts a fixed 
collision barrier that is perpendicular to the line of travel of the 
vehicle, under the conditions of S6, the windshield mounting of the 
vehicle shall retain not less than the minimum portion of the windshield 
periphery specified in S5.1 and S5.2.
    S5.1 Vehicles equipped with passive restraints. Vehicles equipped 
with passive restraint systems shall retain not less than 50 percent of 
the portion of the windshield periphery on each side of the vehicle 
longitudinal centerline.
    S5.2 Vehicles not equipped with passive restraints. Vehicles not 
equipped with passive restraint systems shall retain not less than 75 
percent of the windshield periphery.
    S6. Test conditions. The requirements of S5. shall be met under the 
following conditions:
    S6.1 The vehicle, including test devices and instrumentation, is 
loaded as follows:
    (a) Except as specified in S6.2, a passenger car is loaded to its 
unloaded vehicle weight plus its cargo and luggage capacity weight, 
secured in the luggage area, plus a 50th-percentile test dummy as 
specified in part 572 of this chapter at each front outboard designated 
seating position and at any other position whose protection system is 
required to be tested by a dummy under the provisions of Standard No. 
208. Each dummy is restrained only by means that are installed for 
protection at its seating position.
    (b) Except as specified in S6.2, a multipurpose passenger vehicle, 
truck or bus is loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight, plus 136 
kilograms or its rated cargo and luggage capacity, whichever is less, 
secured to the vehicle, plus a 50th-percentile test dummy as specified 
in part 572 of this chapter at each front outboard designated seating 
position and at any other position whose protection system is required 
to be tested by a dummy under the provisions of Standard No. 208. Each 
dummy is restrained only by means that are installed for protection at 
its seating position. The load is distributed so that the weight on each 
axle as measured at the tire-ground interface is in proportion to its 
GAWR. If the weight on any axle when the vehicle is loaded to its 
unloaded vehicle weight plus dummy weight exceeds the axle's 
proportional share of the test weight, the remaining weight is placed so 
that the weight on that axle remains the same. For the purposes of this 
section, unloaded vehicle weight does not include the weight of work-
performing accessories. Vehicles are tested to a maximum unloaded 
vehicle weight of 2,495 kilograms.
    S6.2 The fuel tank is filled to any level from 90 to 95 percent of 
capacity.
    S6.3 The parking brake is disengaged and the transmission is in 
neutral.
    S6.4 Tires are inflated to the vehicle manufacturer's 
specifications.
    S6.5 The windshield mounting material and all vehicle components in 
direct contact with the mounting material are at any temperature between

[[Page 915]]

-9 degrees Celsius and +43 degrees Celsius.

[41 FR 36494, Aug. 30, 1976, as amended at 42 FR 34289, July 5, 1977; 45 
FR 22046, Apr. 3, 1980; 60 FR 13647, Mar. 14, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 571.213  Standard No. 213; Child restraint systems.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for child restraint 
systems used in motor vehicles and aircraft.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce the number of 
children killed or injured in motor vehicle crashes and in aircraft.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses, and to child 
restraint systems for use in motor vehicles and aircraft.
    S4. Definitions.
    Add-on child restraint system means any portable child restraint 
system.
    Backless child restraint system means a child restraint, other than 
a belt-positioning seat, that consists of a seating platform that does 
not extend up to provide a cushion for the child's back or head and has 
a structural element designed to restrain forward motion of the child's 
torso in a forward impact.
    Belt-positioning seat means a child restraint system that positions 
a child on a vehicle seat to improve the fit of a vehicle Type II belt 
system on the child and that lacks any component, such as a belt system 
or a structural element, designed to restrain forward movement of the 
child's torso in a forward impact.
    Booster seat means either a backless child restraint system or a 
belt-positioning seat.
    Built-in child restraint system means a child restraint system that 
is designed to be an integral part of and permanently installed in a 
motor vehicle.
    Car bed means a child restraint system designed to restrain or 
position a child in the supine or prone position on a continuous flat 
surface.
    Child restraint anchorage system is defined in S3 of FMVSS No. 225 
(Sec. 571.225).
    Child restraint system means any device, except Type I or Type II 
seat belts, designed for use in a motor vehicle or aircraft to restrain, 
seat, or position children who weigh 30 kilograms (kg) or less.
    Contactable surface means any child restraint system surface (other 
than that of a belt, belt buckle, or belt adjustment hardware) that may 
contact any part of the head or torso of the appropriate test dummy, 
specified in S7, when a child restraint system is tested in accordance 
with S6.1.
    Factory-installed built-in child restraint system means a built-in 
child restraint system that has been or will be permanently installed in 
a motor vehicle before that vehicle is certified as a completed or 
altered vehicle in accordance with part 567 of this chapter.
    Harness means a combination pelvic and upper torso child restraint 
system that consists primarily of flexible material, such as straps, 
webbing or similar material, and that does not include a rigid seating 
structure for the child.
    Rear-facing child restraint system means a child restraint system, 
except a car bed, that positions a child to face in the direction 
opposite to the normal direction of travel of the motor vehicle.
    Representative aircraft passenger seat means either a Federal 
Aviation Administration approved production aircraft passenger seat or a 
simulated aircraft passenger seat conforming to Figure 6.
    Seat orientation reference line or SORL means the horizontal line 
through Point Z as illustrated in Figure 1A.
    Specific vehicle shell means the actual vehicle model part into 
which the built-in child restraint system is or is intended to be 
fabricated, including the complete surroundings of the built-in system. 
If the built-in child restraint system is or is intended to be 
fabricated as part of any seat other than a front seat, these 
surroundings include the back of the seat in front, the interior rear 
side door panels and trim, the floor pan, adjacent pillars (e.g., the B 
and C pillars), and the ceiling. If the built-in system is or is 
intended to be fabricated as part of the front seat, these surroundings 
include the dashboard, the steering mechanism and its associated trim 
hardware, any levers and knobs installed on the floor or on a console, 
the interior front side door panels and trim, the front seat, the floor 
pan, the A pillars and the ceiling.

[[Page 916]]

    Tether anchorage is defined in S3 of FMVSS No. 225 (Sec. 571.225).
    Tether strap is defined in S3 of FMVSS No. 225 (Sec. 571.225).
    Tether hook is defined in S3 of FMVSS No. 225 (Sec. 571.225).
    Torso means the portion of the body of a seated anthropomorphic test 
dummy, excluding the thighs, that lies between the top of the child 
restraint system seating surface and the top of the shoulders of the 
test dummy.
    S5. Requirements. (a) Each motor vehicle with a built-in child 
restraint system shall meet the requirements in this section when, as 
specified, tested in accordance with S6.1 and this paragraph.
    (b) Each child restraint system manufactured for use in motor 
vehicles shall meet the requirements in this section when, as specified, 
tested in accordance with S6.1 and this paragraph. Each add-on system 
shall meet the requirements at each of the restraint's seat back angle 
adjustment positions and restraint belt routing positions, when the 
restraint is oriented in the direction recommended by the manufacturer 
(e.g., forward, rearward or laterally) pursuant to S5.6, and tested with 
the test dummy specified in S7.
    (c) Each child restraint system manufactured for use in aircraft 
shall meet the requirements in this section and the additional 
requirements in S8.
    (d) Each child restraint tested with a Part 572 Subpart S dummy need 
not meet S5.1.2 and S5.1.3.
    S5.1 Dynamic performance.
    S5.1.1 Child restraint system integrity. When tested in accordance 
with S6.1, each child restraint system shall meet the requirements of 
paragraphs (a) through (c) of this section.
    (a) Exhibit no complete separation of any load bearing structural 
element and no partial separation exposing either surfaces with a radius 
of less than \1/4\ inch or surfaces with protrusions greater than \3/8\ 
inch above the immediate adjacent surrounding contactable surface of any 
structural element of the system.
    (b)(1) If adjustable to different positions, remain in the same 
adjustment position during the testing that it was in immediately before 
the testing, except as otherwise specified in paragraph (b)(2).
    (2)(i) Subject to paragraph (b)(2)(ii), a rear-facing child 
restraint system may have a means for repositioning the seating surface 
of the system that allows the system's occupant to move from a reclined 
position to an upright position and back to a reclined position during 
testing.
    (ii) No opening that is exposed and is larger than \1/4\ inch before 
the testing shall become smaller during the testing as a result of the 
movement of the seating surface relative to the restraint system as a 
whole.
    (c) If a front facing child restraint system, not allow the angle 
between the system's back support surfaces for the child and the 
system's seating surface to be less than 45 degrees at the completion of 
the test.
    S5.1.2 Injury criteria. When tested in accordance with S6.1 and with 
the test dummies specified in S7, each child restraint system 
manufactured before August 1, 2005, that, in accordance with S5.5.2, is 
recommended for use by children whose mass is more than 10 kg shall--
    (a) Limit the resultant acceleration at the location of the 
accelerometer mounted in the test dummy head as specified in part 572 
such that the expression:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.097


shall not exceed 1,000, where a is the resultant acceleration expressed 
as a multiple of g (the acceleration of gravity), and t<INF>1</INF> and 
t<INF>2</INF> are any two moments during the impacts.
    (b) Limit the resultant acceleration at the location of the 
accelerometer mounted in the test dummy upper thorax as specified in 
part 572 to not more than 60 g's, except for intervals whose cumulative 
duration is not more than 3 milliseconds.
    S5.1.2.1 When tested in accordance with S6.1 and with the test 
dummies specified in S7, each child restraint system manufactured on or 
after August 1, 2005 shall'
    (a) Limit the resultant acceleration at the location of the 
accelerometer

[[Page 917]]

mounted in the test dummy head such that, for any two points in time, t1 
and t2, during the event which are separated by not more than a 36 
millisecond time interval and where t1 is less than t2, the maximum 
calculated head injury criterion (HIC36) shall not exceed 1,000, 
determined using the resultant head acceleration at the center of 
gravity of the dummy head, ar, expressed as a multiple of g (the 
acceleration of gravity), calculated using the expression:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18JN03.018

    (b) The resultant acceleration calculated from the output of the 
thoracic instrumentation shall not exceed 60 g's, except for intervals 
whose cumulative duration is not more than 3 milliseconds.
    S5.1.2.2 At the manufacturer's option (with said option irrevocably 
selected prior to, or at the time of, certification of the restraint), 
child restraint systems manufactured before August 1, 2005 may be tested 
to the requirements of S5 while using the test dummies specified in 
S7.1.2 of this standard according to the criteria for selecting test 
dummies specified in that paragraph. That paragraph specifies the 
dummies used to test child restraint systems manufactured on or after 
August 1, 2005. If a manufacturer selects the dummies specified in 
S7.1.2 to test its product, the injury criteria specified by S5.1.2.1 of 
this standard must be met. Child restraints manufactured on or after 
August 1, 2005 must be tested using the test dummies specified in 
S7.1.2.
    S5.1.3 Occupant excursion. When tested in accordance with S6.1 and 
the requirements specified in this section, each child restraint system 
shall meet the applicable excursion limit requirements specified in 
S5.1.3.1-S5.1.3.3.
    S5.1.3.1 Child restraint systems other than rear-facing ones and car 
beds. Each child restraint system, other than a rear-facing child 
restraint system or a car bed, shall retain the test dummy's torso 
within the system.
    (a) For each add-on child restraint system:
    (1) No portion of the test dummy's head shall pass through a 
vertical transverse plane that is 720 mm or 813 mm (as specified in the 
table in this S5.1.3.1) forward of point Z on the standard seat 
assembly, measured along the center SORL (as illustrated in figure 1B of 
this standard); and
    (2) Neither knee pivot point shall pass through a vertical 
transverse plane that is 915 mm forward of point Z on the standard seat 
assembly, measured along the center SORL.

                          Table to S5.1.3.1(a)--Add-On Forward-Facing Child Restraints
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                        Explanatory note: In the
                                                                                          test specified in 2nd
                                                                                            column, the child
                                      is tested in accordance   these excursion limits  restraint is attached to
  When this type of child restraint            with--                   apply            the test seat assembly
                                                                                         in the manner described
                                                                                            below, subject to
                                                                                           certain conditions
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Harnesses, backless booster seats     S6.1.2(a)(1)(i)(A).....  Head 813 mm;...........  Attached with lap belt;
 and restraints designed for use by                            Knee 915 mm............   in addition, if a
 physically handicapped children.                                                        tether is provided, it
                                                                                         is attached.
Harnesses labeled per S5.3.1(b)(i)    S6.1.2(a)(1)(i)(A).....  Head 813 mm;...........  Attached with seat back
 through S5.3.1(b)(iii) and Figure                             Knee 915 mm............   mount.
 12.
Belt-positioning seats..............  S6.1.2(a)(1)(ii).......  Head 813 mm;...........  Attached with lap and
                                                               Knee 915 mm............   shoulder belt; no
                                                                                         tether is attached.
All other child restraints,           S6.1.2(a)(1)(i)(B).....  Head 813 mm;...........  Attached with lap belt;
 manufactured before September 1,                              Knee 915 mm............   no tether is attached.
 1999.
All other child restraints,           S6.1.2(a)(1)(i)(B).....  Head 813 mm;...........  Attached with lap belt;
 manufactured on or after September                            Knee 915 mm............   no tether is attached.
 1, 1999.
                                      S6.1.2(a)(1)(i)(D)                                Attached to lower
                                       (beginning September                              anchorages of child
                                       1, 2002).                                         restraint anchorage
                                                                                         system; no tether is
                                                                                         attached.
                                      S6.1.2(a)(1)(i)(A).....  Head 720 mm;...........  Attached with lap belt;
                                                               Knee 915 mm............   in addition, if a
                                                                                         tether is provided, it
                                                                                         is attached.
                                      S6.1.2(a)(1)(i)(C)                                Attached to lower
                                       (beginning September                              anchorages of child
                                       1, 2002).                                         restraint anchorage
                                                                                         system; in addition, if
                                                                                         a tether is provided,
                                                                                         it is attached.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 918]]

    (b) In the case of a built-in child restraint system, neither knee 
pivot point shall, at any time during the dynamic test, pass through a 
vertical transverse plane that is 305 mm forward of the initial pre-test 
position of the respective knee pivot point, measured along a horizontal 
line that passes through the knee pivot point and is parallel to the 
vertical longitudinal plane that passes through the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline.
    S5.1.3.2 Rear-facing child restraint systems. In the case of each 
rear-facing child restraint system, all portions of the test dummy's 
torso shall be retained within the system and neither of the target 
points on either side of the dummy's head and on the transverse axis 
passing through the center of mass of the dummy's head and perpendicular 
to the head's midsagittal plane, shall pass through the transverse 
orthogonal planes whose intersection contains the forward-most and top-
most points on the child restraint system surfaces (illustrated in 
Figure 1C).
    S5.1.3.3 Car beds. In the case of car beds, all portions of the test 
dummy's head and torso shall be retained within the confines of the car 
bed.
    S5.1.4 Back support angle. When a rear-facing child restraint system 
is tested in accordance with S6.1, the angle between the system's back 
support surface for the child and the vertical shall not exceed 70 
degrees.
    S5.2 Force distribution.
    S5.2.1 Minimum head support surface--child restraints other than car 
beds.
    S5.2.1.1 Except as provided in S5.2.1.2, each child restraint system 
other than a car bed shall provide restraint against rearward movement 
of the head of the child (rearward in relation to the child) by means of 
a continuous seat back which is an integral part of the system and 
which--
    (a) Has a height, measured along the system seat back surface for 
the child in the vertical longitudinal plane passing through the 
longitudinal centerline of the child restraint systems from the lowest 
point on the system seating surface that is contacted by the buttocks of 
the seated dummy, as follows:

                          Table to S5.2.1.1(a)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Height
                          Weight \1\                            \2\(mm)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Not more than 18 kg..........................................        500
More than 18 kg..............................................       560
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ When a child restraint system is recommended under S5.5 for use by
  children of the above weights.
\2\ The height of the portion of the system seat back providing head
  restraint shall not be less than the above.

    (b) Has a width of not less than 8 inches, measured in the 
horizontal plane at the height specified in paragraph (a) of this 
section. Except that a child restraint system with side supports 
extending at least 4 inches forward from the padded surface of the 
portion of the restraint system provided for support of the child's head 
may have a width of not less than 6 inches, measured in the horizontal 
plane at the height specified in paragraph (a) of this section.
    (c) Limits the rearward rotation of the test dummy head so that the 
angle between the head and torso of the dummy specified in S7. when 
tested in accordance with S6.1 is not more than 45 degrees greater than 
the angle between the head and torso after the dummy has been placed in 
the system in accordance with S6.1.2.3 and before the system is tested 
in accordance with S6.1.
    S5.2.1.2 The applicability of the requirements of S5.2.1.1 to a 
front-facing child restraint, and the conformance of any child restraint 
other than a car bed to those requirements, is determined using the 
largest of the test dummies specified in S7 for use in testing that 
restraint, provided that the 6-year-old dummy described in subpart I or 
subpart N of part 572 of this title is not used to determine the 
applicability of or compliance with S5.2.1.1. A front-facing child 
restraint system is not required to comply with S5.2.1.1 if the target 
point on either side of the dummy's head is below a horizontal plane 
tangent to the top of--
    (a) The standard seat assembly, in the case of an add-on child 
restraint system, when the dummy is positioned in the system and the 
system is installed on the assembly in accordance with S6.1.2.
    (b) The vehicle seat, in the case of a built-in child restraint 
system, when the system is activated and the dummy

[[Page 919]]

is positioned in the system in accordance with S6.1.2.
    S5.2.2 Torso impact protection. Each child restraint system other 
than a car bed shall comply with the applicable requirements of S5.2.2.1 
and S5.2.2.2.
    S5.2.2.1(a) The system surface provided for the support of the 
child's back shall be flat or concave and have a continuous surface area 
of not less than 85 square inches.
    (b) Each system surface provided for support of the side of the 
child's torso shall be flat or concave and have a continuous surface of 
not less than 24 square inches for systems recommended for children 
weighing 20 pounds or more, or 48 square inches for systems recommended 
for children weighing less than 20 pounds.
    (c) Each horizontal cross section of each system surface designed to 
restrain forward movement of the child's torso shall be flat or concave 
and each vertical longitudinal cross section shall be flat or convex 
with a radius of curvature of the underlying structure of not less than 
2 inches.
    S5.2.2.2 Each forward-facing child restraint system shall have no 
fixed or movable surface--
    (a) Directly forward of the dummy and intersected by a horizontal 
line--
    (1) Parallel to the SORL, in the case of the add-on child restraint 
system, or
    (2) Parallel to a vertical plane through the longitudinal center 
line of the vehicle seat, in the case of a built-in child restraint 
system, and,
    (b) Passing through any portion of the dummy, except for surfaces 
which restrain the dummy when the system is tested in accordance with 
S6.1.2(a)(2), so that the child restraint system shall conform to the 
requirements of S5.1.2 and S5.1.3.1.
    S5.2.3 Head impact protection.
    S5.2.3.1 Each child restraint system other than a child harness, 
manufactured before August 1, 2005, that is recommended under S5.5.2 for 
a child whose mass is less than 10 kg and that is not tested with the 
Part 572 Subpart R dummy, shall comply with S5.2.3.
    S5.2.3.2 Each system surface, except for protrusions that comply 
with S5.2.4, which is contactable by the dummy head when the system is 
tested in accordance with S6.1 shall be covered with slow recovery, 
energy absorbing material with the following characteristics:
    (a) A 25 percent compression-deflection resistance of not less than 
0.5 and not more than 10 pounds per square inch when tested in 
accordance with S6.3.
    (b) A thickness of not less than \1/2\ inch for materials having a 
25 percent compression-deflection resistance of not less than 1.8 and 
not more than 10 pounds per square inch when tested in accordance with 
S6.3. Materials having a 25 percent compression-deflection resistance of 
less than 1.8 pounds per square inch shall have a thickness of not less 
than \3/4\ inch.
    S5.2.4 Protrusion limitation. Any portion of a rigid structural 
component within or underlying a contactable surface, or any portion of 
a child restraint system surface that is subject to the requirements of 
S5.2.3 shall, with any padding or other flexible overlay material 
removed, have a height above any immediately adjacent restraint system 
surface of not more than \3/8\ inch and no exposed edge with a radius of 
less than \1/4\ inch.
    S5.3 Installation.
    S5.3.1 Add-on child restraints shall meet either (a) or (b), as 
appropriate.
    (a) Except for components designed to attach to a child restraint 
anchorage system, each add-on child restraint system must not have any 
means designed for attaching the system to a vehicle seat cushion or 
vehicle seat back and any component (except belts) that is designed to 
be inserted between the vehicle seat cushion and vehicle seat back.
    (b) Harnesses manufactured for use on school bus seats must meet 
S5.3.1(a) of this standard, unless a label that conforms in content to 
Figure 12 and to the requirements of S5.3.1(b)(1) through S5.3.1(b)(3) 
of this standard is permanently affixed to the part of the harness that 
attaches the system to a vehicle seat back. Harnesses that are not 
labeled as required by this paragraph must meet S5.3.1(a).
    (1) The label must be plainly visible when installed and easily 
readable.
    (2) The message area must be white with black text. The message area

[[Page 920]]

must be no less than 20 square centimeters.
    (3) The pictogram shall be gray and black with a red circle and 
slash on a white background. The pictogram shall be no less than 20 mm 
in diameter.
    S5.3.2 Each add-on child restraint system shall be capable of 
meeting the requirements of this standard when installed solely by each 
of the means indicated in the following table for the particular type of 
child restraint system:

                                                Table for S5.3.2
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                      Means of installation
                                               -----------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Type 1 seat      Child
                                                                  belt        restraint
     Type of add-on child restraint system       Type 1 seat    assembly      anchorage   Type II seat    Seat
                                                    belt         plus a        system         belt        back
                                                  assembly       tether      (effective     assembly      mount
                                                               anchorage,   September 1,
                                                                if needed       2002)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Harnesses labeled per S5.3.1(b)(1) through      ............  ............  ............  ............        X
 S5.3.1(b)(3) and Figure 12...................
Other harnesses...............................  ............            X
Car beds......................................            X
Rear-facing restraints........................            X   ............            X
Belt-positioning seats........................  ............  ............  ............            X   ........
All other child restraints....................            X             X             X
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S5.3.3 Car beds. Each car bed shall be designed to be installed on a 
vehicle seat so that the car bed's longitudinal axis is perpendicular to 
a vertical longitudinal plane through the longitudinal axis of the 
vehicle.
    S5.4 Belts, belt buckles, and belt webbing.
    S5.4.1 Performance requirements.
    S5.4.1.1 Child restraint systems manufactured before September 1, 
2007. The webbing of belts provided with a child restraint system and 
used to attach the system to the vehicle or to restrain the child within 
the system shall--
    (a) After being subjected to abrasion as specified in S5.1(d) or 
S5.3(c) of FMVSS 209 (Sec. 571.209), have a breaking strength of not 
less than 75 percent of the strength of the unabraded webbing when 
tested in accordance with S5.1(b) of FMVSS 209. A mass of 2.35 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> .05 kg shall be used in the test procedure in S5.1(d) 
of FMVSS 209 for webbing, including webbing used to secure a child 
restraint system to the tether and lower anchorages of a child restraint 
anchorage system, except that a mass of 1.5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>.05 kg 
shall be used for webbing in pelvic and upper torso restraints of a belt 
assembly used in a child restraint system. The mass is shown as (B) in 
Figure 2 of FMVSS 209.
    (b) Meet the requirements of S4.2 (e) and (f) of FMVSS No. 209 
(Sec. 571.209); and
    (c) If contactable by the test dummy torso when the system is tested 
in accordance with S6.1, have a width of not less than 1\1/2\ inches 
when measured in accordance with S5.4.1.3.
    S5.4.1.2 Child restraint systems manufactured on or after September 
1, 2007. The webbing of belts provided with a child restraint system and 
used to attach the system to the vehicle or to restrain the child within 
the system shall--
    (a) Have a minimum breaking strength for new webbing of not less 
than 15,000 N in the case of webbing used to secure a child restraint 
system to the vehicle, including the tether and lower anchorages of a 
child restraint anchorage system, and not less than 11,000 N in the case 
of the webbing used to secure a child to a child restraint system when 
tested in accordance with S5.1 of FMVSS No. 209. Each value shall be not 
less than the 15,000 N and 11,000 N applicable breaking strength 
requirements, but the median value shall be used for determining the 
retention of breaking strength in paragraphs (b)(1), (c)(1), and (c)(2) 
of this section S5.4.1.2. ``New webbing'' means webbing that has not 
been exposed to abrasion, light or micro-organisms as specified 
elsewhere in this section.
    (b)(1) After being subjected to abrasion as specified in S5.1(d) or 
S5.3(c) of

[[Page 921]]

FMVSS 209 (Sec. 571.209), have a breaking strength of not less than 75 
percent of the new webbing strength, when tested in accordance with 
S5.1(b) of FMVSS 209.
    (2) A mass of 2.35 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> .05 kg shall be used in 
the test procedure in S5.1(d) of FMVSS 209 for webbing, including 
webbing to secure a child restraint system to the tether and lower 
anchorages of a child restraint anchorage system, except that a mass of 
1.5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> .05 kg shall be used for webbing in pelvic 
and upper torso restraints of a belt assembly used in a child restraint 
system. The mass is shown as (B) in Figure 2 of FMVSS 209.
    (c)(1) After exposure to the light of a carbon arc and tested by the 
procedure specified in S5.1(e) of FMVSS 209 (Sec. 571.209), have a 
breaking strength of not less than 60 percent of the new webbing, and 
shall have a color retention not less than No. 2 on the Geometric Gray 
Scale published by the American Association of Textile Chemists and 
Colorists, Post Office Box 886, Durham, NC.
    (2) After being subjected to micro-organisms and tested by the 
procedures specified in S5.1(f) of FMVSS 209 (Sec. 571.209), shall have 
a breaking strength not less than 85 percent of the new webbing.
    (d) If contactable by the test dummy torso when the system is tested 
in accordance with S6.1, have a width of not less than 1\1/2\ inches 
when measured in accordance with S5.4.1.3.
    S5.4.1.3 Width test procedure. Condition the webbing for 24 hours in 
an atmosphere of any relative humidity between 48 and 67 percent, and 
any ambient temperature between 70[deg] and 77 [deg]F. Measure belt 
webbing width under a tension of 5 pounds applied lengthwise.
    S5.4.2 Belt buckles and belt adjustment hardware. Each belt buckle 
and item of belt adjustment hardware used in a child restraint system 
shall conform to the requirements of S4.3(a) and S4.3(b) of FMVSS No. 
209 (Sec. 571.209).
    S5.4.3 Belt Restraint.
    S5.4.3.1 General. Each belt that is part of a child restraint system 
and that is designed to restrain a child using the system shall be 
adjustable to snugly fit any child whose height and weight are within 
the ranges recommended in accordance with S5.5.2(f) and who is 
positioned in the system in accordance with the instructions required by 
S5.6.
    S5.4.3.2 Direct restraint. Except for a child restraint system whose 
mass is less than 4.4 kg, each belt that is part of a child restraint 
system and that is designed to restrain a child using the system and to 
attach the system to the vehicle, and each Type I and lap portion of a 
Type II vehicle belt that is used to attach the system to the vehicle 
shall, when tested in accordance with S6.1, impose no loads on the child 
that result from the mass of the system, or
    (a) In the case of an add-on child restraint system, from the mass 
of the seat back of the standard seat assembly specified in S6.1, or
    (b) In the case of a built-in child restraint system, from the mass 
of any part of the vehicle into which the child restraint system is 
built.
    S5.4.3.3 Seating systems. Except for child restraint systems subject 
to S5.4.3.4, each child restraint system that is designed for use by a 
child in a seated position and that has belts designed to restrain the 
child, shall, with the test dummy specified in S7 positioned in the 
system in accordance with S10 provide:
    (a) Upper torso restraint in the form of:
    (i) Belts passing over each shoulder of the child, or
    (ii) A fixed or movable surface that complies with S5.2.2.1(c), and
    (b) Lower torso restraint in the form of:
    (i) A lap belt assembly making an angle between 45[deg] and 90[deg] 
with the child restraint seating surface at the lap belt attachment 
points, or
    (ii) A fixed or movable surface that complies with S5.2.2.1(c), and
    (c) In the case of each seating system recommended for children 
whose masses are more than 10 kg, crotch restraint in the form of:
    (i) A crotch belt connectable to the lap belt or other device used 
to restrain the lower torso, or
    (ii) A fixed or movable surface that complies with S5.2.2.1(c).
    S5.4.3.4 Harnesses. Each child harness shall:

[[Page 922]]

    (a) Provide upper torso restraint, including belts passing over each 
shoulder of the child;
    (b) Provide lower torso restraint by means of lap and crotch belt; 
and
    (c) Prevent a child of any height for which the restraint is 
recommended for use pursuant to S5.5.2(f) from standing upright on the 
vehicle seat when the child is placed in the device in accordance with 
the instructions required by S5.6.
    S5.4.3.5 Buckle release. Any buckle in a child restraint system belt 
assembly designed to restrain a child using the system shall:
    (a) When tested in accordance with S6.2.1 prior to the dynamic test 
of S6.1, not release when a force of less than 40 newtons (N) is applied 
and shall release when a force of not more than 62 N is applied;
    (b) After the dynamic test of S6.1, when tested in accordance with 
the appropriate sections of S6.2, release when a force of not more than 
71 N is applied, provided, however, that the conformance of any child 
restraint to this requirement is determined using the largest of the 
test dummies specified in S7 for use in testing that restraint when the 
restraint is facing forward, rearward, and/or laterally;
    (c) Meet the requirements of S4.3(d)(2) of FMVSS No. 209 (Sec. 
571.209), except that the minimum surface area for child restraint 
buckles designed for push button application shall be 0.6 square inch;
    (d) Meet the requirements of S4.3(g) of FMVSS No. 209 (Sec. 
571.209) when tested in accordance with S5.2(g) of FMVSS No. 209; and
    (e) Not release during the testing specified in S6.1.
    S5.5 Labeling. Any labels or written instructions provided in 
addition to those required by this section shall not obscure or confuse 
the meaning of the required information or be otherwise misleading to 
the consumer. Any labels or written instructions other than in the 
English language shall be an accurate translation of English labels or 
written instructions.
    S5.5.1 Each add-on child restraint system shall be permanently 
labeled with the information specified in S5.5.2 (a) through (m).
    S5.5.2 The information specified in paragraphs (a) through (m) of 
this section shall be stated in the English language and lettered in 
letters and numbers that are not smaller than 10 point type. Unless 
otherwise specified, the information shall be labeled on a white 
background with black text. Unless written in all capitals, the 
information shall be stated in sentence capitalization.
    (a) The model name or number of the system.
    (b) The manufacturer's name. A distributor's name may be used 
instead if the distributor assumes responsibility for all duties and 
liabilities imposed on the manufacturer with respect to the system by 
the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act, as amended.
    (c) The statement: ``Manufactured in ----,'' inserting the month and 
year of manufacture.
    (d) The place of manufacture (city and State, or foreign country). 
However, if the manufacturer uses the name of the distributor, then it 
shall state the location (city and State, or foreign country) of the 
principal offices of the distributor.
    (e) The statement: ``This child restraint system conforms to all 
applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards.''
    (f) One of the following statements, as appropriate, inserting the 
manufacturer's recommendations for the maximum mass of children who can 
safely occupy the system, except that booster seats shall not be 
recommended for children whose masses are less than 13.6 kg. For seats 
that can only be used as belt-positioning seats, manufacturers must 
include the maximum and minimum recommended height, but may delete the 
reference to weight:
    (1) Use only with children who weigh ---- pounds (---- kg) or less 
and whose height is (insert values in English and metric units; use of 
word ``mass'' in label is optional) or less; or
    (2) Use only with children who weigh between ---- and ---- pounds 
(insert appropriate English and metric values; use of word ``mass'' is 
optional) and whose height is (insert appropriate values in English and 
metric units) or less and who are capable of sitting upright alone; or

[[Page 923]]

    (3) Use only with children who weigh between ---- and ---- pounds 
(insert appropriate English and metric values; use of word ``mass'' is 
optional) and whose height is (insert appropriate values in English and 
metric units) or less.
    (4) Use only with children who weigh between ---- and ---- pounds 
(insert appropriate English and metric values; use of word ``mass'' is 
optional) and whose height is between ---- and ---- (insert appropriate 
values in English and metric units).
    (g) The statements specified in paragraphs (1) and (2):
    (1) A heading as specified in S5.5.2(k)(3)(i), with the statement 
``WARNING! DEATH or SERIOUS INJURY can occur,'' capitalized as written 
and followed by bulleted statements in the following order:
    (i) As appropriate, the statements required by the following 
sections will be bulleted and placed after the statement required by 
5.5.2(g)(1) in the following order: 5.5.2(k)(1) or 5.5.2(k)(2), 
5.5.2(f), 5.5.2(h), 5.5.2(j), and 5.5.2(i).
    (ii) Secure this child restraint with the vehicle's child restraint 
anchorage system if available or with a vehicle belt. [For car beds, 
harnesses, and belt positioning boosters, the first part of the 
statement regarding attachment by the child restraint anchorage system 
is optional.]
    (iii) Follow all instructions on this child restraint and in the 
written instructions located (insert storage location on the restraint 
for the manufacturer's installation instruction booklet or sheet).
    (iv) Register your child restraint with the manufacturer.
    (2) At the manufacturer's option, the phrase ``DEATH or SERIOUS 
INJURY can occur'' in the heading can be on either a white or yellow 
background.
    (3) More than one label may be used for the required bulleted 
statements. Multiple labels shall be placed one above the other unless 
that arrangement is precluded by insufficient space or shape of the 
child restraint. In that case, multiple labels shall be placed side by 
side. When using multiple labels, the mandated warnings must be in the 
correct order when read from top to bottom. If the labels are side-by-
side, then the mandated warnings must appear top to bottom of the 
leftmost label, then top to bottom of the next label to its right, and 
so on. There shall be no intervening labels and the required heading 
shall only appear on the first label in the sequence.
    (h) In the case of each child restraint system that has belts 
designed to restrain children using them and which do not adjust 
automatically to fit the child: Snugly adjust the belts provided with 
this child restraint around your child.
    (i)(1) For a booster seat that is recommended for use with either a 
vehicle's Type I or Type II seat belt assembly, one of the following 
statements, as appropriate:
    (i) Use only the vehicle's lap and shoulder belt system when 
restraining the child in this booster seat; or,
    (ii) Use only the vehicle's lap belt system, or the lap belt part of 
a lap/shoulder belt system with the shoulder belt placed behind the 
child, when restraining the child in this seat.
    (2)(i) Except as provided in paragraph (i)(2)(ii) of this section, 
for a booster seat which is recommended for use with both a vehicle's 
Type I and Type II seat belt assemblies, the following statement: Use 
only the vehicle's lap belt system, or the lap belt part of a lap/
shoulder belt system with the shoulder belt placed behind the child, 
when restraining the child with the (insert description of the system 
element provided to restrain forward movement of the child's torso when 
used with a lap belt (e.g., shield)), and only the vehicle's lap and 
shoulder belt system when using the booster without the (insert above 
description).
    (ii) A booster seat which is recommended for use with both a 
vehicle's Type I and Type II seat belt assemblies is not subject to 
S5.5.2(i)(2)(i) if, when the booster is used with the shield or similar 
component, the booster will cause the shoulder belt to be located in a 
position other than in front of the child when the booster is installed. 
However, such a booster shall be labeled with a warning to use the 
booster with the vehicle's lap and shoulder belt system when using the 
booster without a shield.
    (j) In the case of each child restraint system equipped with a top 
anchorage

[[Page 924]]

strap, the statement: Secure the top anchorage strap provided with this 
child restraint.
    (k) (1) In the case of each rear-facing child restraint system that 
is designed for infants only, the statement: Use only in a rear-facing 
position when using it in the vehicle.
    (2) In the case of a child restraint system that is designed to be 
used rearward-facing for infants and forward-facing for older children, 
the statement: Use only in a rear-facing position when using it with an 
infant weighing less than (insert a recommended weight that is not less 
than 20 pounds).
    (3) Except as provided in (k)(4) of this section, each child 
restraint system that can be used in a rear-facing position shall have a 
label that conforms in content to Figure 10 and to the requirements of 
S5.5.2(k)(3)(i) through S5.5.2(k)(3)(iii) of this standard permanently 
affixed to the outer surface of the cushion or padding in or adjacent to 
the area where a child's head would rest, so that the label is plainly 
visible and easily readable.
    (i) The heading area shall be yellow with the word ``warning'' and 
the alert symbol in black.
    (ii) The message area shall be white with black text. The message 
area shall be no less than 30 square cm.
    (iii) The pictogram shall be black with a red circle and slash on a 
white background. The pictogram shall be no less than 30 mm in diameter.
    (4) If a child restraint system is equipped with a device that 
deactivates the passenger-side air bag in a vehicle when and only when 
the child restraint is installed in the vehicle and provides a signal, 
for at least 60 seconds after deactivation, that the air bag is 
deactivated, the label specified in Figure 10 may include the phrase 
``unless air bag is off'' after ``on front seat with air bag.''
    (l) An installation diagram showing the child restraint system 
installed in:
    (1) A seating position equipped with a continuous-loop lap/shoulder 
belt;
    (2) A seating position equipped with only a lap belt, as specified 
in the manufacturer's instructions; and
    (3) A seating position equipped with a child restraint anchorage 
system.
    (m) One of the following statements, inserting an address and a U.S. 
telephone number. If a manufacturer opts to provide a Web site on the 
registration card as permitted in Figure 9a of this section, the 
manufacturer must include the statement in part (ii):
    (i) ``Child restraints could be recalled for safety reasons. You 
must register this restraint to be reached in a recall. Send your name, 
address, e-mail address if available (preceding four words are optional) 
and the restraint's model number and manufacturing date to (insert 
address) or call (insert a U.S. telephone number). For recall 
information, call the U.S. Government's Vehicle Safety Hotline at 1-888-
327-4236 (TTY: 1-800-424-9153), or go to http://www.NHTSA.gov.''
    (ii) ``Child restraints could be recalled for safety reasons. You 
must register this restraint to be reached in a recall. Send your name, 
address, e-mail address if available [preceding four words are 
optional], and the restraint's model number and manufacturing date to 
(insert address) or call (insert a U.S. telephone number) or register 
online at (insert Web site for electronic registration form). For recall 
information, call the U.S. Government's Vehicle Safety Hotline at 1-888-
327-4236 (TTY: 1-800-424-9153), or go to http://www.NHTSA.gov.''
    (n) Child restraint systems, other than belt-positioning seats, 
harnesses and backless child restraint systems, may be certified as 
complying with the provisions of S8. Child restraints that are so 
certified shall be labeled with the statement ``This Restraint is 
Certified for Use in Motor Vehicles and Aircraft.'' Belt-positioning 
seats, harnesses and backless child restraint systems shall be labeled 
with the statement ``This Restraint is Not Certified for Use in 
Aircraft.'' The statement required by this paragraph shall be in red 
lettering and shall be placed after the certification statement required 
by S5.5.2(e).
    S5.5.3 The information specified in S5.5.2(f) through (l) shall be 
located on the add-on child restraint system so that it is visible when 
the system is installed as specified in S5.6.1, except that for child 
restraints with a detachable base, the installation diagrams

[[Page 925]]

specified in S5.5.2(l) are required to be visible only when the base 
alone is installed.
    S5.5.4 (a) Each built-in child restraint system other than a 
factory-installed built-in restraint shall be permanently labeled with 
the information specified in S5.5.5 (a) through (l). The information 
specified in S5.5.5(a) through (j) and in S5.5.5(l) shall be visible 
when the system is activated for use.
    (b) Each factory-installed built-in child restraint shall be 
permanently labeled with the information specified in S5.5.5(f) through 
(j) and S5.5.5(l), so that the information is visible when the restraint 
is activated for use. The information shall also be included in the 
vehicle owner's manual.
    S5.5.5 The information specified in paragraphs (a) through (l) of 
this section that is required by S5.5.4 shall be in English and lettered 
in letters and numbers using a not smaller than 10 point type. Unless 
specified otherwise, the information shall be labeled on a white 
background with black text. Unless written in all capitals, the 
information shall be stated in sentence capitalization.
    (a) The model name or number of the system.
    (b) The manufacturer's name. A distributor's or dealer's name may be 
used instead if the distributor or dealer assumes responsibility for all 
duties and liabilities imposed on the manufacturer with respect to the 
system by the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act, as amended.
    (c) The statement: ``Manufactured in ------,'' inserting the month 
and year of manufacture.
    (d) The place of manufacture (city and State, or foreign country). 
However, if the manufacturer uses the name of the distributor or dealer, 
then it shall state the location (city and State, or foreign country) of 
the principal offices of the distributor or dealer.
    (e) The statement: ``This child restraint system conforms to all 
applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards.''
    (f) One of the following statements, inserting the manufacturer's 
recommendations for the maximum mass of children who can safely occupy 
the system, except that booster seats shall not be recommended for 
children whose masses are less than 13.6 kg. For seats that can only be 
used as belt-positioning seats, manufacturers must include the maximum 
and minimum recommended height, but may delete the reference to weight:
    (1) Use only with children who weigh ---- pounds (---- kg) or less 
and whose height is (insert values in English and metric units; use of 
word ``mass'' in label is optional) or less; or
    (2) Use only with children who weigh between ---- and ---- pounds 
(---- and ---- kg) and whose height is (insert appropriate values in 
English and metric units; use of word ``mass'' in label is optional) or 
less and who are capable of sitting upright alone; or
    (3) Use only with children who weigh between ---- and ---- pounds ( 
---- and ---- kg) and whose height is (insert appropriate values in 
English and metric units; use of word ``mass'' in label is optional) or 
less.
    (4) Use only with children who weigh between ---- and ---- pounds 
(insert appropriate English and metric values; use of word ``mass'' is 
optional) and whose height is between ---- and ---- (insert appropriate 
values in English and metric units).
    (g) The heading and statement specified in paragraph (1), and if 
appropriate, the statements in paragraph (2) and (3). If used, the 
statements in paragraphs (2) and (3) shall be bulleted and precede the 
bulleted statement required by paragraph (1) after the heading.
    (1) A heading as specified in S5.5.2(k)(3)(i), with the statement 
``WARNING! DEATH or SERIOUS INJURY can occur,'' capitalized as written 
and followed by the bulleted statement: Follow all instructions on the 
child restraint and in the vehicle's owner's manual. At the 
manufacturer's option, the phrase ``DEATH or SERIOUS INJURY can occur'' 
in the heading can be on either a white or yellow background.
    (2) In the case of each built-in child restraint system which is not 
intended for use in motor vehicles in certain adjustment positions or 
under certain

[[Page 926]]

circumstances, an appropriate statement of the manufacturers 
restrictions regarding those positions or circumstances.
    (3) As appropriate, the statements required by the following 
sections will be bulleted and placed after the statement required by 
5.5.5(g)(1) in the following order: 5.5.5(g)(2), 5.5.5(f), S5.5.5(h) and 
S5.5.5(i).
    (h) In the case of each built-in child restraint system that has 
belts designed to restrain children using them and which do not adjust 
automatically to fit the child: Snugly adjust the belts provided with 
this child restraint around your child.
    (i) In the case of each built-in child restraint which can be used 
in a rear-facing position, the following statement: Place an infant in a 
rear-facing position in this child restraint.
    (j) A diagram or diagrams showing the fully activated child 
restraint system in infant and/or child configurations.
    (k) One of the following statements, inserting an address and a U.S. 
telephone number. If a manufacturer opts to provide a Web site on the 
registration card as permitted in Figure 9a of this section, the 
manufacturer must include the statement in part (ii):
    (i) ``Child restraints could be recalled for safety reasons. You 
must register this restraint to be reached in a recall. Send your name, 
address, e-mail address if available (preceding four words are 
optional), and the restraint's model number and manufacturing date to 
(insert address) or call (insert a U.S. telephone number). For recall 
information, call the U.S. Government's Vehicle Safety Hotline at 1-888-
327-4236 (TTY: 1-800-424-9153), or go to http://www.NHTSA.gov.''
    (ii) ``Child restraints could be recalled for safety reasons. You 
must register this restraint to be reached in a recall. Send your name, 
address, e-mail address if available (preceding four words are 
optional), and the restraint's model number and manufacturing date to 
(insert address) or call (insert telephone number) or register online at 
(insert Web site for electronic registration form). For recall 
information, call the U.S. Government's Vehicle Safety Hotline at 1-888-
327-4236 (TTY: 1-800-424-9153), or go to http://www.NHTSA.gov.''
    (l) In the case of a built-in belt-positioning seat that uses either 
the vehicle's Type I or Type II belt systems or both, a statement 
describing the manufacturer's recommendations for the maximum height and 
weight of children who can safely occupy the system and how the booster 
should be used (e.g., with or without shield) with the different vehicle 
belt systems.
    S5.6 Printed Instructions for Proper Use. Any labels or written 
instructions provided in addition to those required by this section 
shall not obscure or confuse the meaning of the required information or 
be otherwise misleading to the consumer. Any labels or written 
instructions other than in the English language shall be an accurate 
translation of English labels or written instructions. Unless written in 
all capitals, the information required by S5.6.1 through S5.6.3 shall be 
stated in sentence capitalization.
    S5.6.1 Add-on child restraint systems. Each add-on child restraint 
system shall be accompanied by printed installation instructions in 
English that provide a step-by-step procedure, including diagrams, for 
installing the system in motor vehicles, securing the system in the 
vehicles, positioning a child in the system, and adjusting the system to 
fit the child. For each child restraint system that has components for 
attaching to a tether anchorage or a child restraint anchorage system, 
the installation instructions shall include a step-by-step procedure, 
including diagrams, for properly attaching to that anchorage or system.
    S5.6.1.1 In a vehicle with rear designated seating positions, the 
instructions shall alert vehicle owners that, according to accident 
statistics, children are safer when properly restrained in the rear 
seating positions than in the front seating positions.
    S5.6.1.2 The instructions shall specify in general terms the types 
of vehicles, the types of seating positions, and the types of vehicle 
safety belts with which the add-on child restraint system can or cannot 
be used.
    S5.6.1.3 The instructions shall explain the primary consequences of 
not following the warnings required to be

[[Page 927]]

labeled on the child restraint system in accordance with S5.5.2 (g) 
through (k).
    S5.6.1.4 The instructions for each car bed shall explain that the 
car bed should position in such a way that the child's head is near the 
center of the vehicle.
    S5.6.1.5 The instructions shall state that add-on child restraint 
systems should be securely belted to the vehicle, even when they are not 
occupied, since in a crash an unsecured child restraint system may 
injure other occupants.
    S5.6.1.6 Each add-on child restraint system shall have a location on 
the restraint for storing the manufacturer's instructions.
    S5.6.1.7 One of the following statements, inserting an address and a 
U.S. telephone number. If a manufacturer opts to provide a Web site on 
the registration card as permitted in Figure 9a of this section, the 
manufacturer must include the statement in part (ii):
    (i) ``Child restraints could be recalled for safety reasons. You 
must register this restraint to be reached in a recall. Send your name, 
address, e-mail address if available (preceding four words are 
optional), and the restraint's model number and manufacturing date to 
(insert address) or call (insert a U.S. telephone number). For recall 
information, call the U.S. Government's Vehicle Safety Hotline at 1-888-
327-4236 (TTY: 1-800-424-9153), or go to http://www.NHTSA.gov.''
    (ii) ``Child restraints could be recalled for safety reasons. You 
must register this restraint to be reached in a recall. Send your name, 
address, e-mail address if available (preceding four words are 
optional), and the restraint's model number and manufacturing date to 
(insert address) or call (insert telephone number) or register online at 
(insert Web site for electronic registration form). For recall 
information, call the U.S. Government's Vehicle Safety Hotline at 1-888-
327-4236 (TTY: 1-800-424-9153), or go to http://www.NHTSA.gov.''
    S5.6.1.8 In the case of each child restraint system that can be used 
in a position so that it is facing the rear of the vehicle, the 
instructions shall provide a warning against using rear-facing 
restraints at seating positions equipped with air bags, and shall 
explain the reasons for, and consequences of not following the warning. 
The instructions shall also include a statement that owners of vehicles 
with front passenger side air bags should refer to their vehicle owner's 
manual for child restraint installation instructions.
    S5.6.1.9 In the case of each rear-facing child restraint system that 
has a means for repositioning the seating surface of the system that 
allows the system's occupant to move from a reclined position to an 
upright position during testing, the instructions shall include a 
warning against impeding the ability of the restraint to change 
adjustment position.
    S5.6.1.10(a) For instructions for a booster seat that is recommended 
for use with either a vehicle's Type I or Type II seat belt assembly, 
one of the following statements, as appropriate, and the reasons for the 
statement:
    (1) Warning! Use only the vehicle's lap and shoulder belt system 
when restraining the child in this booster seat; or,
    (2) Warning! Use only the vehicle's lap belt system, or the lap belt 
part of a lap/shoulder belt system with the shoulder belt placed behind 
the child, when restraining the child in this seat.
    (b)(1) Except as provided in S5.6.1.10(b)(2), the instructions for a 
booster seat that is recommended for use with both a vehicle's Type I 
and Type II seat belt assemblies shall include the following statement 
and the reasons therefor: Warning! Use only the vehicle's lap belt 
system, or the lap belt part of a lap/shoulder belt system with the 
shoulder belt placed behind the child, when restraining the child with 
the (insert description of the system element provided to restrain 
forward movement of the child's torso when used with a lap belt (e.g., 
shield)), and only the vehicle's lap and shoulder belt system when using 
this booster without the (insert above description).
    (2) A booster seat which is recommended for use with both a 
vehicle's Type I and Type II seat belt assemblies is not subject to 
S5.6.1.10(b)(1) if, when the booster is used with the shield or similar 
component, the booster will cause the shoulder belt to be located in

[[Page 928]]

a position other than in front of the child when the booster is 
installed. However, the instructions for such a booster shall include a 
warning to use the booster with the vehicle's lap and shoulder belt 
system when using the booster without a shield.
    (c) The instructions for belt-positioning seats shall include the 
statement, ``This restraint is not certified for aircraft use,'' and the 
reasons for this statement.
    S5.6.1.11 For harnesses that are manufactured for use on school bus 
seats, the instructions must include the following statements:
    ``WARNING! This restraint must only be used on school bus seats. 
Entire seat directly behind must be unoccupied or have restrained 
occupants.'' The labeling requirement refers to a restrained occupant 
as: an occupant restrained by any user appropriate vehicle restraint or 
child restraint system (e.g. lap belt, lap and shoulder belt, booster, 
child seat, harness . . .).
    S5.6.2 Built-in child restraint systems. (a) Each built-in child 
restraint system shall be accompanied by printed instructions in English 
that provide a step-by-step procedure, including diagrams, for 
activating the restraint system, positioning a child in the system, 
adjusting the restraint and, if provided, the restraint harness to fit 
the child. The instructions for each built-in car bed shall explain that 
the child should be positioned in the bed in such a way that the child's 
head is near the center of the vehicle.
    (b) Each motor vehicle equipped with a factory-installed built-in 
child restraint shall have the information specified in paragraph (a) of 
this section included in its vehicle owner's manual.
    S5.6.2.1 The instructions shall explain the primary consequences of 
not following the manufacturer's warnings for proper use of the child 
restraint system in accordance with S5.5.5 (f) through (i).
    S5.6.2.2 The instructions for each built-in child restraint system 
other than a factory-installed restraint, shall include one of the 
following statements, inserting an address and a U.S. telephone number. 
If a manufacturer opts to provide a Web site on the registration card as 
permitted in Figure 9a of this section, the manufacturer must include 
the statement in part (ii):
    (i) ``Child restraints could be recalled for safety reasons. You 
must register this restraint to be reached in a recall. Send your name, 
address, e-mail address if available (preceding four words are 
optional), and the restraint's model number and manufacturing date to 
(insert address) or call (insert a U.S. telephone number). For recall 
information, call the U.S. Government's Vehicle Safety Hotline at 1-888-
327-4236 (TTY: 1-800-424-9153), or go to http://www.NHTSA.gov.''
    (ii) ``Child restraints could be recalled for safety reasons. You 
must register this restraint to be reached in a recall. Send your name, 
address, e-mail address if available (preceding four words are 
optional), and the restraint's model number and manufacturing date to 
(insert address) or call (insert U.S. telephone number) or register 
online at (insert Web site for electronic registration form). For recall 
information, call the U.S. Government's Vehicle Safety Hotline at 1-888-
327-4236 (TTY: 1-800-424-9153), or go to http://www.NHTSA.gov.''
    S5.6.2.3. Each built-in child restraint system other than a factory-
installed built-in restraint, shall have a location on the restraint for 
storing the instructions.
    S5.6.2.4 Each built-in child restraint system, other than a system 
that has been installed in a vehicle or a factory-installed built-in 
system that is designed for a specific vehicle model and seating 
position, shall be accompanied by instructions in English that provide a 
step-by-step procedure for installing the system in a motor vehicle. The 
instructions shall specify the types of vehicles and the seating 
positions into which the restraint can or cannot be installed. The 
instructions for each car bed shall explain that the bed should be 
installed so that the child's head will be near the center of the 
vehicle.
    S5.6.2.5 In the case of a built-in belt-positioning seat that uses 
either the vehicle's Type I or Type II belt systems or both, the 
instructions shall include a statement describing the manufacturer's 
recommendations for the maximum height and weight of children

[[Page 929]]

who can safely occupy the system and how the booster must be used with 
the vehicle belt systems appropriate for the booster seat. The 
instructions shall explain the consequences of not following the 
directions. The instructions shall specify that, if the booster seat is 
recommended for use with only the lap-belt part of a Type II assembly, 
the shoulder belt portion of the assembly must be placed behind the 
child.
    S5.6.3 Add-on and built-in child restraint systems. In the case of 
each child restraint system that has belts designed to restrain children 
using them and which do not adjust automatically to fit the child, the 
printed instructions shall include the following statement: A snug strap 
should not allow any slack. It lies in a relatively straight line 
without sagging. It does not press on the child's flesh or push the 
child's body into an unnatural position.
    S5.7 Flammability. Each material used in a child restraint system 
shall conform to the requirements of S4 of FMVSS No. 302 (571.302). In 
the case of a built-in child restraint system, the requirements of S4 of 
FMVSS No. 302 shall be met in both the ``in-use'' and ``stowed'' 
positions.
    S5.8 Information requirements--attached registration form and 
electronic registration form.
    S5.8.1 Attached registration form.
    (a) Each child restraint system, except a factory-installed built-in 
restraint system, shall have a registration form attached to any surface 
of the restraint that contacts the dummy when the dummy is positioned in 
the system in accordance with S6.1.2 of Standard 213.
    (b) Each attached form shall:
    (1) Consist of a postcard that is attached at a perforation to an 
informational card;
    (2) Conform in size, content and format to Figures 9a and 9b of this 
section; and
    (3) Have a thickness of at least 0.007 inches and not more than 
0.0095 inches.
    (c) Each postcard shall provide the model name or number and date of 
manufacture (month, year) of the child restraint system to which the 
form is attached, shall contain space for the purchaser to record his or 
her name, mailing address, and at the manufacturer's option, e-mail 
address, shall be addressed to the manufacturer, and shall be postage 
paid. No other information shall appear on the postcard, except 
identifying information that distinguishes a particular child restraint 
system from other systems of that model name or number may be preprinted 
in the shaded area of the postcard, as shown in figure 9a.
    (d) Manufacturers may voluntarily provide a web address on the 
informational card enabling owners to register child restraints online, 
provided that the Web address is a direct link to the electronic 
registration form meeting the requirements of S5.8.2 of this section.
    S5.8.2 Electronic registration form.
    (a) Each electronic registration form must meet the requirements of 
this S5.8.2. Each form shall:
    (1) Contain the following statements at the top of the form:
    (i) ``FOR YOUR CHILD'S CONTINUED SAFETY'' (Displayed in bold type 
face, caps, and minimum 12 point type.)
    (ii) ``Although child restraint systems undergo testing and 
evaluation, it is possible that a child restraint could be recalled.'' 
(Displayed in bold typeface, caps and lower case, and minimum 12 point 
type.)
    (iii) ``In case of a recall, we can reach you only if we have your 
name and address, so please fill in the registration form to be on our 
recall list.'' (Displayed in bold typeface, caps and lower case, and 
minimum 12 point type.)
    (iv) ``In order to properly register your child restraint system, 
you will need to provide the model number, serial number and date of 
manufacture. This information is printed on the registration card and 
can also be found on a white label located on the back of the child 
restraint system.'' (Displayed in bold typeface, caps and lower case, 
and minimum 12 point type.)
    (v) ``This registration is only applicable to child restraint 
systems purchased in the United States.'' (Displayed in bold typeface, 
caps and lower case, and minimum 12 point type.)
    (2) Provide as required registration fields, space for the purchaser 
to record the model name or number and date of manufacture (month, year) 
of the child

[[Page 930]]

restraint system, and space for the purchaser to record his or her name 
and mailing address. At the manufacturer's option, a space is provided 
for the purchaser to record his or her e-mail address.
    (b) No other information shall appear on the electronic registration 
form, except for information identifying the manufacturer or a link to 
the manufacturer's home page, a field to confirm submission, and a 
prompt to indicate any incomplete or invalid fields prior to submission. 
Accessing the web page that contains the electronic registration form 
shall not cause additional screens or electronic banners to appear.
    (c) The electronic registration form shall be accessed directly by 
the web address that the manufacturer printed on the attached 
registration form. The form must appear on screen when the consumer has 
inputted the web address provided by the manufacturer, without any 
further keystrokes on the keyboard or clicks of the mouse.
    S5.9 Attachment to child restraint anchorage system.
    (a) Each add-on child restraint anchorage system manufactured on or 
after September 1, 2002, other than a car bed, harness and belt-
positioning seat, shall have components permanently attached to the 
system that enable the restraint to be securely fastened to the lower 
anchorages of the child restraint anchorage system specified in Standard 
No. 225 (Sec. 571.213) and depicted in Drawing Package SAS-100-1000 
with Addendum A: Seat Base Weldment (consisting of drawings and a bill 
of materials), dated October 23, 1998, or in Drawing Package, ``NHTSA 
Standard Seat Assembly; FMVSS No. 213, No. NHTSA-213-2003,'' (consisting 
of drawings and a bill of materials) dated June 3, 2003 (incorporated by 
reference; see Sec. 571.5). The components must be attached by use of a 
tool, such as a screwdriver. In the case of rear-facing child restraints 
with detachable bases, only the base is required to have the components.
    (b) In the case of each child restraint system that is manufactured 
on or after September 1, 1999 and that has components for attaching the 
system to a tether anchorage, those components shall include a tether 
hook that conforms to the configuration and geometry specified in Figure 
11 of this standard.
    (c) In the case of each child restraint system that is manufactured 
on or after September 1, 1999 and that has components, including belt 
webbing, for attaching the system to a tether anchorage or to a child 
restraint anchorage system, the belt webbing shall be adjustable so that 
the child restraint can be tightly attached to the vehicle.
    (d) Beginning September 1, 1999, each child restraint system with 
components that enable the restraint to be securely fastened to the 
lower anchorages of a child restraint anchorage system, other than a 
system with hooks for attaching to the lower anchorages, shall provide 
either an indication when each attachment to the lower anchorages 
becomes fully latched or attached, or a visual indication that all 
attachments to the lower anchorages are fully latched or attached. 
Visual indications shall be detectable under normal daylight lighting 
conditions.
    S6. Test conditions and procedures.
    S6.1 Dynamic systems test for child restraint systems.
    The test conditions described in S6.1.1 apply to the dynamic systems 
test. The test procedure for the dynamic systems test is specified in 
S6.1.2. The test dummy specified in S7 is placed in the test specimen 
(child restraint), clothed as described in S9 and positioned according 
to S10.
    S6.1.1 Test conditions.
    (a) Test devices.
    (1) Add-on child restraints.
    (i) The test device for add-on restraint systems manufactured before 
August 1, 2005 is a standard seat assembly consisting of a simulated 
vehicle bench seat, with three seating positions, which is described in 
Drawing Package SAS-100-1000 with Addendum A: Seat Base Weldment 
(consisting of drawings and a bill of materials), dated October 23, 1998 
(incorporated by reference in Sec. 571.5). The assembly is mounted on a 
dynamic test platform so that the center SORL of the seat is parallel to 
the direction of the test platform travel and so that movement

[[Page 931]]

between the base of the assembly and the platform is prevented.
    (ii) The test device for add-on restraint systems manufactured on or 
after August 1, 2005 is a standard seat assembly consisting of a 
simulated vehicle bench seat, with three seating positions, which is 
depicted in Drawing Package, ``NHTSA Standard Seat Assembly; FMVSS No. 
213, No. NHTSA-213-2003,'' (consisting of drawings and a bill of 
materials) dated June 3, 2003 (incorporated by reference; see Sec. 
571.5). The assembly is mounted on a dynamic test platform so that the 
center SORL of the seat is parallel to the direction of the test 
platform travel and so that movement between the base of the assembly 
and the platform is prevented.
    (2) The test device for built-in child restraint systems is either 
the specific vehicle shell or the specific vehicle.
    (i) Specific vehicle shell.
    (A) The specific vehicle shell, if selected for testing, is mounted 
on a dynamic test platform so that the longitudinal center line of the 
shell is parallel to the direction of the test platform travel and so 
that movement between the base of the shell and the platform is 
prevented. Adjustable seats are in the adjustment position midway 
between the forwardmost and rearmost positions, and if separately 
adjustable in a vertical direction, are at the lowest position. If an 
adjustment position does not exist midway between the forwardmost and 
rearmost position, the closest adjustment position to the rear of the 
midpoint is used. Adjustable seat backs are in the manufacturer's 
nominal design riding position. If such a position is not specified, the 
seat back is positioned so that the longitudinal center line of the 
child test dummy's neck is vertical, and if an instrumented test dummy 
is used, the accelerometer surfaces in the dummy's head and thorax, as 
positioned in the vehicle, are horizontal. If the vehicle seat is 
equipped with adjustable head restraints, each is adjusted to its 
highest adjustment position.
    (B) The platform is instrumented with an accelerometer and data 
processing system having a frequency response of 60 Hz channel class as 
specified in Society of Automotive Engineers Recommended Practice J211 
JUN80 ``Instrumentation for Impact Tests.'' The accelerometer sensitive 
axis is parallel to the direction of test platform travel.
    (ii) Specific vehicle. For built-in child restraint systems, an 
alternate test device is the specific vehicle into which the built-in 
system is fabricated. The following test conditions apply to this 
alternate test device.
    (A) The vehicle is loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight plus its 
rated cargo and luggage capacity weight, secured in the luggage area, 
plus the appropriate child test dummy and, at the vehicle manufacturer's 
option, an anthropomorphic test dummy which conforms to the requirements 
of subpart B or subpart E of part 572 of this title for a 50th 
percentile adult male dummy placed in the front outboard seating 
position. If the built-in child restraint system is installed at one of 
the seating positions otherwise requiring the placement of a part 572 
test dummy, then in the frontal barrier crash specified in (c), the 
appropriate child test dummy shall be substituted for the part 572 adult 
dummy, but only at that seating position. The fuel tank is filled to any 
level from 90 to 95 percent of capacity.
    (B) Adjustable seats are in the adjustment position midway between 
the forward-most and rearmost positions, and if separately adjustable in 
a vehicle direction, are at the lowest position. If an adjustment 
position does not exist midway between the forward-most and rearmost 
positions, the closest adjustment position to the rear of the midpoint 
is used.
    (C) Adjustable seat backs are in the manufacturer's nominal design 
riding position. If a nominal position is not specified, the seat back 
is positioned so that the longitudinal center line of the child test 
dummy's neck is vertical, and if an anthropomorphic test dummy is used, 
the accelerometer surfaces in the test dummy's head and thorax, as 
positioned in the vehicle, are horizontal. If the vehicle is equipped 
with adjustable head restraints, each is adjusted to its highest 
adjustment position.

[[Page 932]]

    (D) Movable vehicle windows and vents are, at the manufacturer's 
option, placed in the fully closed position.
    (E) Convertibles and open-body type vehicles have the top, if any, 
in place in the closed passenger compartment configuration.
    (F) Doors are fully closed and latched but not locked.
    (G) All instrumentation and data reduction is in conformance with 
SAE J211 JUN80.
    (b) The tests are frontal barrier impact simulations of the test 
platform or frontal barrier crashes of the specific vehicles as 
specified in S5.1 of Sec. 571.208 and for:
    (1) Test Configuration I, are at a velocity change of 48 km/h with 
the acceleration of the test platform entirely within the curve shown in 
Figure 2 (for child restraints manufactured before August 1, 2005) or in 
Figure 2A (for child restraints manufactured on or after August 1, 
2005), or for the specific vehicle test with the deceleration produced 
in a 48 km/h frontal barrier crash.
    (2) Test Configuration II, are set at a velocity change of 32 km/h 
with the acceleration of the test platform entirely within the curve 
shown in Figure 3, or for the specific vehicle test, with the 
deceleration produced in a 32 km/h frontal barrier crash.
    (c) As illustrated in Figures 1A and 1B of this standard, attached 
to the seat belt anchorage points provided on the standard seat assembly 
are Type 1 seat belt assemblies in the case of add-on child restraint 
systems other than belt-positioning seats, or Type 2 seat belt 
assemblies in the case of belt-positioning seats. These seat belt 
assemblies meet the requirements of Standard No. 209 (Sec. 571.209) and 
have webbing with a width of not more than 2 inches, and are attached to 
the anchorage points without the use of retractors or reels of any kind. 
As illustrated in Figures 1A'' and 1B'' of this standard, attached to 
the standard seat assembly is a child restraint anchorage system 
conforming to the specifications of Standard No. 225 (Sec. 571.225), in 
the case of add-on child restraint systems other than belt-positioning 
booster seats.
    (d)(1) When using the test dummies specified in 49 CFR Part 572, 
subparts C, I, J, or K, performance tests under S6.1 are conducted at 
any ambient temperature from 19[deg] C to 26[deg] C and at any relative 
humidity from 10 percent to 70 percent.
    (2) When using the test dummies specified in 49 CFR Part 572, 
subparts N, P or R, performance tests under S6.1 are conducted at any 
ambient temperature from 20.6[deg] C to 22.2[deg] C and at any relative 
humidity from 10 percent to 70 percent.
    (e) In the case of add-on child restraint systems, the restraint 
shall meet the requirements of S5 at each of its seat back angle 
adjustment positions and restraint belt routing positions, when the 
restraint is oriented in the direction recommended by the manufacturer 
(e.g., forward, rearward or laterally) pursuant to S5.6, and tested with 
the test dummy specified in S7.
    S6.1.2 Dynamic test procedure.
    (a) Activate the built-in child restraint or attach the add-on child 
restraint to the seat assembly as described below:
    (1) Test configuration I.
    (i) Child restraints other than belt-positioning seats. Attach the 
child restraint in any of the following manners specified in 
S6.1.2(a)(1)(i)(A) through (D), unless otherwise specified in this 
standard.
    (A) Install the child restraint system at the center seating 
position of the standard seat assembly, in accordance with the 
manufacturer's instructions provided with the system pursuant to S5.6.1, 
except that the standard lap belt is used and, if provided, a tether 
strap may be used. For harnesses that bear the label shown in Figure 12 
and that meet S5.3.1(b)(1) through S5.3.1(b)(3), attach the harness in 
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions provided with the system 
pursuant to S5.6.1, i.e., the seat back mount is used.
    (B) Except for a child harness, a backless child restraint system 
with a tether strap, and a restraint designed for use by physically 
handicapped children, install the child restraint system at the center 
seating position of the standard seat assembly as in S6.1.2(a)(1)(i)(A), 
except that no tether

[[Page 933]]

strap (or any other supplemental device) is used.
    (C) Install the child restraint system using the child restraint 
anchorage system at the center seating position of the standard seat 
assembly in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions provided 
with the system pursuant to S5.6.1. The tether strap, if one is 
provided, is attached to the tether anchorage.
    (D) Install the child restraint system using only the lower 
anchorages of the child restraint anchorage system as in 
S6.1.2(a)(1)(i)(C). No tether strap (or any other supplemental device) 
is used.
    (ii) Belt-positioning seats. A belt-positioning seat is attached to 
either outboard seating position of the standard seat assembly in 
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions provided with the system 
pursuant to S5.6.1 using only the standard vehicle lap and shoulder belt 
and no tether (or any other supplemental device).
    (iii) In the case of each built-in child restraint system, activate 
the restraint in the specific vehicle shell or the specific vehicle, in 
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions provided in accordance 
with S5.6.2.
    (2) Test configuration II. (i) In the case of each add-on child 
restraint system which is equipped with a fixed or movable surface 
described in S5.2.2.2, or a backless child restraint system with a top 
anchorage strap, install the add-on child restraint system at the center 
seating position of the standard seat assembly using only the standard 
seat lap belt to secure the system to the standard seat.
    (ii) In the case of each built-in child restraint system which is 
equipped with a fixed or movable surface described in S5.2.2.2, or a 
built-in booster seat with a top anchorage strap, activate the system in 
the specific vehicle shell or the specific vehicle in accordance with 
the manufacturer's instructions provided in accordance with S5.6.2.
    (b) Select any dummy specified in S7 for testing systems for use by 
children of the heights and weights for which the system is recommended 
in accordance with S5.5. The dummy is assembled, clothed and prepared as 
specified in S7 and S9 and Part 572 of this chapter, as appropriate.
    (c) Place the dummy in the child restraint. Position it, and attach 
the child restraint belts, if appropriate, as specified in S10.
    (d) Belt adjustment.
    (1) Add-on systems other than belt-positioning seats.
    (i) If appropriate, shoulder and pelvic belts that directly restrain 
the dummy shall be adjusted as follows: Tighten the belts until a 9 N 
force applied (as illustrated in figure 5) to the webbing at the top of 
each dummy shoulder and to the pelvic webbing 50 mm on either side of 
the torso midsagittal plane pulls the webbing 7 mm from the dummy.
    (ii) All Type I belt systems used to attach an add-on child 
restraint system to the standard seat assembly, and any provided 
additional anchorage belt (tether), are tightened to a tension of not 
less than 53.5 N and not more than 67 N, as measured by a load cell used 
on the webbing portion of the belt. All belt systems used to attach a 
harness that bears the label shown in Figure 12 and that meets 
S5.3.1(b)(i) through S5.3.1(b)(iii) are also tightened to a tension of 
not less than 53.5 N and not more than 67 N, by measurement means 
specified in this paragraph.
    (iii) When attaching a child restraint system to the tether 
anchorage and the child restraint anchorage system on the standard seat 
assembly, tighten all belt systems used to attach the restraint to the 
standard seat assembly to a tension of not less than 53.5 N and not more 
than 67 N, as measured by a load cell or other suitable means used on 
the webbing portion of the belt.
    (2) Add-on belt-positioning seats.
    (i) The lap portion of Type II belt systems used to attach the child 
restraint to the standard seat assembly is tightened to a tension of not 
less than 53.5 N and not more than 67 N, as measured by a load cell used 
on the webbing portion of the belt.
    (ii) The shoulder portion of Type II belt systems used to restrain 
the dummy is tightened to a tension of not less than 9 N and not more 
than 18 N, as measured by a load cell used on the webbing portion of the 
belt.
    (3) Built-in child restraint systems.

[[Page 934]]

    (i) The lap portion of Type II belt systems used to secure a dummy 
to the built-in child restraint system is tightened to a tension of not 
less than 53.5 N and not more than 67 N, as measured by a load cell used 
on the webbing portion of the belt.
    (ii) The shoulder portion of Type II belt systems used to secure a 
child is tightened to a tension of not less than 9 N and not more than 
18 N, as measured by a load cell used on the webbing portion of the 
belt.
    (iii) If provided, and if appropriate to attach the child restraint 
belts under S10, shoulder (other than the shoulder portion of a Type II 
vehicle belt system) and pelvic belts that directly restrain the dummy 
shall be adjusted as follows: Tighten the belts until a 9 N force 
applied (as illustrated in figure 5) to the webbing at the top of each 
dummy shoulder and to the pelvic webbing 50 mm on either side of the 
torso midsagittal plane pulls the webbing 7 mm from the dummy.
    (e) Accelerate the test platform to simulate frontal impact in 
accordance with Test Configuration I or II, as appropriate.
    (f) Determine conformance with the requirements in S5.1.
    S6.2 Buckle release test procedure.
    The belt assembly buckles used in any child restraint system shall 
be tested in accordance with S6.2.1 through S6.2.4 inclusive.
    S6.2.1 Before conducting the testing specified in S6.1, place the 
loaded buckle on a hard, flat, horizontal surface. Each belt end of the 
buckle shall be pre-loaded in the following manner. The anchor end of 
the buckle shall be loaded with a 9 N force in the direction away from 
the buckle. In the case of buckles designed to secure a single latch 
plate, the belt latch plate end of the buckle shall be pre-loaded with a 
9 N force in the direction away from the buckle. In the case of buckles 
designed to secure two or more latch plates, the belt latch plate ends 
of the buckle shall be loaded equally so that the total load is 9 N, in 
the direction away from the buckle. For pushbutton-release buckles, the 
release force shall be applied by a conical surface (cone angle not 
exceeding 90 degrees). For pushbutton-release mechanisms with a fixed 
edge (referred to in Figure 7 as ``hinged button''), the release force 
shall be applied at the centerline of the button, 3 mm away from the 
movable edge directly opposite the fixed edge, and in the direction that 
produces maximum releasing effect. For pushbutton-release mechanisms 
with no fixed edge (referred to in Figure 7 as ``floating button''), the 
release force shall be applied at the center of the release mechanism in 
the direction that produces the maximum releasing effect. For all other 
buckle release mechanisms, the force shall be applied on the centerline 
of the buckle lever or finger tab in the direction that produces the 
maximum releasing effect. Measure the force required to release the 
buckle. Figure 7 illustrates the loading for the different buckles and 
the point where the release force should be applied, and Figure 8 
illustrates the conical surface used to apply the release force to 
pushbutton-release buckles.
    S6.2.2 After completion of the testing specified in S6.1 and before 
the buckle is unlatched, tie a self-adjusting sling to each wrist and 
ankle of the test dummy in the manner illustrated in Figure 4, without 
disturbing the belted dummy and the child restraint system.
    S6.2.3 Pull the sling tied to the dummy restrained in the child 
restraint system and apply the following force: 50 N for a system tested 
with a newborn dummy; 90 N for a system tested with a 9-month-old dummy; 
90 N for a system tested with a 12-month-old dummy; 200 N for a system 
tested with a 3-year-old dummy; or 270 N for a system tested with a 6-
year-old dummy; or 350 N for a system tested with a weighted 6-year-old 
dummy. The force is applied in the manner illustrated in Figure 4 and as 
follows:
    (a) Add-on Child Restraints. For an add-on child restraint other 
than a car bed, apply the specified force by pulling the sling 
horizontally and parallel to the SORL of the standard seat assembly. For 
a car bed, apply the force by pulling the sling vertically.
    (b) Built-in Child Restraints. For a built-in child restraint other 
than a car bed, apply the force by pulling the sling parallel to the 
longitudinal center line of the specific vehicle shell or

[[Page 935]]

the specific vehicle. In the case of a car bed, apply the force by 
pulling the sling vertically.
    S6.2.4 While applying the force specified in S6.2.3, and using the 
device shown in Figure 8 for pushbutton-release buckles, apply the 
release force in the manner and location specified in S6.2.1, for that 
type of buckle. Measure the force required to release the buckle.
    S6.3 Head impact protection--energy absorbing material test 
procedure.
    S6.3.1 Prepare and test specimens of the energy absorbing material 
used to comply with S5.2.3 in accordance with the applicable 25 percent 
compression-deflection test described in the American Society for 
Testing and Materials (ASTM) Standard D1056-73, ``Standard Specification 
for Flexible Cellular Materials--Sponge or Expanded Rubber,'' or D1564-
71 ``Standard Method of Testing Flexible Cellular Materials--Slab 
Urethane Foam'' or D1565-76 ``Standard Specification for Flexible 
Cellular Materials--Vinyl Chloride Polymer and Copolymer open-cell 
foams.''
    S7 Test dummies. (Subparts referenced in this section are of part 
572 of this chapter.) S7.1 Dummy selection. Select any dummy specified 
in S7.1.1, S7.1.2 or S7.1.3, as appropriate, for testing systems for use 
by children of the height and mass for which the system is recommended 
in accordance with S5.5. A child restraint that meets the criteria in 
two or more of the following paragraphs in S7 may be tested with any of 
the test dummies specified in those paragraphs.
    S7.1.1 Child restraints that are manufactured before August 1, 2005, 
are subject to the following provisions:
    (a) A child restraint that is recommended by its manufacturer in 
accordance with S5.5 for use either by children in a specified mass 
range that includes any children having a mass of not greater than 5 kg, 
or by children in a specified height range that includes any children 
whose height is not greater than 650 mm, is tested with a newborn test 
dummy conforming to part 572 subpart K.
    (b) A child restraint that is recommended by its manufacturer in 
accordance with S5.5 for use either by children in a specified mass 
range that includes any children having a mass greater than 5 but not 
greater than 10 kg, or by children in a specified height range that 
includes any children whose height is greater than 650 mm but not 
greater than 850 mm, is tested with a newborn test dummy conforming to 
part 572 subpart K, and a 9-month-old test dummy conforming to part 572 
subpart J.
    (c) A child restraint that is recommended by its manufacturer in 
accordance with S5.5 for use either by children in a specified mass 
range that includes any children having a mass greater than 10 kg but 
not greater than 18 kg, or by children in a specified height range that 
includes any children whose height is greater than 850 mm but not 
greater than 1100 mm, is tested with a 9-month-old test dummy conforming 
to part 572 subpart J, and a 3-year-old test dummy conforming to part 
572 subpart C and S7.2, provided, however, that the 9-month-old dummy is 
not used to test a booster seat.
    (d) A child restraint that is recommended by its manufacturer in 
accordance with S5.5 for use either by children in a specified mass 
range that includes any children having a mass greater than 18 kg, or by 
children in a specified height range that includes any children whose 
height is greater than 1100 mm, is tested with a 6-year-old child dummy 
conforming to part 572 subpart I.
    S7.1.2 Child restraints that are manufactured on or after August 1, 
2005, are subject to the following provisions and S7.1.3.
    (a) A child restraint that is recommended by its manufacturer in 
accordance with S5.5 for use either by children in a specified mass 
range that includes any children having a mass of not greater than 5 kg, 
or by children in a specified height range that includes any children 
whose height is not greater than 650 mm, is tested with a newborn test 
dummy conforming to part 572 subpart K.
    (b) A child restraint that is recommended by its manufacturer in 
accordance with S5.5 for use either by children in a specified mass 
range that includes any children having a mass greater than 5 but not 
greater than 10 kg, or by children in a specified height

[[Page 936]]

range that includes any children whose height is greater than 650 mm but 
not greater than 850 mm, is tested with a newborn test dummy conforming 
to part 572 subpart K, and a 12-month-old test dummy conforming to part 
572 subpart R.
    (c) A child restraint that is recommended by its manufacturer in 
accordance with S5.5 for use either by children in a specified mass 
range that includes any children having a mass greater than 10 kg but 
not greater than 18 kg, or by children in a specified height range that 
includes any children whose height is greater than 850 mm but not 
greater than 1100 mm, is tested with a 12-month-old test dummy 
conforming to part 572 subpart R, and a 3-year-old test dummy conforming 
to part 572 subpart P and S7.2, provided, however, that the 12-month-old 
dummy is not used to test a booster seat.
    (d) A child restraint that is recommended by its manufacturer in 
accordance with S5.5 for use either by children in a specified mass 
range that includes any children having a mass greater than 18 kg, or by 
children in a specified height range that includes any children whose 
height is greater than 1100 mm, is tested with a 6-year-old child dummy 
conforming to part 572 subpart N.
    (e) A child restraint that is manufactured on or after August 1, 
2005, that is recommended by its manufacturer in accordance with S5.5 
for use either by children in a specified mass range that includes any 
children having a mass greater than 22.7 kg or by children in a 
specified height range that includes any children whose erect standing 
height is greater than 1100 mm is tested with a part 572 subpart S 
dummy.
    S7.1.3 Voluntary use of alternative dummies. At the manufacturer's 
option (with said option irrevocably selected prior to, or at the time 
of, certification of the restraint), when this section specifies use of 
the 49 CFR part 572, subpart N (Hybrid III 6-year-old dummy) test dummy, 
the test dummy specified in 49 CFR part 572, subpart I (Hybrid II 6-
year-old dummy) may be used in place of the subpart N test dummy.
    S8 Requirements, test conditions, and procedures for child restraint 
systems manufactured for use in aircraft. Each child restraint system 
manufactured for use in both motor vehicles and aircraft must comply 
with all of the applicable requirements specified in Section S5 and with 
the additional requirements specified in S8.1 and S8.2.
    S8.1 Installation instructions. Each child restraint system 
manufactured for use in aircraft shall be accompanied by printed 
instructions in English that provide a step-by-step procedure, including 
diagrams, for installing the system in aircraft passenger seats, 
securing a child in the system when it is installed in aircraft, and 
adjusting the system to fit the child.
    S8.2 Inversion test. When tested in accordance with S8.2.1 through 
S8.2.5, each child restraint system manufactured for use in aircraft 
shall meet the requirements of S8.2.1 through S8.2.6. The manufacturer 
may, at its option, use any seat which is a representative aircraft 
passenger seat within the meaning of S4. Each system shall meet the 
requirements at each of the restraint's seat back angle adjustment 
positions and restraint belt routing positions, when the restraint is 
oriented in the direction recommended by the manufacturer (e.g., facing 
forward, rearward or laterally) pursuant to S8.1, and tested with the 
test dummy specified in S7. If the manufacturer recommendations do not 
include instructions for orienting the restraint in aircraft when the 
restraint seat back angle is adjusted to any position, position the 
restraint on the aircraft seat by following the instructions (provided 
in accordance with S5.6) for orienting the restraint in motor vehicles.
    S8.2.1 A standard seat assembly consisting of a representative 
aircraft passenger seat shall be positioned and adjusted so that its 
horizontal and vertical orientation and its seat back angle are the same 
as shown in Figure 6.
    S8.2.2 The child restraint system shall be attached to the 
representative aircraft passenger seat using, at the manufacturer's 
option, any Federal Aviation Administration approved aircraft safety 
belt, according to the restraint manufacturer's instructions for 
attaching the restraint to an aircraft seat. No supplementary anchorage

[[Page 937]]

belts or tether straps may be attached; however, Federal Aviation 
Administration approved safety belt extensions may be used.
    S8.2.3 In accordance with S10, place in the child restraint any 
dummy specified in S7 for testing systems for use by children of the 
heights and weights for which the system is recommended in accordance 
with S5.5 and S8.1.
    S8.2.4 If provided, shoulder and pelvic belts that directly restrain 
the dummy shall be adjusted in accordance with S6.1.2.
    S8.2.5 The combination of representative aircraft passenger seat, 
child restraint, and test dummy shall be rotated forward around a 
horizontal axis which is contained in the median transverse vertical 
plane of the seating surface portion of the aircraft seat and is located 
25 mm below the bottom of the seat frame, at a speed of 35 to 45 degrees 
per second, to an angle of 180 degrees. The rotation shall be stopped 
when it reaches that angle and the seat shall be held in this position 
for three seconds. The child restraint shall not fall out of the 
aircraft safety belt nor shall the test dummy fall out of the child 
restraint at any time during the rotation or the three second period. 
The specified rate of rotation shall be attained in not less than one 
half second and not more than one second, and the rotating combination 
shall be brought to a stop in not less than one half second and not more 
than one second.
    S8.2.6 Repeat the procedures set forth in S8.2.1 through S8.2.4. The 
combination of the representative aircraft passenger seat, child 
restraint, and test dummy shall be rotated sideways around a horizontal 
axis which is contained in the median longitudinal vertical plane of the 
seating surface portion of the aircraft seat and is located 25 mm below 
the bottom of the seat frame, at a speed of 35 to 45 degrees per second, 
to an angle of 180 degrees. The rotation shall be stopped when it 
reaches that angle and the seat shall be held in this position for three 
seconds. The child restraint shall not fall out of the aircraft safety 
belt nor shall the test dummy fall out of the child restraint at any 
time during the rotation or the three second period. The specified rate 
of rotation shall be attained in not less than one half second and not 
more than one second, and the rotating combination shall be brought to a 
stop in not less than one half second and not more than one second.
    S9 Dummy clothing and preparation.
    S9.1 Type of clothing.
    (a) Newborn dummy. When used in testing under this standard, the 
dummy is unclothed.
    (b) Nine-month-old dummy. When used in testing under this standard, 
the dummy is clothed in terry cloth polyester and cotton size 1 long 
sleeve shirt and size 1 long pants, with a total mass of 0.136 kg.
    (c) 12-month-old dummy (49 CFR Part 572, Subpart R). When used in 
testing under this standard, the dummy specified in 49 CFR part 572, 
subparts R, is clothed in a cotton-polyester based tight fitting sweat 
shirt with long sleeves and ankle long pants whose combined weight is 
not more than 0.25 kg.
    (d) Hybrid II three-year-old and Hybrid II six-year-old dummies (49 
CFR part 572, subparts C and I). When used in testing under this 
standard, the dummies specified in 49 CFR part 572, subparts C and I, 
are clothed in thermal knit, waffle-weave polyester and cotton underwear 
or equivalent, a size 4 long-sleeved shirt (3-year-old dummy) or a size 
5 long-sleeved shirt (6-year-old dummy) having a mass of 0.090 kg, a 
size 4 pair of long pants having a mass of 0.090 kg, and cut off just 
far enough above the knee to allow the knee target to be visible, and 
size 7M sneakers (3-year-old dummy) or size 12\1/2\M sneakers (6-year-
old dummy) with rubber toe caps, uppers of dacron and cotton or nylon 
and a total mass of 0.453 kg.
    (e) Hybrid III 3-year-old dummy (49 CFR Part 572, Subpart P). When 
used in testing under this standard, the dummy specified in 49 CFR Part 
572, Subpart P, is clothed as specified in that subpart, except that the 
shoes are children's size 8 canvas oxford style sneakers weighing not 
more than 0.26 kg each.
    (f) Hybrid III 6-year-old dummy (49 CFR Part 572, Subpart N) and 
Hybrid III 6-year-old weighted dummy (49 CFR Part 572, Subpart S). When 
used in testing

[[Page 938]]

under this standard, the dummies specified in 49 CFR Part 572, Subpart N 
and Subpart S, are clothed as specified in those subparts, except that 
the shoes are children's size 13 M canvas oxford style sneakers weighing 
not more than 0.43 kg each.
    S9.2 Preparing clothing. Clothing other than the shoes is machined-
washed in 71 [deg]C to 82 [deg]C and machine-dried at 49 [deg]C to 60 
[deg]C for 30 minutes.
    S9.3 Preparing dummies. (Subparts referenced in this section are of 
Part 572 of this chapter.)
    S9.3.1 When using the test dummies conforming to Part 572 Subpart C, 
I, J, or K, prepare the dummies as specified in this paragraph. Before 
being used in testing under this standard, dummies must be conditioned 
at any ambient temperature from 19 [deg]C to 25.5 [deg]C and at any 
relative humidity from 10 percent to 70 percent, for at least 4 hours.
    S9.3.2 When using the test dummies conforming to Part 572 Subparts 
N, P, R, or S, prepare the dummies as specified in this paragraph. 
Before being used in testing under this standard, dummies must be 
conditioned at any ambient temperature from 20.6[deg] to 22.2 [deg]C and 
at any relative humidity from 10 percent to 70 percent, for at least 4 
hours.
    S10 Positioning the dummy and attaching the system belts.
    S10.1 Car beds. Place the test dummy in the car bed in the supine 
position with its midsagittal plane perpendicular to the center SORL of 
the standard seat assembly, in the case of an add-on car bed, or 
perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the specific vehicle shell or 
the specific vehicle, in the case of a built-in car bed. Position the 
dummy within the car bed in accordance with the instructions for child 
positioning that the bed manufacturer provided with the bed in 
accordance with S5.6.
    S10.2 Restraints other than car beds.
    S10.2.1 Newborn dummy and nine-month-old dummy. Position the test 
dummy according to the instructions for child positioning that the 
manufacturer provided with the system under S5.6.1 or S5.6.2, while 
conforming to the following:
    (a) Prior to placing the 9-month-old test dummy in the child 
restraint system, place the dummy in the supine position on a horizontal 
surface. While placing a hand on the center of the torso to prevent 
movement of the dummy torso, rotate the dummy legs upward by lifting the 
feet 90 degrees. Slowly release the legs but do not return them to the 
flat surface.
    (b)(1) When testing forward-facing child restraint systems, holding 
the 9-month-old test dummy torso upright until it contacts the system's 
design seating surface, place the 9-month-old test dummy in the seated 
position within the system with the mid-sagittal plane of the dummy 
head--
    (i) Coincident with the center SORL of the standard seating 
assembly, in the case of the add-on child restraint system, or
    (ii) Vertical and parallel to the longitudinal center line of the 
specific vehicle shell or the specific vehicle, in the case of a built-
in child restraint system.
    (2) When testing rear-facing child restraint systems, place the 
newborn, 9-month-old or 12-month-old dummy in the child restraint system 
so that the back of the dummy torso contacts the back support surface of 
the system. For a child restraint system which is equipped with a fixed 
or movable surface described in S5.2.2.2 which is being tested under the 
conditions of test configuration II, do not attach any of the child 
restraint belts unless they are an integral part of the fixed or movable 
surface. For all other child restraint systems and for a child restraint 
system with a fixed or movable surface which is being tested under the 
conditions of test configuration I, attach all appropriate child 
restraint belts and tighten them as specified in S6.1.2. Attach all 
appropriate vehicle belts and tighten them as specified in S6.1.2. 
Position each movable surface in accordance with the instructions that 
the manufacturer provided under S5.6.1 or S5.6.2. If the dummy's head 
does not remain in the proper position, tape it against the front of the 
seat back surface of the system by means of a single thickness of 6 mm-
wide paper masking tape placed across the center of the dummy's face.
    (c)(1)(i) When testing forward-facing child restraint systems, 
extend the

[[Page 939]]

arms of the 9-month-old or 12-month-old test dummy as far as possible in 
the upward vertical direction. Extend the legs of the 9-month-old or 12-
month-old test dummy as far as possible in the forward horizontal 
direction, with the dummy feet perpendicular to the centerline of the 
lower legs. Using a flat square surface with an area of 2,580 square mm, 
apply a force of 178 N, perpendicular to:
    (A) The plane of the back of the standard seat assembly, in the case 
of an add-on system, or
    (B) The back of the vehicle seat in the specific vehicle shell or 
the specific vehicle, in the case of a built-in system, first against 
the dummy crotch and then at the dummy thorax in the midsagittal plane 
of the dummy. For a child restraint system with a fixed or movable 
surface described in S5.2.2.2, which is being tested under the 
conditions of test configuration II, do not attach any of the child 
restraint belts unless they are an integral part of the fixed or movable 
surface. For all other child restraint systems and for a child restraint 
system with a fixed or movable surface which is being tested under the 
conditions of test configuration I, attach all appropriate child 
restraint belts and tighten them as specified in S6.1.2. Attach all 
appropriate vehicle belts and tighten them as specified in S6.1.2. 
Position each movable surface in accordance with the instructions that 
the manufacturer provided under S5.6.1 or S5.6.2.
    (ii) After the steps specified in paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this 
section, rotate each dummy limb downwards in the plane parallel to the 
dummy's midsagittal plane until the limb contacts a surface of the child 
restraint system or the standard seat assembly, in the case of an add-on 
system, or the specific vehicle shell or specific vehicle, in the case 
of a built-in system, as appropriate. Position the limbs, if necessary, 
so that limb placement does not inhibit torso or head movement in tests 
conducted under S6.
    (2) When testing rear-facing child restraint systems, extend the 
dummy's arms vertically upwards and then rotate each arm downward toward 
the dummy's lower body until the arm contacts a surface of the child 
restraint system or the standard seat assembly in the case of an add-on 
child restraint system, or the specific vehicle shell or the specific 
vehicle, in the case of a built-in child restraint system. Ensure that 
no arm is restrained from movement in other than the downward direction, 
by any part of the system or the belts used to anchor the system to the 
standard seat assembly, the specific shell, or the specific vehicle.
    S10.2.2 Three-year-old and six-year-old test dummy. Position the 
test dummy according to the instructions for child positioning that the 
restraint manufacturer provided with the system in accordance with 
S5.6.1 or S5.6.2, while conforming to the following:
    (a) Holding the test dummy torso upright until it contacts the 
system's design seating surface, place the test dummy in the seated 
position within the system with the midsagittal plane of the test dummy 
head--
    (1) Coincident with the center SORL of the standard seating 
assembly, in the case of the add-on child restraint system, or
    (2) Vertical and parallel to the longitudinal center line of the 
specific vehicle, in the case of a built-in child restraint system.
    (b) Extend the arms of the test dummy as far as possible in the 
upward vertical direction. Extend the legs of the dummy as far as 
possible in the forward horizontal direction, with the dummy feet 
perpendicular to the center line of the lower legs.
    (c) Using a flat square surface with an area of 2580 square 
millimeters, apply a force of 178 N, perpendicular to:
    (1) The plane of the back of the standard seat assembly, in the case 
of an add-on system, or
    (2) The back of the vehicle seat in the specific vehicle shell or 
the specific vehicle, in the case of a built-in system, first against 
the dummy crotch and then at the dummy thorax in the midsagittal plane 
of the dummy. For a child restraint system with a fixed or movable 
surface described in S5.2.2.2, which is being tested under the 
conditions of test configuration II, do not attach any of the child 
restraint belts unless they are an integral part of the fixed or movable 
surface. For all other child restraint systems and for a child

[[Page 940]]

restraint system with a fixed or movable surface which is being tested 
under the conditions of test configuration I, attach all appropriate 
child restraint belts and tighten them as specified in S6.1.2. Attach 
all appropriate vehicle belts and tighten them as specified in S6.1.2. 
Position each movable surface in accordance with the instructions that 
the manufacturer provided under S5.6.1 or S5.6.2.
    (d) After the steps specified in paragraph (c) of this section, 
rotate each dummy limb downwards in the plane parallel to the dummy's 
midsagittal plane until the limb contacts a surface of the child 
restraint system or the standard seat assembly, in the case of an add-on 
system, or the specific vehicle shell or specific vehicle, in the case 
of a built-in system, as appropriate. Position the limbs, if necessary, 
so that limb placement does not inhibit torso or head movement in tests 
conducted under S6.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18JN03.012


[[Page 941]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR05MR99.001


[[Page 942]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.012


[[Page 943]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.013


[[Page 944]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.100


[[Page 945]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.101


[[Page 946]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18JN03.013


[[Page 947]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.102


[[Page 948]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.103


[[Page 949]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.104


[[Page 950]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.105


[[Page 951]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.106


[[Page 952]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.107


[[Page 953]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09SE05.000


[[Page 954]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09SE05.001


[[Page 955]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27NO96.014


[[Page 956]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR05MR99.004


[[Page 957]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09MR04.023


[44 FR 72147, Dec. 13, 1979]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.213, see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 571.214  Standard No. 214; Side impact protection.

    S1 Scope and purpose.
    (a) Scope. This standard specifies performance requirements for 
protection of occupants in side impacts.
    (b) Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce the risk of 
serious and fatal injury to occupants of passenger cars, multipurpose 
passenger vehicles, trucks and buses in side impacts by specifying 
strength requirements for side doors, limiting the forces, deflections 
and accelerations measured on anthropomorphic dummies in test crashes, 
and by other means.
    S2 Applicability. This standard applies to passenger cars, and to 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses with a gross vehicle 
weight rating (GVWR) of 4,536 kilograms (kg) (10,000 pounds (lb)) or 
less, except for walk-in vans, or otherwise specified.
    S3 Definitions.
    Contoured means, with respect to a door, that the lower portion of 
its front or rear edge is curved upward, typically to conform to a wheel 
well.
    Double side doors means a pair of hinged doors with the lock and 
latch mechanisms located where the door lips overlap.
    Limited line manufacturer means a manufacturer that sells three or 
fewer carlines, as that term is defined in 49 CFR 583.4, in the United 
States during a production year.
    Lowered floor means the replacement floor on a motor vehicle whose 
original floor has been removed, in part or in total, and replaced by a 
floor that is lower than the original floor.
    Modified roof means the replacement roof on a motor vehicle whose 
original roof has been removed, in part or in total.
    Raised roof is used as defined in paragraph S4 of 49 CFR 571.216.
    Walk-in van means a special cargo/mail delivery vehicle that has 
only one designated seating position. That designated seating position 
must be forward facing and for use only by the driver. The vehicle 
usually has a thin and light sliding (or folding) side door for easy 
operation and a high roof clearance that a person of medium

[[Page 958]]

stature can enter the passenger compartment area in an up-right 
position.
    S4 Requirements. Subject to the exceptions of S5--
    (a) Passenger cars. Passenger cars must meet the requirements set 
forth in S6 (door crush resistance), S7 (moving deformable barrier 
test), and S9 (vehicle-to-pole test), subject to the phased-in 
application of S7 and S9.
    (b) Multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses with a GVWR of 
2,722 kg or less (6,000 lb or less). Multipurpose passenger vehicles, 
trucks and buses with a GVWR of 2,722 kg or less (6,000 lb or less) must 
meet the requirements set forth in S6 (door crush resistance), S7 
(moving deformable barrier test), and S9 (vehicle-to-pole test), subject 
to the phased-in application of S7 and S9.
    (c) Multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses with a GVWR 
greater than 2,722 kg (6,000 lb). Multipurpose passenger vehicles, 
trucks and buses with a GVWR greater than 2,722 kg (6,000 lb) must meet 
the requirements set forth in S6 (door crush resistance) and S9 
(vehicle-to-pole test), subject to the phased-in application of S9.
    S5 General exclusions.
    (a) Exclusions from S6 (door crush resistance). A vehicle need not 
meet the requirements of S6 (door crush resistance) for--
    (1) Any side door located so that no point on a ten-inch horizontal 
longitudinal line passing through and bisected by the H-point of a 
manikin placed in any seat, with the seat adjusted to any position and 
the seat back adjusted as specified in S8.4, falls within the 
transverse, horizontal projection of the door's opening,
    (2) Any side door located so that no point on a ten-inch horizontal 
longitudinal line passing through and bisected by the H-point of a 
manikin placed in any seat recommended by the manufacturer for 
installation in a location for which seat anchorage hardware is 
provided, with the seat adjusted to any position and the seat back 
adjusted as specified in S8.3, falls within the transverse, horizontal 
projection of the door's opening,
    (3) Any side door located so that a portion of a seat, with the seat 
adjusted to any position and the seat back adjusted as specified in 
S8.3, falls within the transverse, horizontal projection of the door's 
opening, but a longitudinal vertical plane tangent to the outboard side 
of the seat cushion is more than 254 mm (10 inches) from the innermost 
point on the inside surface of the door at a height between the H-point 
and shoulder reference point (as shown in Figure 1 of Federal Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standard No. 210 (49 CFR 571.210)) and longitudinally 
between the front edge of the cushion with the seat adjusted to its 
forwardmost position and the rear edge of the cushion with the seat 
adjusted to its rearmost position.
    (4) Any side door that is designed to be easily attached to or 
removed (e.g., using simple hand tools such as pliers and/or a 
screwdriver) from a motor vehicle manufactured for operation without 
doors.
    (b) Exclusions from S7 (moving deformable barrier test). The 
following vehicles are excluded from S7 (moving deformable barrier 
test):
    (1) Motor homes, ambulances and other emergency rescue/medical 
vehicles (including vehicles with fire-fighting equipment), vehicles 
equipped with wheelchair lifts, and vehicles which have no doors or 
exclusively have doors that are designed to be easily attached or 
removed so the vehicle can be operated without doors.
    (2) Passenger cars with a wheelbase greater than 130 inches need not 
meet the requirements of S7 as applied to the rear seat.
    (3) Passenger cars, multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and 
buses need not meet the requirements of S7 (moving deformable barrier 
test) as applied to the rear seat for side-facing rear seats and for 
rear seating areas that are so small that a Part 572 Subpart V dummy 
representing a 5th percentile adult female cannot be accommodated 
according to the positioning procedure specified in S12.3.4 of this 
standard. Vehicles that are manufactured before September 1, 2010, and 
vehicles that manufactured on or after September 1, 2010, that are not 
part of the percentage of a manufacturer's production meeting the moving 
deformable barrier test requirements with advanced test dummies (S7.2 of 
this section) or are otherwise excluded from the phase-in

[[Page 959]]

requirements of S7.2, need not meet the requirements of the moving 
deformable barrier test as applied to the rear seat for rear seating 
areas that are so small that a Subpart F dummy (SID) cannot be 
accommodated according to the positioning procedure specified in S12.1 
of this standard.
    (4) Multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses with a GVWR of 
more than 2,722 kg (6,000 lb) need not meet the requirements of S7 
(moving deformable barrier test).
    (c) Exclusions from S9 (vehicle-to-pole test). The following 
vehicles are excluded from S9 (vehicle-to-pole test) (wholly or in 
limited part, as set forth below):
    (1) Motor homes;
    (2) Ambulances and other emergency rescue/medical vehicles 
(including vehicles with fire-fighting equipment) except police cars;
    (3) Vehicles with a lowered floor or raised or modified roof and 
vehicles that have had the original roof rails removed and not replaced;
    (4) Vehicles in which the seat for the driver or right front 
passenger has been removed and wheelchair restraints installed in place 
of the seat are excluded from meeting the vehicle-to-pole test at that 
position; and
    (5) Vehicles that have no doors, or exclusively have doors that are 
designed to be easily attached or removed so that the vehicle can be 
operated without doors.
    S6 Door Crush Resistance Requirements. Except as provided in section 
S5, each vehicle shall be able to meet the requirements of either, at 
the manufacturer's option, S6.1 or S6.2, when any of its side doors that 
can be used for occupant egress is tested according to procedures 
described in S6.3 of this standard (49 CFR 571.214).
    S6.1 With any seats that may affect load upon or deflection of the 
side of the vehicle removed from the vehicle, each vehicle must be able 
to meet the requirements of S6.1.1 through S6.1.3.
    S6.1.1 Initial crush resistance. The initial crush resistance shall 
not be less than 10,000 N (2,250 lb).
    S6.1.2 Intermediate crush resistance. The intermediate crush 
resistance shall not be less than 15,569 N (3,500 lb).
    S6.1.3 Peak crush resistance. The peak crush resistance shall not be 
less than two times the curb weight of the vehicle or 31,138 N (7,000 
lb),
    S6.2 With seats installed in the vehicle, and located in any 
horizontal or vertical position to which they can be adjusted and at any 
seat back angle to which they can be adjusted, each vehicle must be able 
to meet the requirements of S6.2.1 through S6.2.3.
    S6.2.1 Initial crush resistance. The initial crush resistance shall 
not be less than 10,000 N (2,250 lb).
    S6.2.2 Intermediate crush resistance. The intermediate crush 
resistance shall not be less than 19,460 N (4,375 lb).
    S6.2.3 Peak crush resistance. The peak crush resistance shall not be 
less than three and one half times the curb weight of the vehicle or 
53,378 N (12,000 lb), whichever is less.
    S6.3 Test procedures for door crush resistance. The following 
procedures apply to determining compliance with S6.1 and S6.2 of S6, 
Door crush resistance requirements.
    (a) Place side windows in their uppermost position and all doors in 
locked position. Place the sill of the side of the vehicle opposite to 
the side being tested against a rigid unyielding vertical surface. Fix 
the vehicle rigidly in position by means of tiedown attachments located 
at or forward of the front wheel centerline and at or rearward of the 
rear wheel centerline.
    (b) Prepare a loading device consisting of a rigid steel cylinder or 
semi-cylinder 305 mm (12 inches) in diameter with an edge radius of 13 
mm (\1/2\ inch). The length of the loading device shall be such that--
    (1) For doors with windows, the top surface of the loading device is 
at least 13 mm (\1/2\ inch) above the bottom edge of the door window 
opening but not of a length that will cause contact with any structure 
above the bottom edge of the door window opening during the test.
    (2) For doors without windows, the top surface of the loading device 
is at the same height above the ground as when the loading device is 
positioned in accordance with paragraph (b)(1) of this section for 
purposes of testing a

[[Page 960]]

front door with windows on the same vehicle.
    (c) Locate the loading device as shown in Figure 1 (side view) of 
this section so that--
    (1) Its longitudinal axis is vertical.
    (2) Except as provided in paragraphs (c)(2)(i) and (ii) of this 
section, its longitudinal axis is laterally opposite the midpoint of a 
horizontal line drawn across the outer surface of the door 127 mm (5 
inches) above the lowest point of the door, exclusive of any decorative 
or protective molding that is not permanently affixed to the door panel.
    (i) For contoured doors on trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger 
vehicles with a GVWR of 4,536 kg (10,000 lb) or less, if the length of 
the horizontal line specified in this paragraph (c)(2) is not equal to 
or greater than 559 mm (22 inches), the line is moved vertically up the 
side of the door to the point at which the line is 559 mm (22 inches) 
long. The longitudinal axis of the loading device is then located 
laterally opposite the midpoint of that line.
    (ii) For double side doors on trucks, buses, and multipurpose 
passenger vehicles with a GVWR of 4,536 kg (10,000 lb) or less, its 
longitudinal axis is laterally opposite the midpoint of a horizontal 
line drawn across the outer surface of the double door span, 127 mm (5 
inches) above the lowest point on the doors, exclusive of any decorative 
or protective molding that is not permanently affixed to the door panel.
    (3) Except as provided in paragraphs (c)(3)(i) and (ii) of this 
section, its bottom surface is in the same horizontal plane as the 
horizontal line drawn across the outer surface of the door 127 mm (5 
inches) above the lowest point of the door, exclusive of any decorative 
or protective molding that is not permanently affixed to the door panel.
    (i) For contoured doors on trucks, buses, and multipurpose passenger 
vehicles with a GVWR of 4,536 kg (10,000 lb) or less, its bottom surface 
is in the lowest horizontal plane such that every point on the lateral 
projection of the bottom surface of the device on the door is at least 
127 mm (5 inches), horizontally and vertically, from any edge of the 
door panel, exclusive of any decorative or protective molding that is 
not permanently affixed to the door panel.
    (ii) For double side doors, its bottom surface is in the same 
horizontal plane as a horizontal line drawn across the outer surface of 
the double door span, 127 mm (5 inches) above the lowest point of the 
doors, exclusive of any decorative or protective molding that is not 
permanently affixed to the door panel.
    (d) Using the loading device, apply a load to the outer surface of 
the door in an inboard direction normal to a vertical plane along the 
vehicle's longitudinal centerline. Apply the load continuously such that 
the loading device travel rate does not exceed 12.7 mm (0.5 inch) per 
second until the loading device travels 457 mm (18 inches). Guide the 
loading device to prevent it from being rotated or displaced from its 
direction of travel. The test is completed within 120 seconds.
    (e) Record applied load versus displacement of the loading device, 
either continuously or in increments of not more than 25.4 mm (1 inch) 
or 91 kg (200 pounds) for the entire crush distance of 457 mm (18 
inches).
    (f) Determine the initial crush resistance, intermediate crush 
resistance, and peak crush resistance as follows:
    (1) From the results recorded in paragraph (e) of this section, plot 
a curve of load versus displacement and obtain the integral of the 
applied load with respect to the crush distances specified in paragraphs 
(f)(2) and (3) of this section. These quantities, expressed in mm-kN 
(inch-pounds) and divided by the specified crush distances, represent 
the average forces in kN (pounds) required to deflect the door those 
distances.
    (2) The initial crush resistance is the average force required to 
deform the door over the initial 152 mm (6 inches) of crush.
    (3) The intermediate crush resistance is the average force required 
to deform the door over the initial 305 mm (12 inches) of crush.
    (4) The peak crush resistance is the largest force recorded over the 
entire 457 mm (18-inch) crush distance.

[[Page 961]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11SE07.000

    S7 Moving Deformable Barrier (MDB) Requirements. Except as provided 
in section S5, when tested under the conditions of S8 each vehicle shall 
meet S7.3 and the following requirements in a 53 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 
1.0 km/h (33.5 mph) impact in which the vehicle is struck on either side 
by a moving deformable barrier.
    S7.1 MDB test with SID. For vehicles manufactured before September 
1, 2010, the following requirements must be met. The following 
requirements also apply to vehicles manufactured on or after September 
1, 2010 that are not part of the percentage of a manufacturer's 
production meeting the MDB test with advanced test dummies (S7.2 of this 
section) or are otherwise excluded from the phase-in requirements of 
S7.2. (Vehicles manufactured before September 1, 2010 may meet S7.2, at 
the manufacturer's option.)
    S7.1.1 The test dummy specified in 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart F (SID) 
is placed in the front and rear outboard seating positions on the struck 
side of the vehicle, as specified in S11 and S12 of this standard (49 
CFR 571.214).
    S7.1.2 When using the Part 572 Subpart F dummy (SID), the following 
performance requirements must be met.
    (a) Thorax. The Thoracic Trauma Index (TTI(d)) shall not exceed:
    (1) 85 g for a passenger car with four side doors, and for any 
multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, or bus; and,
    (2) 90 g for a passenger car with two side doors, when calculated in 
accordance with the following formula:


[[Page 962]]


TI(d) = \1/2\(G<INF>R</INF> + G<INF>LS</INF>)

Where the term ``G<INF>R</INF>'' is the greater of the peak 
accelerations of either the upper or lower rib, expressed in g's and the 
term ``G<INF>LS</INF>'' is the lower spine (T12) peak acceleration, 
expressed in g's. The peak acceleration values are obtained in 
accordance with the procedure specified in S11.5.

    (b) Pelvis. The peak lateral acceleration of the pelvis, as measured 
in accordance with S11.5, shall not exceed 130 g's.
    S7.2 MDB test with advanced test dummies.
    S7.2.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2010 to August 
31, 2014.
    (a) Except as provided in S7.2.4 of this section, for vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2010 to August 31, 2014, a 
percentage of each manufacturer's production, as specified in S13.1.1, 
S13.1.2, S13.1.3, and S13.1.4, shall meet the requirements of S7.2.5 and 
S7.2.6 when tested with the test dummy specified in those sections. 
Vehicles manufactured before September 1, 2014 may be certified as 
meeting the requirements of S7.2.5 and S7.2.6.
    (b) For vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2010 that are 
not part of the percentage of a manufacturer's production meeting S7.2.1 
of this section, the requirements of S7.1 of this section must be met.
    (c) Place the Subpart U ES-2re 50th percentile male dummy in the 
front seat and the Subpart V SID-IIs 5th percentile female test dummy in 
the rear seat. The test dummies are placed and positioned in the front 
and rear outboard seating positions on the struck side of the vehicle, 
as specified in S11 and S12 of this standard (49 CFR 571.214).
    S7.2.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2014.
    (a) Subject to S7.2.4 of this section, each vehicle manufactured on 
or after September 1, 2014 must meet the requirements of S7.2.5 and 
S7.2.6, when tested with the test dummy specified in those sections.
    (b) Place the Subpart U ES-2re 50th percentile male dummy in the 
front seat and the Subpart V SID-IIs 5th percentile female test dummy in 
the rear seat. The test dummies are placed and positioned in the front 
and rear outboard seating positions on the struck side of the vehicle, 
as specified in S11 and S12 of this standard (49 CFR 571.214).
    S7.2.3 [Reserved]
    S7.2.4 Exceptions from the MDB phase-in; special allowances.
    (a)(1) Vehicles that are manufactured by an original vehicle 
manufacturer that produces or assembles fewer than 5,000 vehicles 
annually for sale in the United States are not subject to S7.2.1 of this 
section (but vehicles that will be manufactured on or after September 1, 
2014 are subject to S7.2.2);
    (2) Vehicles that are manufactured by a limited line manufacturer 
are not subject to S7.2.1 of this section (but vehicles that will be 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2014 are subject to S7.2.2).
    (3) Convertibles manufactured before September 1, 2015, are not 
subject to S7.2.1 or S7.2.2 of this section. These vehicles may be 
voluntarily certified to meet the MDB test requirements prior to 
September 1, 2015. Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2015 
are subject to S7 and S7.2.2.
    (b) Vehicles that are altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) 
before September 1, 2016 after having been previously certified in 
accordance with part 567 of this chapter, and vehicles manufactured in 
two or more stages before September 1, 2016, are not subject to S7.2.1. 
Vehicles that are altered on or after September 1, 2016, and vehicles 
that are manufactured in two or more stages on or after September 1, 
2016, must meet the requirements of S7.2.5 and S7.2.6, when tested with 
the test dummy specified in those sections. Place the Subpart U ES-2re 
50th percentile male dummy in the front seat and the Subpart V SID-IIs 
5th percentile female test dummy in the rear seat. The test dummies are 
placed and positioned in the front and rear outboard seating positions 
on the struck side of the vehicle, as specified in S11 and S12 of this 
standard (49 CFR 571.214).
    S7.2.5 Dynamic performance requirements using the Part 572 Subpart U 
dummy (ES-2re 50th percentile male) dummy. Use the 49 CFR Part 572 
Subpart U ES-2re dummy specified in S11 with measurements in accordance 
with

[[Page 963]]

S11.5. The following criteria shall be met:
    (a) The HIC shall not exceed 1000 when calculated in accordance with 
the following formula:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11SE07.003


Where the term a is the resultant head acceleration at the center of 
gravity of the dummy head expressed as a multiple of g (the acceleration 
of gravity), and t1 and t2 are any two points in time during the impact 
which are separated by not more than a 36 millisecond time interval and 
where t1 is less than t2.

    (b) Thorax. The deflection of any of the upper, middle, and lower 
ribs, shall not exceed 44 mm (1.73 inches).
    (c) Force measurements.
    (1) The sum of the front, middle and rear abdominal forces, shall 
not exceed 2,500 N (562 lb).
    (2) The pubic symphysis force shall not exceed 6,000 N (1,350 
pounds).
    S7.2.6 Dynamic performance requirements using the Part 572 Subpart V 
SID-IIs (5th percentile female) dummy. Use the 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart V 
SID-IIs 5th percentile female dummy specified in S11 with measurements 
in accordance with S11.5. The following criteria shall be met:
    (a) The HIC shall not exceed 1000 when calculated in accordance with 
the following formula:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11SE07.004


Where the term a is the resultant head acceleration expressed as a 
multiple of g (the acceleration of gravity), and t1 and t2 are any two 
points in time during the impact which are separated by not more than a 
36 millisecond time interval.

    (b) The resultant lower spine acceleration shall not exceed 82 g.
    (c) The sum of the acetabular and iliac pelvic forces shall not 
exceed 5,525 N.
    S7.3 Door opening.
    (a) Any side door that is struck by the moving deformable barrier 
shall not separate totally from the vehicle.
    (b) Any door (including a rear hatchback or tailgate) that is not 
struck by the moving deformable barrier shall meet the following 
requirements:
    (1) The door shall not disengage from the latched position;
    (2) The latch shall not separate from the striker, and the hinge 
components shall not separate from each other or from their attachment 
to the vehicle.
    (3) Neither the latch nor the hinge systems of the door shall pull 
out of their anchorages.
    S8 Test conditions for determining compliance with moving deformable 
barrier requirements. General test conditions for determining compliance 
with the moving deformable barrier test are specified below. Additional 
specifications may also be found in S12 of this standard (49 CFR 
571.214).
    S8.1 Test weight. Each vehicle is loaded to its unloaded vehicle 
weight, plus 136 kg (300 pounds) or its rated cargo and luggage capacity 
(whichever is less), secured in the luggage or load-carrying area, plus 
the weight of the necessary anthropomorphic test dummies. Any added test 
equipment is located away from impact areas in secure places in the 
vehicle. The vehicle's fuel system is filled in accordance with the 
following procedure. With the test vehicle on a level surface, pump the 
fuel from the vehicle's fuel tank and then operate the engine until it 
stops. Then, add Stoddard solvent to the test vehicle's fuel tank in an 
amount that is equal to not less than 92 percent and not more than 94 
percent of the fuel tank's usable capacity stated by the vehicle's 
manufacturer. In addition, add the amount of Stoddard solvent needed to 
fill the entire fuel system from the fuel tank through the engine's 
induction system.
    S8.2 Vehicle test attitude. Determine the distance between a level 
surface and a standard reference point on the test vehicle's body, 
directly above each wheel opening, when the vehicle is in its fully 
loaded condition at the test site, with all tires inflated to the 
manufacturer's specifications listed on the

[[Page 964]]

vehicle's tire placard, and with the vehicle filled to 100 percent of 
all fluid capacities. The ``fully loaded condition'' is the test vehicle 
loaded in accordance with S8.1 of this standard (49 CFR 571.214). The 
load placed in the cargo area is centered over the longitudinal 
centerline of the vehicle. The pretest vehicle attitude is equal to the 
fully loaded attitude <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 mm.
    S8.3 Adjustable seats.
    S8.3.1 50th Percentile Male ES-2re Dummy (49 CFR Part 572 Subpart U) 
In Front Seats
    S8.3.1.1 Lumbar support adjustment. Position adjustable lumbar 
supports so that the lumbar support is in its lowest, retracted or 
deflated adjustment position.
    S8.3.1.2 Other seat adjustments. Position any adjustable parts of 
the seat that provide additional support so that they are in the lowest 
or non-deployed adjustment position. Position any adjustable head 
restraint in the highest and most forward position. Place adjustable 
seat backs in the manufacturer's nominal design riding position in the 
manner specified by the manufacturer. If the position is not specified, 
set the seat back at the first detent rearward of 25[deg] from the 
vertical.
    S8.3.1.3 Seat position adjustment. If the passenger seat does not 
adjust independently of the driver seat, the driver seat shall control 
the final position of the passenger seat.
    S8.3.1.3.1 Using only the controls that primarily move the seat and 
seat cushion independent of the seat back in the fore and aft 
directions, move the seat cushion reference point (SCRP) to the rearmost 
position. Using any part of any control, other than those just used, 
determine the full range of angles of the seat cushion reference line 
and set the seat cushion reference line to the middle of the range. 
Using any part of any control other than those that primarily move the 
seat or seat cushion fore and aft, while maintaining the seat cushion 
reference line angle, place the SCRP to its lowest position.
    S8.3.1.3.2 Using only the control that primarily moves the seat fore 
and aft, move the seat cushion reference point to the mid travel 
position. If an adjustment position does not exist midway between the 
forwardmost and rearmost positions, the closest adjustment position to 
the rear of the midpoint is used.
    S8.3.1.3.3 If the seat or seat cushion height is adjustable, other 
than by the controls that primarily move the seat or seat cushion fore 
and aft, set the height of the seat cushion reference point to the 
minimum height, with the seat cushion reference line angle set as 
closely as possible to the angle determined in S8.3.1.3.1. Mark location 
of the seat for future reference.
    S8.3.2  50th Percentile Male SID Dummy (49 CFR Part 572 Subpart F) 
in Front and Rear Seats
    S8.3.2.1 Adjustable seats. Adjustable seats are placed in the 
adjustment position midway between the forward most and rearmost 
positions, and if separately adjustable in a vertical direction, are at 
the lowest position. If an adjustment position does not exist midway 
between the forward most and rearmost positions, the closest adjustment 
position to the rear of the mid-point is used.
    S8.3.2.2 Adjustable seat back placement. Place adjustable seat backs 
in the manufacturer's nominal design riding position in the manner 
specified by the manufacturer. If the position is not specified, set the 
seat back at the first detent rearward of 25[deg] from the vertical. 
Place each adjustable head restraint in its highest adjustment position. 
Position adjustable lumbar supports so that they are set in their 
released, i.e., full back position.
    S8.3.3 5th Percentile Female Dummy in Second Row Seat.
    S8.3.3.1 Lumbar support adjustment. Position adjustable lumbar 
supports so that the lumbar support is in its lowest, retracted or 
deflated adjustment position.
    S8.3.3.2 Other seat adjustments. Position any adjustable parts of 
the seat that provide additional support so that they are in the lowest 
or non-deployed adjustment position. Position any adjustable head 
restraint in the lowest and most forward position. Place adjustable seat 
backs in the manufacturer's nominal design riding position in the manner 
specified by the manufacturer. If the position is not specified, set the 
seat back at the first detent rearward of 25[deg] from the vertical.

[[Page 965]]

    S8.3.3.3 Seat position adjustment. Using only the controls that 
primarily move the seat and seat cushion independent of the seat back in 
the fore and aft directions, move the seat cushion reference point 
(SCRP) to the rearmost position. Using any part of any control, other 
than those just used, determine the full range of angles of the seat 
cushion reference line and set the seat cushion reference line to the 
middle of the range. Using any part of any control other than those that 
primarily move the seat or seat cushion fore and aft, while maintaining 
the seat cushion reference line angle, place the SCRP to its lowest 
position. Mark location of the seat for future reference.
    S8.4 Adjustable steering wheel. Adjustable steering controls are 
adjusted so that the steering wheel hub is at the geometric center of 
the locus it describes when it is moved through its full range of 
driving positions. If there is no setting detent in the mid-position, 
lower the steering wheel to the detent just below the mid-position. If 
the steering column is telescoping, place the steering column in the 
mid-position. If there is no mid-position, move the steering wheel 
rearward one position from the mid-position.
    S8.5 Windows and sunroofs. Movable vehicle windows and vents are 
placed in the fully closed position on the struck side of the vehicle. 
Any sunroof shall be placed in the fully closed position.
    S8.6 Convertible tops. Convertibles and open-body type vehicles have 
the top, if any, in place in the closed passenger compartment 
configuration.
    S8.7 Doors. Doors, including any rear hatchback or tailgate, are 
fully closed and latched but not locked.
    S8.8 Transmission and brake engagement. For a vehicle equipped with 
a manual transmission, the transmission is placed in second gear. For a 
vehicle equipped with an automatic transmission, the transmission is 
placed in neutral. For all vehicles, the parking brake is engaged.
    S8.9 Moving deformable barrier. The moving deformable barrier 
conforms to the dimensions shown in Figure 2 and specified in 49 CFR 
Part 587.
    S8.10 Impact configuration. The test vehicle (vehicle A in Figure 3) 
is stationary. The line of forward motion of the moving deformable 
barrier (vehicle B in Figure 3) forms an angle of 63 degrees with the 
centerline of the test vehicle. The longitudinal centerline of the 
moving deformable barrier is perpendicular to the longitudinal 
centerline of the test vehicle when the barrier strikes the test 
vehicle. In a test in which the test vehicle is to be struck on its left 
(right) side: All wheels of the moving deformable barrier are positioned 
at an angle of 27 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 1 degrees to the right (left) 
of the centerline of the moving deformable barrier; and the left (right) 
forward edge of the moving deformable barrier is aligned so that a 
longitudinal plane tangent to that side passes through the impact 
reference line within a tolerance of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 51 mm (2 
inches) when the barrier strikes the test vehicle.
    S8.11 Impact reference line. Place a vertical reference line at the 
location described below on the side of the vehicle that will be struck 
by the moving deformable barrier.
    S8.11.1 Passenger cars.
    (a) For vehicles with a wheelbase of 2,896 mm (114 inches) or less, 
940 mm (37 inches) forward of the center of the vehicle's wheelbase.
    (b) For vehicles with a wheelbase greater than 2,896 mm (114 
inches), 508 mm (20 inches) rearward of the centerline of the vehicle's 
front axle.
    S8.11.2 Multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses.
    (a) For vehicles with a wheelbase of 2,489 mm (98 inches) or less, 
305 mm (12 inches) rearward of the centerline of the vehicle's front 
axle, except as otherwise specified in paragraph (d) of this section.
    (b) For vehicles with a wheelbase of greater than 2,489 mm (98 
inches) but not greater than 2,896 mm (114 inches), 940 mm (37 inches) 
forward of the center of the vehicle's wheelbase, except as otherwise 
specified in paragraph (d) of this section.
    (c) For vehicles with a wheelbase greater than 2,896 mm (114 
inches), 508 mm (20 inches) rearward of the centerline of the vehicle's 
front axle, except as otherwise specified in paragraph (d) of this 
section.

[[Page 966]]

    (d) At the manufacturer's option, for different wheelbase versions 
of the same model vehicle, the impact reference line may be located by 
the following:
    (1) Select the shortest wheelbase vehicle of the different wheelbase 
versions of the same model and locate on it the impact reference line at 
the location described in (a), (b) or (c) of this section, as 
appropriate;
    (2) Measure the distance between the seating reference point (SgRP) 
and the impact reference line;
    (3) Maintain the same distance between the SgRP and the impact 
reference line for the version being tested as that between the SgRP and 
the impact reference line for the shortest wheelbase version of the 
model.
    (e) For the compliance test, the impact reference line will be 
located using the procedure used by the manufacturer as the basis for 
its certification of compliance with the requirements of this standard. 
If the manufacturer did not use any of the procedures in this section, 
or does not specify a procedure when asked by the agency, the agency may 
locate the impact reference line using either procedure.
    S8.12 Anthropomorphic test dummies. The anthropomorphic test dummies 
used to evaluate a vehicle's performance in the moving deformable 
barrier test conform to the requirements of S11 and are positioned as 
described in S12 of this standard (49 CFR 571.214).

[[Page 967]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11SE07.001


[[Page 968]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11SE07.002

    S9. Vehicle-To-Pole Requirements.
    S9.1 Except as provided in S5, when tested under the conditions of 
S10:
    S9.1.1 Except as provided in S9.1.3 of this section, for vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2010 to August 31, 2014, a 
percentage of each manufacturer's production, as specified in S13.1.1, 
S13.1.2, S13.1.3, and S13.1.4 shall meet the requirements of S9.2.1, 
S9.2.2, and S9.2.3 when tested under the conditions of S10 into a fixed, 
rigid pole of 254 mm (10 inches) in diameter, at any velocity between 26 
km/h to 32 km/h (16 to 20 mph) inclusive. Vehicles manufactured before 
September 1, 2014 that are

[[Page 969]]

not subject to the phase-in may be certified as meeting the requirements 
specified in this section.
    S9.1.2 Except as provided in S9.1.3 of this section, each vehicle 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2014, must meet the requirements 
of S9.2.1, S9.2.2 and S9.2.3, when tested under the conditions specified 
in S10 into a fixed, rigid pole of 254 mm (10 inches) in diameter, at 
any speed up to and including 32 km/h (20 mph). All vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2014 must meet S9.1.2 without the 
use of advance credits.
    S9.1.3 Exceptions from the phase-in; special allowances.
    (a)(1) Vehicles that are manufactured by an original vehicle 
manufacturer that produces or assembles fewer than 5,000 vehicles 
annually for sale in the United States are not subject to S9.1.1 of this 
section (but vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2014 by 
these manufacturers are subject to S9.1.2);
    (2) Vehicles that are manufactured by a limited line manufacturer 
are not subject to S9.1.1 of this section (but vehicles manufactured on 
or after September 1, 2014 by these manufacturers are subject to 
S9.1.2).
    (b) Vehicles that are altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) 
before September 1, 2016 after having been previously certified in 
accordance with part 567 of this chapter, and vehicles manufactured in 
two or more stages before September 1, 2016, are not subject to S9.1.1. 
Vehicles that are altered on or after September 1, 2016, and vehicles 
that are manufactured in two or more stages on or after September 1, 
2016, must meet the requirements of S9.1.2, when tested under the 
conditions specified in S10 into a fixed, rigid pole of 254 mm (10 
inches) in diameter, at any speed up to and including 32 km/h (20 mph).
    (c) Vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating greater than 3,855 
kg (8,500 lb) manufactured before September 1, 2015 are not subject to 
S9.1.1 or S9.1.2 of this section. These vehicles may be voluntarily 
certified to meet the pole test requirements prior to September 1, 2015. 
Vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating greater than 3,855 kg (8,500 
lb) manufactured on or after September 1, 2015 must meet the 
requirements of S9.2.1, S9.2.2 and S9.2.3, when tested under the 
conditions specified in S10 into a fixed, rigid pole of 254 mm (10 
inches) in diameter, at any speed up to and including 32 km/h (20 mph).
    (d)(1) Convertibles manufactured before September 1, 2015 are not 
subject to S9.1.1 or S9.1.2 of this section. These vehicles may be 
voluntarily certified to meet the pole test requirements prior to 
September 1, 2015.
    (2) Convertibles manufactured on or after September 1, 2015 must 
meet the requirements of S9.2.1, S9.2.2 and S9.2.3, when tested under 
the conditions specified in S10 into a fixed, rigid pole of 254 mm (10 
inches) in diameter, at any speed up to and including 32 km/h (20 mph).
    S9.2 Requirements. Each vehicle shall meet these vehicle-to-pole 
test requirements when tested under the conditions of S10 of this 
standard. At NHTSA's option, either the 50th percentile adult male test 
dummy (ES-2re dummy, 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart U) or the 5th percentile 
adult female test dummy (SID-IIs, 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart V) shall be 
used in the test. At NHTSA's option, either front outboard seating 
position shall be tested. The vehicle shall meet the specific 
requirements at all front outboard seating positions.
    S9.2.1 Dynamic performance requirements using the Part 572 Subpart U 
(ES-2re 50th percentile male) dummy. When using the ES-2re Part 572 
Subpart U dummy, use the specifications of S11 of this standard (49 CFR 
571.214). When using the dummy, the following performance requirements 
must be met using measurements in accordance with S11.5.
    (a) The HIC shall not exceed 1000 when calculated in accordance with 
the following formula:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11SE07.005

    Where the term a is the resultant head acceleration at the center of 
gravity of the dummy head expressed as a multiple of g (the acceleration 
of gravity), and t1 and t2 are any two points in

[[Page 970]]

time during the impact which are separated by not more than a 36 
millisecond time interval and where t1 is less than t2.

    (b) Thorax. The deflection of any of the upper, middle, and lower 
ribs, shall not exceed 44 mm (1.73 inches).
    (c) Force measurements.
    (1) The sum of the front, middle and rear abdominal forces, shall 
not exceed 2,500 N (562 pounds).
    (2) The pubic symphysis force shall not exceed 6,000 N (1,350 
pounds).
    S9.2.2 Dynamic performance requirements using the Part 572 Subpart V 
SID-IIs (5th percentile female) dummy. When using the SID-IIs Part 572 
Subpart V dummy, use the specifications of S11 of this standard (49 CFR 
571.214). When using the dummy, the following performance requirements 
must be met.
    (a) The HIC shall not exceed 1000 when calculated in accordance with 
the following formula:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11SE07.006

    Where the term a is the resultant head acceleration at the center of 
gravity of the dummy head expressed as a multiple of g (the acceleration 
of gravity), and t1 and t2 are any two points in time during the impact 
which are separated by not more than a 36 millisecond time interval and 
where t1 is less than t2.

    (b) Resultant lower spine acceleration must not exceed 82 g.
    (c) The sum of the acetabular and iliac pelvic forces must not 
exceed 5,525 N.
    S9.2.3 Door opening.
    (a) Any side door that is struck by the pole shall not separate 
totally from the vehicle.
    (b) Any door (including a rear hatchback or tailgate) that is not 
struck by the pole shall meet the following requirements:
    (1) The door shall not disengage from the latched position; and
    (2) The latch shall not separate from the striker, and the hinge 
components shall not separate from each other or from their attachment 
to the vehicle.
    (3) Neither the latch nor the hinge systems of the door shall pull 
out of their anchorages.
    S10. General test conditions for determining compliance with 
vehicle-to-pole requirements. General test conditions for determining 
compliance with the vehicle-to-pole test are specified below and in S12 
of this standard (49 CFR 571.214).
    S10.1 Test weight. Each vehicle is loaded as specified in S8.1 of 
this standard (49 CFR 571.214).
    S10.2 Vehicle test attitude. When the vehicle is in its ``as 
delivered,'' ``fully loaded'' and ``as tested'' condition, locate the 
vehicle on a flat, horizontal surface to determine the vehicle attitude. 
Use the same level surface or reference plane and the same standard 
points on the test vehicle when determining the ``as delivered,'' 
``fully loaded'' and ``as tested'' conditions. Measure the angles 
relative to a horizontal plane, front-to-rear and from left-to-right for 
the ``as delivered,'' ``fully loaded,'' and ``as tested'' conditions. 
The front-to-rear angle (pitch) is measured along a fixed reference on 
the driver's and front passenger's door sill. Mark where the angles are 
taken on the door sill. The left to right angle (roll) is measured along 
a fixed reference point at the front and rear of the vehicle at the 
vehicle longitudinal center plane. Mark where the angles are measured. 
The ``as delivered'' condition is the vehicle as received at the test 
site, with 100 percent of all fluid capacities and all tires inflated to 
the manufacturer's specifications listed on the vehicle's tire placard. 
When the vehicle is in its ``fully loaded'' condition, measure the angle 
between the driver's door sill and the horizontal, at the same place the 
``as delivered'' angle was measured. The ``fully loaded condition'' is 
the test vehicle loaded in accordance with S8.1 of this standard (49 CFR 
571.214). The load placed in the cargo area is centered over the 
longitudinal centerline of the vehicle. The vehicle ``as tested'' pitch 
and roll angles are between the ``as delivered'' and ``fully loaded'' 
condition, inclusive.
    S10.3 Adjustable seats.
    S10.3.1 Driver and front passenger seat set-up for 50th percentile 
male dummy. The driver and front passenger seats

[[Page 971]]

are set up as specified in S8.3.1 of this standard, 49 CFR 571.214.
    S10.3.2. Driver and front passenger seat set-up for 49 CFR Part 572 
Subpart V 5th percentile female dummy.
    S10.3.2.1 Lumbar support adjustment. Position adjustable lumbar 
supports so that the lumbar support is in its lowest, retracted or 
deflated adjustment position.
    S10.3.2.2 Other seat adjustments. Position any adjustable parts of 
the seat that provide additional support so that they are in the lowest 
or non-deployed adjustment position. Position any adjustable head 
restraint in the lowest and most forward position. If it is possible to 
achieve a position lower than the effective detent range, the head 
restraint should be set to its lowest possible position. Place 
adjustable seat backs in the manufacturer's nominal design riding 
position in the manner specified by the manufacturer. If the position is 
not specified, set the seat back at the first detent rearward of 25[deg] 
from the vertical.
    S10.3.2.3 Seat position adjustment. If the passenger seat does not 
adjust independently of the driver seat, the driver seat controls the 
final position of the passenger seat.
    S10.3.2.3.1 Using only the controls that primarily move the seat and 
seat cushion independent of the seat back in the fore and aft 
directions, move the seat cushion reference point (SCRP) to the rearmost 
position. Using any part of any control, other than those just used, 
determine the full range of angles of the seat cushion reference line 
and set the seat cushion reference line to the middle of the range. 
Using any part of any control other than those that primarily move the 
seat or seat cushion fore and aft, while maintaining the seat cushion 
reference line angle, place the SCRP to its lowest position.
    S10.3.2.3.2 Using only the control that primarily moves the seat 
fore and aft, move the seat reference point to the most forward 
position.
    S10.3.2.3.3 If the seat or seat cushion height is adjustable, other 
than by the controls that primarily move the seat or seat cushion fore 
and aft, set the seat reference point to the midpoint height, with the 
seat cushion reference line angle set as close as possible to the angle 
determined in S10.3.2.3.1. Mark location of the seat for future 
reference.
    S10.4 Positioning dummies for the vehicle-to-pole test.
    (a) 50th percentile male test dummy (49 CFR Part 572 Subpart U ES-
2re dummy). The 50th percentile male test dummy is positioned in the 
front outboard seating position on the struck side of the vehicle in 
accordance with the provisions of S12.2 of this standard, 49 CFR 
571.214.
    (b) 5th percentile female test dummy (49 CFR Part 572 Subpart V SID-
IIs dummy). The 5th percentile female test dummy is positioned in the 
front outboard seating positions on the struck side of the vehicle in 
accordance with the provisions of S12.3 of this standard, 49 CFR 
571.214.
    S10.5 Adjustable steering wheel. Adjustable steering controls are 
adjusted so that the steering wheel hub is at the geometric center of 
the locus it describes when it is moved through its full range of 
driving positions. If there is no setting detent in the mid-position, 
lower the steering wheel to the detent just below the mid-position. If 
the steering column is telescoping, place the steering column in the 
mid-position. If there is no mid-position, move the steering wheel 
rearward one position from the mid-position.
    S10.6 Windows and sunroofs. Movable vehicle windows and vents are 
placed in the fully closed position on the struck side of the vehicle. 
Any sunroof is placed in the fully closed position.
    S10.7 Convertible tops. Convertibles and open-body type vehicles 
have the top, if any, in place in the closed passenger compartment 
configuration.
    S10.8 Doors. Doors, including any rear hatchback or tailgate, are 
fully closed and latched but not locked.
    S10.9 Transmission and brake engagement. For a vehicle equipped with 
a manual transmission, the transmission is placed in second gear. For a 
vehicle equipped with an automatic transmission, the transmission is 
placed in neutral. For all vehicles, the parking brake is engaged.
    S10.10 Rigid pole. The rigid pole is a vertical metal structure 
beginning no more than 102 millimeters (4 inches) above the lowest point 
of the tires on

[[Page 972]]

the striking side of the test vehicle when the vehicle is loaded as 
specified in S8.1 and extending above the highest point of the roof of 
the test vehicle. The pole is 254 mm (10 inches) <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 
6 mm (0.25 in) in diameter and set off from any mounting surface, such 
as a barrier or other structure, so that the test vehicle will not 
contact such a mount or support at any time within 100 milliseconds of 
the initiation of vehicle to pole contact.
    S10.11 Impact reference line. The impact reference line is located 
on the striking side of the vehicle at the intersection of the vehicle 
exterior and a vertical plane passing through the center of gravity of 
the head of the dummy seated in accordance with S12 in the front 
outboard designated seating position. The vertical plane forms an angle 
of 285 (or 75) degrees with the vehicle's longitudinal centerline for 
the right (or left) side impact test. The angle is measured 
counterclockwise from the vehicle's positive X-axis as defined in 
S10.13.
    S10.12 Impact configuration.
    S10.12.1 The rigid pole is stationary.
    S10.12.2 The test vehicle is propelled sideways so that its line of 
forward motion forms an angle of 285 (or 75) degrees (<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>3 degrees) for the right (or left) side impact with the 
vehicle's longitudinal centerline. The angle is measured 
counterclockwise from the vehicle's positive X-axis as defined in 
S10.13. The impact reference line is aligned with the center line of the 
rigid pole surface, as viewed in the direction of vehicle motion, so 
that, when the vehicle-to-pole contact occurs, the center line contacts 
the vehicle area bounded by two vertical planes parallel to and 38 mm 
(1.5 inches) forward and aft of the impact reference line.
    S10.13 Vehicle reference coordinate system. The vehicle reference 
coordinate system is an orthogonal coordinate system consisting of three 
axes, a longitudinal axis (X), a transverse axis (Y), and a vertical 
axis (Z). X and Y are in the same horizontal plane and Z passes through 
the intersection of X and Y. The origin of the system is at the center 
of gravity of the vehicle. The X-axis is parallel to the longitudinal 
centerline of the vehicle and is positive to the vehicle front end and 
negative to the rear end. The Y-axis is positive to the left side of the 
vehicle and negative to the right side. The Z-axis is positive above the 
X-Y plane and negative below it.
    S11 Anthropomorphic test dummies. The anthropomorphic test dummies 
used to evaluate a vehicle's performance in the moving deformable 
barrier and vehicle-to-pole tests are specified in 49 CFR part 572. In a 
test in which the test vehicle is to be struck on its left side, each 
dummy is to be configured and instrumented to be struck on its left 
side, in accordance with part 572. In a test in which the test vehicle 
is to be struck on its right side, each dummy is to be configured and 
instrumented to be struck on its right side, in accordance with part 
572.
    S11.1 Clothing.
    (a) 50th percentile male. Each test dummy representing a 50th 
percentile male is clothed in formfitting cotton stretch garments with 
short sleeves and midcalf length pants. Each foot of the test dummy is 
equipped with a size 11EEE shoe, which meets the configuration size, 
sole, and heel thickness specifications of MIL-S-13192 (1976) and weighs 
0.68 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.09 kilograms (1.25 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 
0.2 lb).
    (b) 5th percentile female. The 49 CFR part 572 subpart V test dummy 
representing a 5th percentile female is clothed in formfitting cotton 
stretch garments with short sleeves and about the knee length pants. 
Each foot has on a size 7.5W shoe that meets the configuration and size 
specifications of MIL-S-21711E or its equivalent.
    S11.2 Limb joints.
    (a) For the 50th percentile male dummy, set the limb joints at 
between 1 and 2 g. Adjust the leg joints with the torso in the supine 
position. Adjust the knee and ankle joints so that they just support the 
lower leg and the foot when extended horizontally (1 to 2 g adjustment).
    (b) For the 49 CFR Part 572 Subpart V 5th percentile female dummy, 
set the limb joints at slightly above 1 g, barely restraining the weight 
of the limb when extended horizontally. The force needed to move a limb 
segment does not exceed 2 g throughout the range of limb motion. Adjust 
the leg joints with the torso in the supine position.

[[Page 973]]

    S11.3 The stabilized temperature of the test dummy at the time of 
the test is at any temperature between 20.6 degrees C and 22.2 degrees 
C.
    S11.4 Acceleration data. Accelerometers are installed on the head, 
rib, spine and pelvis components of various dummies as required to meet 
the injury criteria of the standard. Accelerations measured from 
different dummy components may use different filters and processing 
methods.
    S11.5 Processing Data.
    (a) Subpart F (SID) test dummy.
    (1) Process the acceleration data from the accelerometers mounted on 
the ribs, spine and pelvis of the Subpart F dummy with the FIR100 
software specified in 49 CFR 572.44(d). Process the data in the 
following manner:
    (i) Filter the data with a 300 Hz, SAE Class 180 filter;
    (ii) Subsample the data to a 1600 Hz sampling rate;
    (iii) Remove the bias from the subsampled data; and
    (iv) Filter the data with the FIR100 software specified in 49 CFR 
572.44(d), which has the following characteristics--
    (A) Passband frequency 100 Hz.
    (B) Stopband frequency 189 Hz.
    (C) Stopband gain -50 db.
    (D) Passband ripple 0.0225 db.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (b) Subpart U (ES-2re 50th percentile male) test dummy.
    (1) The rib deflection data are filtered at channel frequency class 
180 Hz. Abdominal and pubic force data are filtered at channel frequency 
class of 600 Hz.
    (2) The acceleration data from the accelerometers installed inside 
the skull cavity of the ES-2re test dummy are filtered at channel 
frequency class of 1000 Hz.
    (c) Subpart V (SID-IIs 5th percentile female) test dummy.
    (1) The acceleration data from the accelerometers installed inside 
the skull cavity of the SID-IIs test dummy are filtered at channel 
frequency class of 1000 Hz.
    (2) The acceleration data from the accelerometers installed on the 
lower spine of the SID-IIs test dummy are filtered at channel frequency 
class of 180 Hz.
    (3) The iliac and acetabular forces from load cells installed in the 
pelvis of the SID-IIs are filtered at channel frequency class of 600 Hz.
    S12 Positioning procedures for the anthropomorphic test dummies.
    S12.1 50th percentile male test dummy--49 CFR part 572 subpart F 
(SID). Position a correctly configured test dummy, conforming to the 
applicable requirements of part 572 Subpart F of this chapter, in the 
front outboard seating position on the side of the test vehicle to be 
struck by the moving deformable barrier and, if the vehicle has a second 
seat, position another conforming test dummy in the second seat outboard 
position on the same side of the vehicle, as specified in S12.1.3. Each 
test dummy is restrained using all available belt systems in all seating 
positions where such belt restraints are provided. Place any adjustable 
anchorages at the manufacturer's nominal design position for a 50th 
percentile adult male occupant. In addition, any folding armrest is 
retracted. Additional positioning procedures are specified below.
    S12.1.1 Positioning a Part 572 Subpart F (SID) dummy in the driver 
position.
    (a) Torso. Hold the dummy's head in place and push laterally on the 
non-impacted side of the upper torso in a single stroke with a force of 
66.7-89.0 N (15-20 lb) towards the impacted side.
    (1) For a bench seat. The upper torso of the test dummy rests 
against the seat back. The midsagittal plane of the test dummy is 
vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline, and 
passes through the center of the steering wheel.
    (2) For a bucket seat. The upper torso of the test dummy rests 
against the seat back. The midsagittal plane of the test dummy is 
vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline, and 
coincides with the longitudinal centerline of the bucket seat.
    (b) Pelvis.
    (1) H-point. The H-points of each test dummy coincide within 12.7 mm 
(\1/2\ inch) in the vertical dimension and 12.7 mm (\1/2\ inch) in the 
horizontal dimension of a point that is located 6.4 mm (\1/4\ inch) 
below the position of the H-

[[Page 974]]

point determined by using the equipment for the 50th percentile and 
procedures specified in SAE J826 (1980) (incorporated by reference; see 
49 CFR 571.5), except that Table 1 of SAE J826 is not applicable. The 
length of the lower leg and thigh segments of the H-point machine are 
adjusted to 414 and 401 mm (16.3 and 15.8 inches), respectively.
    (2) Pelvic angle. As determined using the pelvic angle gauge (GM 
drawing 78051-532 incorporated by reference in part 572, Subpart E of 
this chapter) which is inserted into the H-point gauging hole of the 
dummy, the angle of the plane of the surface on the lumbar-pelvic 
adaptor on which the lumbar spine attaches is 23 to 25 degrees from the 
horizontal, sloping upward toward the front of the vehicle.
    (3) Legs. The upper legs of each test dummy rest against the seat 
cushion to the extent permitted by placement of the feet. The left knee 
of the dummy is positioned such that the distance from the outer surface 
of the knee pivot bolt to the dummy's midsagittal plane is 152.4 mm (6.0 
inches). To the extent practicable, the left leg of the test dummy is in 
a vertical longitudinal plane.
    (4) Feet. The right foot of the test dummy rests on the undepressed 
accelerator with the heel resting as far forward as possible on the 
floorpan. The left foot is set perpendicular to the lower leg with the 
heel resting on the floorpan in the same lateral line as the right heel.
    S12.1.2 Positioning a Part 572 Subpart F (SID) dummy in the front 
outboard seating position.
    (a) Torso. Hold the dummy's head in place and push laterally on the 
non-impacted side of the upper torso in a single stroke with a force of 
66.7-89.0 N (15-20 lb) towards the impacted side.
    (1) For a bench seat. The upper torso of the test dummy rests 
against the seat back. The midsagittal plane of the test dummy is 
vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline, and the 
same distance from the vehicle's longitudinal centerline as would be the 
midsagittal plane of a test dummy positioned in the driver position 
under S12.1.1(a)(1).
    (2) For a bucket seat. The upper torso of the test dummy rests 
against the seat back. The midsagittal plane of the test dummy is 
vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline, and 
coincides with the longitudinal centerline of the bucket seat.
    (b) Pelvis.
    (1) H-point. The H-points of each test dummy coincide within 12.7 mm 
(\1/2\ inch) in the vertical dimension and 12.7 mm (\1/2\ inch) in the 
horizontal dimension of a point that is located 6.4 mm (\1/4\ inch) 
below the position of the H-point determined by using the equipment for 
the 50th percentile and procedures specified in SAE J826 (1980) 
(incorporated by reference; see 49 CFR 571.5), except that Table 1 of 
SAE J826 is not applicable. The length of the lower leg and thigh 
segments of the H-point machine are adjusted to 414 and 401 mm (16.3 and 
15.8 inches), respectively.
    (2) Pelvic angle. As determined using the pelvic angle gauge (GM 
drawing 78051-532 incorporated by reference in part 572, Subpart E of 
this chapter) which is inserted into the H-point gauging hole of the 
dummy, the angle of the plane of the surface on the lumbar-pelvic 
adaptor on which the lumbar spine attaches is 23 to 25 degrees from the 
horizontal, sloping upward toward the front of the vehicle.
    (c) Legs. The upper legs of each test dummy rest against the seat 
cushion to the extent permitted by placement of the feet. The initial 
distance between the outboard knee clevis flange surfaces is 292 mm 
(11.5 inches). To the extent practicable, both legs of the test dummies 
in outboard passenger positions are in vertical longitudinal planes. 
Final adjustment to accommodate placement of feet in accordance with 
S12.1.2(d) for various passenger compartment configurations is 
permitted.
    (d) Feet. The feet of the test dummy are placed on the vehicle's 
toeboard with the heels resting on the floorpan as close as possible to 
the intersection of the toeboard and floorpan. If the feet cannot be 
placed flat on the toeboard, they are set perpendicular to the lower 
legs and placed as far forward as possible so that the heels rest on the 
floorpan.

[[Page 975]]

    S12.1.3 Positioning a Part 572 Subpart F (SID) dummy in the rear 
outboard seating positions.
    (a) Torso. Hold the dummy's head in place and push laterally on the 
non-impacted side of the upper torso in a single stroke with a force of 
66.7-89.0 N (15-20 lb) towards the impacted side.
    (1) For a bench seat. The upper torso of the test dummy rests 
against the seat back. The midsagittal plane of the test dummy is 
vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline, and, if 
possible, the same distance from the vehicle's longitudinal centerline 
as the midsagittal plane of a test dummy positioned in the driver 
position under S12.1.1(a)(1). If it is not possible to position the test 
dummy so that its midsagittal plane is parallel to the vehicle 
longitudinal centerline and is at this distance from the vehicle's 
longitudinal centerline, the test dummy is positioned so that some 
portion of the test dummy just touches, at or above the seat level, the 
side surface of the vehicle, such as the upper quarter panel, an 
armrest, or any interior trim (i.e., either the broad trim panel surface 
or a smaller, localized trim feature).
    (2) For a bucket or contoured seat. The upper torso of the test 
dummy rests against the seat back. The midsagittal plane of the test 
dummy is vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline, 
and coincides with the longitudinal centerline of the bucket or 
contoured seat.
    (b) Pelvis.
    (1) H-point. The H-points of each test dummy coincide within 12.7 mm 
(\1/2\ inch) in the vertical dimension and 12.7 mm (\1/2\ inch) in the 
horizontal dimension of a point that is located 6.4 mm (\1/4\ inch) 
below the position of the H-point determined by using the equipment for 
the 50th percentile and procedures specified in SAE J826 (1980) 
(incorporated by reference; see 49CFR 571.5), except that Table 1 of SAE 
J826 is not applicable. The length of the lower leg and thigh segments 
of the H-point machine are adjusted to 414 and 401 mm (16.3 and 15.8 
inches), respectively.
    (2) Pelvic angle. As determined using the pelvic angle gauge (GM 
drawing 78051-532 incorporated by reference in part 572, Subpart E of 
this chapter) which is inserted into the H-point gauging hole of the 
dummy, the angle of the plane of the surface on the lumbar-pelvic 
adaptor on which the lumbar spine attaches is 23 to 25 degrees from the 
horizontal, sloping upward toward the front of the vehicle.
    (c) Legs. Rest the upper legs of each test dummy against the seat 
cushion to the extent permitted by placement of the feet. The initial 
distance between the outboard knee clevis flange surfaces is 292 mm 
(11.5 inches). To the extent practicable, both legs of the test dummies 
in outboard passenger positions are in vertical longitudinal planes. 
Final adjustment to accommodate placement of feet in accordance with 
S12.1.3(d) for various passenger compartment configurations is 
permitted.
    (d) Feet. Place the feet of the test dummy flat on the floorpan and 
beneath the front seat as far as possible without front seat 
interference. If necessary, the distance between the knees may be 
changed in order to place the feet beneath the seat.
    S12.2 50th percentile male test dummy--49 CFR Part 572 Subpart U 
(ES-2re).
    S12.2.1 Positioning an ES-2re dummy in all seating positions. 
Position a correctly configured ES-2re test dummy, conforming to the 
applicable requirements of part 572 of this chapter, in the front 
outboard seating position on the side of the test vehicle to be struck 
by the moving deformable barrier or pole. Restrain the test dummy using 
all available belt systems in the seating positions where the belt 
restraints are provided. Place any adjustable anchorages at the 
manufacturer's nominal design position for a 50th percentile adult male 
occupant. Retract any folding armrest.
    S12.3 5th percentile female test dummy--49 CFR Part 572 Subpart V 
(SID-IIs). Position a correctly configured 5th percentile female Part 
572 Subpart V (SID-IIs) test dummy, conforming to the applicable 
requirements of part 572 of this chapter, in the front outboard seating 
position on the side of the test vehicle to be struck by the pole and, 
for the moving deformable barrier, if the vehicle has a second seat, 
position

[[Page 976]]

a conforming test dummy in the second seat outboard position on the same 
side of the vehicle (side to be struck) as specified in S12.3.4. Retract 
any folding armrest. Additional procedures are specified below.
    S12.3.1 General provisions and definitions.
    (a) Measure all angles with respect to the horizontal plane unless 
otherwise stated.
    (b) Adjust the SID-IIs dummy's neck bracket to align the zero degree 
index marks.
    (c) Other seat adjustments. The longitudinal centerline of a bucket 
seat cushion passes through the SgRP and is parallel to the longitudinal 
centerline of the vehicle.
    (d) Driver and passenger manual belt adjustment. Use all available 
belt systems. Place adjustable belt anchorages at the nominal position 
for a 5th percentile adult female suggested by the vehicle manufacturer.
    (e) Definitions.
    (1) The term ``midsagittal plane'' refers to the vertical plane that 
separates the dummy into equal left and right halves.
    (2) The term ``vertical longitudinal plane'' refers to a vertical 
plane parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline.
    (3) The term ``vertical plane'' refers to a vertical plane, not 
necessarily parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline.
    (4) The term ``transverse instrumentation platform'' refers to the 
transverse instrumentation surface inside the dummy's skull casting to 
which the neck load cell mounts. This surface is perpendicular to the 
skull cap's machined inferior-superior mounting surface.
    (5) The term ``thigh'' refers to the femur between, but not 
including, the knee and the pelvis.
    (6) The term ``leg'' refers to the lower part of the entire leg 
including the knee.
    (7) The term ``foot'' refers to the foot, including the ankle.
    (8) For leg and thigh angles, use the following references:
    (i) Thigh--a straight line on the thigh skin between the center of 
the \1/2\-13 UNC-2B tapped hole in the upper leg femur clamp and the 
knee pivot shoulder bolt.
    (ii) Leg--a straight line on the leg skin between the center of the 
ankle shell and the knee pivot shoulder bolt.
    (9) The term ``seat cushion reference point'' (SCRP) means a point 
placed on the outboard side of the seat cushion at a horizontal distance 
between 150 mm (5.9 in) and 250 mm (9.8 in) from the front edge of the 
seat used as a guide in positioning the seat.
    (10) The term ``seat cushion reference line'' means a line on the 
side of the seat cushion, passing through the seat cushion reference 
point, whose projection in the vehicle vertical longitudinal plane is 
straight and has a known angle with respect to the horizontal.
    S12.3.2 5th percentile female driver dummy positioning.
    (a) Driver torso/head/seat back angle positioning.
    (1) With the seat in the position determined in S10.3.2, use only 
the control that moves the seat fore and aft to place the seat in the 
rearmost position. If the seat cushion reference line angle 
automatically changes as the seat is moved from the full forward 
position, maintain, as closely as possible, the seat cushion reference 
line angle determined in S10.3.2.3.3, for the final forward position 
when measuring the pelvic angle as specified in S12.3.2(a)(11). The seat 
cushion reference line angle position may be achieved through the use of 
any seat or seat cushion adjustments other than that which primarily 
moves the seat or seat cushion fore-aft.
    (2) Fully recline the seat back, if adjustable. Install the dummy 
into the driver's seat, such that when the legs are positioned 120 
degrees to the thighs, the calves of the legs are not touching the seat 
cushion.
    (3) Bucket seats. Center the dummy on the seat cushion so that its 
midsagittal plane is vertical and passes through the SgRP within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in).
    (4) Bench seats. Position the midsagittal plane of the dummy 
vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline and 
aligned within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 
in) of the center of the steering wheel rim.

[[Page 977]]

    (5) Hold the dummy's thighs down and push rearward on the upper 
torso to maximize the dummy's pelvic angle.
    (6) Place the legs at 120 degrees to the thighs. Set the initial 
transverse distance between the longitudinal centerlines at the front of 
the dummy's knees at 160 to 170 mm (6.3 to 6.7 in), with the thighs and 
legs of the dummy in vertical planes. Push rearward on the dummy's knees 
to force the pelvis into the seat so there is no gap between the pelvis 
and the seat back or until contact occurs between the back of the 
dummy's calves and the front of the seat cushion.
    (7) Gently rock the upper torso relative to the lower torso 
laterally in a side to side motion three times through a <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 degree arc (approximately 51 mm (2 in) side to side).
    (8) If needed, extend the legs slightly so that the feet are not in 
contact with the floor pan. Let the thighs rest on the seat cushion to 
the extent permitted by the foot movement. Keeping the leg and the thigh 
in a vertical plane, place the foot in the vertical longitudinal plane 
that passes through the centerline of the accelerator pedal. Rotate the 
left thigh outboard about the hip until the center of the knee is the 
same distance from the midsagittal plane of the dummy as the right knee 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.2 in). Using only 
the control that moves the seat fore and aft, attempt to return the seat 
to the full forward position. If either of the dummy's legs first 
contacts the steering wheel, then adjust the steering wheel, if 
adjustable, upward until contact with the steering wheel is avoided. If 
the steering wheel is not adjustable, separate the knees enough to avoid 
steering wheel contact. Proceed with moving the seat forward until 
either the leg contacts the vehicle interior or the seat reaches the 
full forward position. (The right foot may contact and depress the 
accelerator and/or change the angle of the foot with respect to the leg 
during seat movement.) If necessary to avoid contact with the vehicle's 
brake or clutch pedal, rotate the test dummy's left foot about the leg. 
If there is still interference, rotate the left thigh outboard about the 
hip the minimum distance necessary to avoid pedal interference. If a 
dummy leg contacts the vehicle interior before the full forward position 
is attained, position the seat at the next detent where there is no 
contact. If the seat is a power seat, move the seat fore and aft to 
avoid contact while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) 
distance between the vehicle interior and the point on the dummy that 
would first contact the vehicle interior. If the steering wheel was 
moved, return it to the position described in S10.5. If the steering 
wheel contacts the dummy's leg(s) prior to attaining this position, 
adjust it to the next higher detent, or if infinitely adjustable, until 
there is 5 mm (0.2 in) clearance between the wheel and the dummy's 
leg(s).
    (9) For vehicles without adjustable seat backs, adjust the lower 
neck bracket to level the head as much as possible. For vehicles with 
adjustable seat backs, while holding the thighs in place, rotate the 
seat back forward until the transverse instrumentation platform of the 
head is level to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degree, making sure 
that the pelvis does not interfere with the seat bight. If the torso 
contacts the steering wheel, adjust the steering wheel in the following 
order until there is no contact: telescoping adjustment, lowering 
adjustment, raising adjustment. If the vehicle has no adjustments or 
contact with the steering wheel cannot be eliminated by adjustment, 
position the seat at the next detent where there is no contact with the 
steering wheel as adjusted in S10.5. If the seat is a power seat, 
position the seat to avoid contact while assuring that there is a 
maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) distance between the steering wheel as adjusted 
in S10.5 and the point of contact on the dummy. Adjust the lower neck 
bracket to level the head as much as possible.
    (10) If it is not possible to achieve the head level within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees, minimize the angle.
    (11) Measure and set the dummy's pelvic angle using the pelvic angle 
gage. The angle is set to 20.0 degrees <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2.5 
degrees. If this is not possible, adjust the pelvic angle as close to 
20.0 degrees as possible while keeping the transverse instrumentation 
platform of the head as level as possible by adjustments specified in 
S12.3.2(a)(9) and (10).

[[Page 978]]

    (12) If the dummy is contacting the vehicle interior after these 
adjustments, move the seat rearward until there is a maximum of 5 mm 
(0.2 in) between the contact point of the dummy and the interior of the 
vehicle or if it has a manual seat adjustment, to the next rearward 
detent position. If after these adjustments, the dummy contact point is 
more than 5 mm (0.2 in) from the vehicle interior and the seat is still 
not in its forwardmost position, move the seat forward until the contact 
point is 5 mm (0.2 in) or less from the vehicle interior, or if it has a 
manual seat adjustment, move the seat to the closest detent position 
without making contact, or until the seat reaches its forwardmost 
position, whichever occurs first.
    (b) Driver foot positioning.
    (1) If the vehicle has an adjustable accelerator pedal, adjust it to 
the full forward position. If the heel of the right foot can contact the 
floor pan, follow the positioning procedure in S12.3.2(b)(1)(i). If not, 
follow the positioning procedure in S12.3.2(b)(1)(ii).
    (i) Rest the right foot of the test dummy on the un-depressed 
accelerator pedal with the rearmost point of the heel on the floor pan 
in the plane of the pedal. If the foot cannot be placed on the 
accelerator pedal, set it initially perpendicular to the leg and then 
place it as far forward as possible in the direction of the pedal 
centerline with the rearmost point of the heel resting on the floor pan. 
If the vehicle has an adjustable accelerator pedal and the right foot is 
not touching the accelerator pedal when positioned as above, move the 
pedal rearward until it touches the right foot. If the accelerator pedal 
in the full rearward position still does not touch the foot, leave the 
pedal in that position.
    (ii) Extend the foot and lower leg by decreasing the knee flexion 
angle until any part of the foot contacts the un-depressed accelerator 
pedal or the highest part of the foot is at the same height as the 
highest part of the pedal. If the vehicle has an adjustable accelerator 
pedal and the right foot is not touching the accelerator pedal when 
positioned as above, move the pedal rearward until it touches the right 
foot.
    (2) If the ball of the foot does not contact the pedal, increase the 
ankle plantar flexion angle such that the toe of the foot contacts or is 
as close as possible to contact with the un-depressed accelerator pedal.
    (3) If, in its final position, the heel is off of the vehicle floor, 
a spacer block is used under the heel to support the final foot 
position. The surface of the block in contact with the heel has an 
inclination of 30 degrees, measured from the horizontal, with the 
highest surface towards the rear of the vehicle.
    (4) Place the left foot on the toe-board with the rearmost point of 
the heel resting on the floor pan as close as possible to the point of 
intersection of the planes described by the toe-board and floor pan, and 
not on or in contact with the vehicle's brake pedal, clutch pedal, 
wheel-well projection or foot rest, except as provided in S12.3.2(b)(6).
    (5) If the left foot cannot be positioned on the toe board, place 
the foot perpendicular to the lower leg centerline as far forward as 
possible with the heel resting on the floor pan.
    (6) If the left foot does not contact the floor pan, place the foot 
parallel to the floor and place the leg as perpendicular to the thigh as 
possible. If necessary to avoid contact with the vehicle's brake pedal, 
clutch pedal, wheel-well, or foot rest, use the three foot position 
adjustments listed in S12.3.2(b)(6)(i) through (iii). The adjustment 
options are listed in priority order, with each subsequent option 
incorporating the previous. In making each adjustment, move the foot the 
minimum distance necessary to avoid contact. If it is not possible to 
avoid all prohibited foot contact, priority is given to avoiding brake 
or clutch pedal contact:
    (i) Rotate (abduction/adduction) the test dummy's left foot about 
the lower leg;
    (ii) Planar flex the foot;
    (iii) Rotate the left leg outboard about the hip.
    (c) Driver arm/hand positioning. Place the dummy's upper arm such 
that the angle between the projection of the arm centerline on the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy and the torso reference line is 45[deg] 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5[deg]. The torso reference line is defined as 
the thoracic

[[Page 979]]

spine centerline. The shoulder-arm joint allows for discrete arm 
positions at 0, +,mn; 45, +,mn; 90, +,mn; 135, and 180 degree settings 
where positive is forward of the spine.
    S12.3.3 5th percentile female front passenger dummy positioning.
    (a) Passenger torso/head/seat back angle positioning.
    (1) With the seat at the mid-height in the full-forward position 
determined in S10.3.2, use only the control that primarily moves the 
seat fore and aft to place the seat in the rearmost position, without 
adjusting independent height controls. If the seat cushion reference 
line angle automatically changes as the seat is moved from the full 
forward position, maintain, as closely as possible, the seat cushion 
reference line angle determined in S10.3.2.3.3, for the final forward 
position when measuring the pelvic angle as specified in S12.3.3(a)(11). 
The seat cushion reference line angle position may be achieved through 
the use of any seat or seat cushion adjustments other than that which 
primarily moves the seat or seat cushion fore-aft.
    (2) Fully recline the seat back, if adjustable. Place the dummy into 
the passenger's seat, such that when the legs are positioned 120 degrees 
to the thighs, the calves of the legs are not touching the seat cushion.
    (3) Bucket seats. Place the dummy on the seat cushion so that its 
midsagittal plane is vertical and passes through the SgRP within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.4 in).
    (4) Bench seats. Position the midsagittal plane of the dummy 
vertical and parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline and the 
same distance from the vehicle's longitudinal centerline, within + 10 mm 
(<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.4 in), as the midsagittal plane of the driver 
dummy.
    (5) Hold the dummy's thighs down and push rearward on the upper 
torso to maximize the dummy's pelvic angle.
    (6) Place the legs at 120 degrees to the thighs. Set the initial 
transverse distance between the longitudinal centerlines at the front of 
the dummy's knees at 160 to 170 mm (6.3 to 6.7 in), with the thighs and 
legs of the dummy in vertical planes. Push rearward on the dummy's knees 
to force the pelvis into the seat so there is no gap between the pelvis 
and the seat back or until contact occurs between the back of the 
dummy's calves and the front of the seat cushion.
    (7) Gently rock the upper torso relative to the lower torso 
laterally in a side to side motion three times through a <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 degree arc (approximately 51 mm (2 in) side to side).
    (8) If needed, extend the legs slightly so that the feet are not in 
contact with the floor pan. Let the thighs rest on the seat cushion to 
the extent permitted by the foot movement. With the feet perpendicular 
to the legs, place the heels on the floor pan. If a heel will not 
contact the floor pan, place it as close to the floor pan as possible. 
Using only the control that primarily moves the seat fore and aft, 
attempt to return the seat to the full forward position. If a dummy leg 
contacts the vehicle interior before the full forward position is 
attained, position the seat at the next detent where there is no 
contact. If the seats are power seats, position the seat to avoid 
contact while assuring that there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) distance 
between the vehicle interior and the point on the dummy that would first 
contact the vehicle interior.
    (9) For vehicles without adjustable seat backs, adjust the lower 
neck bracket to level the head as much as possible. For vehicles with 
adjustable seat backs, while holding the thighs in place, rotate the 
seat back forward until the transverse instrumentation platform of the 
head is level to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degree, making sure 
that the pelvis does not interfere with the seat bight.
    (10) If it is not possible to achieve the head level within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees, minimize the angle.
    (11) Measure and set the dummy's pelvic angle using the pelvic angle 
gage. The angle is set to 20.0 degrees <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2.5 
degrees. If this is not possible, adjust the pelvic angle as close to 
20.0 degrees as possible while keeping the transverse instrumentation 
platform of the head as level as possible by adjustments specified in 
S12.3.3(a)(9) and (10).
    (12) If the dummy is contacting the vehicle interior after these 
adjustments, move the seat rearward until

[[Page 980]]

there is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) between the contact point of the 
dummy and the interior of the vehicle or if it has a manual seat 
adjustment, to the next rearward detent position. If after these 
adjustments, the dummy contact point is more than 5 mm (0.2 in) from the 
vehicle interior and the seat is still not in its forwardmost position, 
move the seat forward until the contact point is 5 mm (0.2 in) or less 
from the vehicle interior, or if it has a manual seat adjustment, move 
the seat to the closest detent position without making contact, or until 
the seat reaches its forwardmost position, whichever occurs first.
    (b) Passenger foot positioning.
    (1) Place the front passenger's feet flat on the toe board.
    (2) If the feet cannot be placed flat on the toe board, set them 
perpendicular to the leg center lines and place them as far forward as 
possible with the heels resting on the floor pan.
    (3) If either foot does not contact the floor pan, place the foot 
parallel to the floor pan and place the lower leg as perpendicular to 
the thigh as
    (c) Passenger arm/hand positioning. Place the dummy's upper arm such 
that the angle between the projection of the arm centerline on the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy and the torso reference line is 45[deg] 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5[deg]. The torso reference line is defined as 
the thoracic spine centerline. The shoulder-arm joint allows for 
discrete arm positions at 0, +,mn; 45, +,mn; 90, +,mn; 135, and 180 
degree settings where positive is forward of the spine.
    S12.3.4 5th percentile female in rear outboard seating positions.
    (a) Set the rear outboard seat at the full rearward, full down 
position determined in S8.3.3.
    (b) Fully recline the seat back, if adjustable. Install the dummy 
into the passenger's seat, such that when the legs are 120 degrees to 
the thighs, the calves of the legs are not touching the seat cushion.
    (c) Place the dummy on the seat cushion so that its midsagittal 
plane is vertical and coincides with the vertical longitudinal plane 
through the center of the seating position SgRP within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.4 mm).
    (d) Hold the dummy's thighs down and push rearward on the upper 
torso to maximize the dummy's pelvic angle.
    (e) Place the legs at 120 degrees to the thighs. Set the initial 
transverse distance between the longitudinal centerlines at the front of 
the dummy's knees at 160 to 170 mm (6.3 to 6.7 in), with the thighs and 
legs of the dummy in vertical planes. Push rearward on the dummy's knees 
to force the pelvis into the seat so there is no gap between the pelvis 
and the seat back or until contact occurs between the back of the 
dummy's calves and the front of the seat cushion.
    (f) Gently rock the upper torso laterally side to side three times 
through a <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 degree arc (approximately 51 mm (2 
in) side to side).
    (g) If needed, extend the legs slightly so that the feet are not in 
contact with the floor pan. Let the thighs rest on the seat cushion to 
the extent permitted by the foot movement. With the feet perpendicular 
to the legs, place the heels on the floor pan. If a heel will not 
contact the floor pan, place it as close to the floor pan as possible.
    (h) For vehicles without adjustable seat backs, adjust the lower 
neck bracket to level the head as much as possible. For vehicles with 
adjustable seat backs, while holding the thighs in place, rotate the 
seat back forward until the transverse instrumentation platform of the 
head is level to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees, making sure 
that the pelvis does not interfere with the seat bight.
    (i) If it is not possible to orient the head level within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees, minimize the angle.
    (j) Measure and set the dummy's pelvic angle using the pelvic angle 
gauge. The angle is set to 20.0 degrees <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2.5 
degrees. If this is not possible, adjust the pelvic angle as close to 
20.0 degrees as possible while keeping the transverse instrumentation 
platform of the head as level as possible, as specified in S12.3.4(h) 
and (i).
    (k) Passenger foot positioning.
    (1) Place the rear seat passenger's feet flat on the floor pan and 
beneath the front seat as far as possible without front seat 
interference.
    (2) If either foot does not contact the floor pan, place the foot 
parallel to the

[[Page 981]]

floor and place the leg as perpendicular to the thigh as possible.
    (l) Passenger arm/hand positioning. Place the rear dummy's upper arm 
such that the angle between the projection of the arm centerline on the 
midsagittal plane of the dummy and the torso reference line is 45[deg] 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5[deg]. The torso reference line is defined as 
the thoracic spine centerline. The shoulder-arm joint allows for 
discrete arm positions at 0, +,mn; 45, +,mn; 90, +,mn; 135, and 180 
degree settings where positive is forward of the spine.
    S13 Phase-in of moving deformable barrier and vehicle-to-pole 
performance requirements.
    S13.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2010 and before 
September 1, 2014. At anytime during the production years ending August 
31, 2011, August 31, 2012, August 31, 2013, and August 31, 2014, each 
manufacturer shall, upon request from the Office of Vehicle Safety 
Compliance, provide information identifying the vehicles (by make, model 
and vehicle identification number) that have been certified as complying 
with the moving deformable barrier test with advanced test dummies 
(S7.2), or the vehicles (by make, model and vehicle identification 
number) that have been certified as complying with the vehicle-to-pole 
test requirements (S9.1) of this standard. The manufacturer's 
designation of a vehicle as a certified vehicle meeting S7.2 or S9.1 is 
irrevocable.
    S13.1.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2010 and 
before September 1, 2011.
    (a) Subject to S13.4, for vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2010 and before September 1, 2011, the number of vehicles 
complying with S7.2 shall be not less than 20 percent of:
    (1) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured in the three previous production years; or
    (2) The manufacturer's production in the current production year.
    (b) Subject to S13.4, for vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2010 and before September 1, 2011, the number of vehicles 
complying with S9.1 shall be not less than 20 percent of:
    (1) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured in the three previous production years; or
    (2) The manufacturer's production in the current production year.
    S13.1.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2011 and 
before September 1, 2012.
    (a) Subject to S13.4, for vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2011 and before September 1, 2012, the number of vehicles 
complying with S7.2 shall be not less than 40 percent of:
    (1) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured in the three previous production years; or
    (2) The manufacturer's production in the current production year.
    (b) Subject to S13.4, for vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2011 and before September 1, 2012, the number of vehicles 
complying with S9.1 shall be not less than 40 percent of:
    (1) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured in the three previous production years; or
    (2) The manufacturer's production in the current production year.
    S13.1.3 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2012 and 
before September 1, 2013.
    (a) Subject to S13.4, for vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2012 and before September 1, 2013, the number of vehicles 
complying with S7.2 shall be not less than 60 percent of:
    (1) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured in the three previous production years; or
    (2) The manufacturer's production in the current production year.
    (b) Subject to S13.4, for vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2012 and before September 1, 2013, the number of vehicles 
complying with S9.1 shall be not less than 60 percent of:
    (1) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured in the three previous production years; or
    (2) The manufacturer's production in the current production year.
    S13.1.4 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2013 and 
before September 1, 2014.
    (a) Subject to S13.4, for vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2013

[[Page 982]]

and before September 1, 2014, the number of vehicles complying with S7.2 
shall be not less than 80 percent of:
    (1) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured in the three previous production years; or
    (2) The manufacturer's production in the current production year.
    (b) Subject to S13.4, for vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2013 and before September 1, 2014, the number of vehicles 
complying with S9.1 shall be not less than 80 percent of:
    (1) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured in the three previous production years; or
    (2) The manufacturer's production in the current production year.
    S13.2 Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S13.2.1 For the purpose of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer under S13.1.1 and S13.1.2, a vehicle produced by 
more than one manufacturer shall be attributed to a single manufacturer 
as follows, subject to S13.2.2.
    (a) A vehicle that is imported shall be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    S13.2.2 A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer shall be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR part 585, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S13.2.1.
    S13.3(a) For the purposes of calculating average annual production 
of vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles 
manufactured by each manufacturer under S13.1.1(a), S13.1.2(a), 
S13.1.3(a), and S13.1.4(a), do not count any vehicle that is excluded by 
Standard No. 214 from the moving deformable barrier test with the ES-2re 
or SID-IIs test dummies (S7.2).
    (b) For the purposes of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer under S13.1.1(b), S13.1.2(b), S13.1.3(b), and 
S13.1.4(b), do not count any vehicle that is excluded by Standard No. 
214 from the vehicle-to-pole test (S9).
    S13.4 Calculation of complying vehicles.
    (a) For the purposes of calculating the vehicles complying with 
S13.1.1, a manufacturer may count a vehicle if it is manufactured on or 
after October 11, 2007 but before September 1, 2011.
    (b) For purposes of complying with S13.1.2, a manufacturer may count 
a vehicle if it--
    (1) Is manufactured on or after October 11, 2007 but before 
September 1, 2012 and,
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S13.1.1.
    (c) For purposes of complying with S13.1.3, a manufacturer may count 
a vehicle if it--
    (1) Is manufactured on or after October 11, 2007 but before 
September 1, 2013 and,
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S13.1.1 or S13.1.2.
    (d) For purposes of complying with S13.1.4, a manufacturer may count 
a vehicle if it--
    (1) Is manufactured on or after October 11, 2007 but before 
September 1, 2014 and,
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S13.1.1, S13.1.2, or 
S13.1.3.
    (e) For the purposes of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer, each vehicle that is excluded from having to meet 
the applicable requirement is not counted.

[72 FR 51957, Sept. 11, 2007, as amended at 73 FR 32483, June 9, 2008; 
75 FR 12139, Mar. 15, 2010]

    Effective Date Note: At 76 FR 52884, Aug. 294 2011, Sec. 571.214 
was amended by revising S5(a)(1), S8.3.1.3, S8.3.3.2, S8.3.3.3, 
S10.3.2.2, S10.3.2.3, S12.3.2(a)(9), S12.3.2(a)(10), S12.3.2(a)(11); 
S12.3.3(a)(9), S12.3.3(a)(10), S12.3.3(a)(11), S12.3.3(b)(3), and 
S12.3.4(h), adding S12.2.1(a) through S12.2.1(d)(2), and removing 
S12.3.3(a)(12), effective February 21, 2012. For the convenience of the 
user, the added and revised text is set forth as follows:

[[Page 983]]


<R05>
Sec. 571.214  Standard No. 214; Side impact protection.

                                * * * * *

    S5 General exclusions.
    (a) * * *
    (1) Any side door located so that no point on a ten-inch horizontal 
longitudinal line passing through and bisected by the H-point of a 
manikin placed in any seat, with the seat adjusted to any position and 
the seat back adjusted as specified in S8.3, falls within the 
transverse, horizontal projection of the door's opening,

                                * * * * *

    S8.3.1.3 Seat position adjustment. If the driver and passenger seats 
do not adjust independently of each other, the struck side seat shall 
control the final position of the non-struck side seat. If the driver 
and passenger seats adjust independently of each other, adjust both the 
struck and non-struck side seats in the manner specified in S8.3.1.

                                * * * * *

    S8.3.3.2 Other seat adjustments. Position any adjustable parts of 
the seat that provide additional support so that they are in the lowest 
or non-deployed adjustment position. Position any adjustable head 
restraint in the lowest and most forward in-use position. If it is 
possible to achieve a position lower than the effective detent range, 
the head restraint should be set to its lowest possible position. A non-
use position as specified by S4.4 of FMVSS No. 202a, is excluded from 
being considered as the lowest possible position.

                                * * * * *

    S8.3.3.3 Seat position adjustment. Using only the controls that 
primarily move the seat and seat cushion independent of the seat back in 
the fore and aft directions, move the seat cushion reference point 
(SCRP) to the rearmost position. Using any part of any control, other 
than those just used, determine the full range of angles of the seat 
cushion reference line and set the seat cushion reference line to the 
middle of the range. Using any part of any control other than those that 
primarily move the seat or seat cushion fore and aft, while maintaining 
the seat cushion reference line angle, place the SCRP to its lowest 
position. Mark location of the seat for future reference. If the non-
struck side seat adjusts independently of the struck side seat, adjust 
the seat in the manner specified in this section.

                                * * * * *

    S10.3.2.2 Other seat adjustments. Position any adjustable parts of 
the seat that provide additional support so that they are in the lowest 
or non-deployed adjustment position. Position any adjustable head 
restraint in the lowest and most forward in-use position. If it is 
possible to achieve a position lower than the effective detent range, 
the head restraint should be set to its lowest possible position. A non-
use position as specified by S4.4 of FMVSS No. 202a, is excluded from 
being considered as the lowest possible position.

                                * * * * *

    S10.3.2.3 Seat position adjustment. If the driver and passenger 
seats do not adjust independently of each other, the struck side seat 
shall control the final position of the non-struck side seat. If the 
driver and passenger seats adjust independently of each other, adjust 
both the struck and non-struck side seats in the manner specified in 
S10.3.2.

                                * * * * *

    S12.2.1 * * *
    (a) Upper torso.
    (1) The plane of symmetry of the dummy coincides with the vertical 
median plane of the specified seating position.
    (2) Bend the upper torso forward and then lay it back against the 
seat back. Set the shoulders of the dummy fully rearward.
    (b) Pelvis. Position the pelvis of the dummy according to the 
following:
    (1) Position the pelvis of the dummy such that a lateral line 
passing through the dummy H-points is perpendicular to the longitudinal 
center plane of the seat. The line through the dummy H-points is 
horizontal with a maximum inclination of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2 
degrees. The dummy may be equipped with tilt sensors in the thorax and 
the pelvis. These instruments can help to obtain the desired position.
    (2) The correct position of the dummy pelvis may be checked relative 
to the H-point of the H-point Manikin by using the M3 holes in the H-
point back plates at each side of the ES-2re pelvis. Position the dummy 
such that the M3 holes are located within a circle of radius 10 mm (0.39 
in.) around the H-point of the H-point Manikin.
    (c) Arms. For the driver seating position and for the front outboard 
passenger seating position, place the dummy's upper arms such that the 
angle between the projection of the arm centerline on the mid-sagittal 
plane of the dummy and the torso reference line is 40[deg] <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 5[deg]. The torso reference line is defined as the 
thoracic spine centerline. The shoulder-arm joint allows for discrete 
arm positions at 0, 40, and 90 degree settings forward of the spine.
    (d) Legs and Feet. Position the legs and feet of the dummy according 
to the following:

[[Page 984]]

    (1) For the driver's seating position, without inducing pelvis or 
torso movement, place the right foot of the dummy on the un-pressed 
accelerator pedal with the heel resting as far forward as possible on 
the floor pan. Set the left foot perpendicular to the lower leg with the 
heel resting on the floor pan in the same lateral line as the right 
heel. Set the knees of the dummy such that their outside surfaces are 
150 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 mm (5.9 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.4 inches) 
from the plane of symmetry of the dummy. If possible within these 
constraints, place the thighs of the dummy in contact with the seat 
cushion.
    (2) For other seating positions, without inducing pelvis or torso 
movement, place the heels of the dummy as far forward as possible on the 
floor pan without compressing the seat cushion more than the compression 
due to the weight of the leg. Set the knees of the dummy such that their 
outside surfaces are 150 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 mm (5.9 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.4 inches) from the plane of symmetry of the dummy.

                                * * * * *

    S12.3.2 5th percentile female driver dummy positioning.
    (a) Driver torso/head/seat back angle positioning.

                                * * * * *

    (9) Head leveling.
    (i) Vehicles with fixed seat backs. Adjust the lower neck bracket to 
level the transverse instrumentation platform angle of the head to 
within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees. If it is not possible to 
level the transverse instrumentation platform to within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees, select the neck bracket adjustment 
position that minimizes the difference between the transverse 
instrumentation platform angle and level.
    (ii) Vehicles with adjustable seat backs. While holding the thighs 
in place, rotate the seat back forward until the transverse 
instrumentation platform angle of the head is level to within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees, making sure that the pelvis does not 
interfere with the seat bight. (If the torso contacts the steering 
wheel, use S12.3.2(a)(10) before proceeding with the remaining portion 
of this paragraph.) If it is not possible to level the transverse 
instrumentation platform to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees, 
select the seat back adjustment position that minimizes the difference 
between the transverse instrumentation platform angle and level, then 
adjust the neck bracket to level the transverse instrumentation platform 
angle to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees if possible. If it is 
still not possible to level the transverse instrumentation platform to 
within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees, select the neck bracket angle 
position that minimizes the difference between the transverse 
instrumentation platform angle and level.
    (10) If the torso contacts the steering wheel, adjust the steering 
wheel in the following order until there is no contact: telescoping 
adjustment, lowering adjustment, raising adjustment. If the vehicle has 
no adjustments or contact with the steering wheel cannot be eliminated 
by adjustment, position the seat at the next detent where there is no 
contact with the steering wheel as adjusted in S10.5. If the seat is a 
power seat, position the seat to avoid contact while assuring that there 
is a maximum of 5 mm (0.2 in) distance between the steering wheel as 
adjusted in S10.5 and the point of contact on the dummy.
    (11) Measure and set the dummy's pelvic angle using the pelvic angle 
gage. The angle is set to 20.0 degrees <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2.5 
degrees. If this is not possible, adjust the pelvic angle as close to 
20.0 degrees as possible while keeping the transverse instrumentation 
platform of the head as level as possible by adjustments specified in 
S12.3.2(a)(9).

                                * * * * *

    S12.3.3 5th percentile female front passenger dummy positioning.
    (a) Passenger torso/head/seat back angle positioning.

                                * * * * *

    (9) Head leveling.
    (i) Vehicles with fixed seat backs. Adjust the lower neck bracket to 
level the transverse instrumentation platform angle of the head to 
within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees. If it is not possible to 
level the transverse instrumentation platform to within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees, select the neck bracket adjustment 
position that minimizes the difference between the transverse 
instrumentation platform angle and level.
    (ii) Vehicles with adjustable seat backs. While holding the thighs 
in place, rotate the seat back forward until the transverse 
instrumentation platform angle of the head is level to within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees, making sure that the pelvis does not 
interfere with the seat bight. If it is not possible to level the 
transverse instrumentation platform to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 
degrees, select the seat back adjustment position that minimizes the 
difference between the transverse instrumentation platform angle and 
level, then adjust the neck bracket to level the transverse 
instrumentation platform angle to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 
degrees if possible. If it is still not possible to level the transverse 
instrumentation platform to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees, 
select the neck bracket angle position that minimizes the difference 
between the transverse instrumentation platform angle and level.
    (10) Measure and set the dummy's pelvic angle using the pelvic angle 
gage. The angle is set to 20.0 degrees <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2.5 
degrees. If this is not possible, adjust the pelvic angle as close

[[Page 985]]

to 20.0 degrees as possible while keeping the transverse instrumentation 
platform of the head as level as possible by adjustments specified in 
S12.3.2(a)(9).
    (11) If the dummy is contacting the vehicle interior after these 
adjustments, move the seat rearward until there is a maximum of 5 mm 
(0.2 in) between the contact point of the dummy and the interior of the 
vehicle or if it has a manual seat adjustment, to the next rearward 
detent position. If after these adjustments, the dummy contact point is 
more than 5 mm (0.2 in) from the vehicle interior and the seat is still 
not in its forwardmost position, move the seat forward until the contact 
point is 5 mm (0.2 in) or less from the vehicle interior, or if it has a 
manual seat adjustment, move the seat to the closest detent position 
without making contact, or until the seat reaches its forwardmost 
position, whichever occurs first.
    (b) Passenger foot positioning.

                                * * * * *

    (3) If either foot does not contact the floor pan, place the foot 
parallel to the floor pan and place the lower leg as perpendicular to 
the thigh as possible.

                                * * * * *

    S12.3.4 5th percentile female in rear outboard seating positions.

                                * * * * *

    (h) Head leveling.
    (1) Vehicles with fixed seat backs. Adjust the lower neck bracket to 
level the transverse instrumentation platform angle of the head to 
within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees. If it is not possible to 
level the transverse instrumentation platform to within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees, select the neck bracket adjustment 
position that minimizes the difference between the transverse 
instrumentation platform angle and level.
    (2) Vehicles with adjustable seat backs. While holding the thighs in 
place, rotate the seat back forward until the transverse instrumentation 
platform angle of the head is level to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 
degrees, making sure that the pelvis does not interfere with the seat 
bight. If it is not possible to level the transverse instrumentation 
platform to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees, select the seat 
back adjustment position that minimizes the difference between the 
transverse instrumentation platform angle and level, then adjust the 
neck bracket to level the transverse instrumentation platform angle to 
within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees if possible. If it is still 
not possible to level the transverse instrumentation platform to within 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees, select the neck bracket angle 
position that minimizes the difference between the transverse 
instrumentation platform angle and level.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 571.215  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 571.216  Standard No. 216; Roof crush resistance; Applicable unless a 

vehicle is certified to Sec. 571.216a.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes strength requirements for the 
passenger compartment roof.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries due to the crushing of the roof into the occupant compartment 
in rollover crashes.
    S3. Application. (a) This standard applies to passenger cars, and to 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses with a GVWR of 2,722 
kilograms (6,000 pounds) or less. However, it does not apply to--
    (a) School buses;
    (b) Vehicles that conform to the rollover test requirements (S5.3) 
of Standard No. 208 (Sec. 571.208) by means that require no action by 
vehicle occupants;
    (c) Convertibles, except for optional compliance with the standard 
as an alternative to the rollover test requirements in S5.3 of Standard 
No. 208; or
    (d) Vehicles certified to comply with Sec. 571.216a.
    S4. Definitions.
    Altered roof means the replacement roof on a motor vehicle whose 
original roof has been removed, in part or in total, and replaced by a 
roof that is higher than the original roof. The replacement roof on a 
motor vehicle whose original roof has been replaced, in whole or in 
part, by a roof that consists of glazing materials, such as those in T-
tops and sunroofs, and is located at the level of the original roof, is 
not considered to be an altered roof.
    Raised roof means, with respect to a roof which includes an area 
that protrudes above the surrounding exterior roof structure, that 
protruding area of the roof.
    Roof over the front seat area means the portion of the roof, 
including windshield trim, forward of a transverse vertical plane 
passing through a point 162 mm rearward of the SgRP of the rearmost 
front outboard seating position.

[[Page 986]]

    Windshield trim means molding of any material between the windshield 
glazing and the exterior roof surface, including material that covers a 
part of either the windshield glazing or exterior roof surface.
    S5. Requirements. Subject to S5.1, when the test device described in 
S6 is used to apply a force to either side of the forward edge of a 
vehicle's roof in accordance with the procedures of S7, the lower 
surface of the test device must not move more than 127 millimeters. The 
applied force in Newtons is equal to 1.5 times the unloaded vehicle 
weight of the vehicle, measured in kilograms and multiplied by 9.8, but 
does not exceed 22,240 Newtons for passenger cars. Both the left and 
right front portions of the vehicle's roof structure must be capable of 
meeting the requirements. A particular vehicle need not meet further 
requirements after being tested at one location.
    S5.1 For multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses that have 
a raised roof or altered roof, manufacturers have the option of using 
the test procedures of S8 instead of the procedures of S7 until October 
25, 2000. The option of using the test procedures of S8 ceases to be 
available on that date.
    S6. Test device. The test device is a rigid unyielding block whose 
lower surface is a flat rectangle measuring 762 millimeters by 1,829 
millimeters.
    S7. Test procedure. Each vehicle must be capable of meeting the 
requirements of S5 when tested in accordance with the procedure in S7.1 
through 7.6.
    S7.1 Place the sills or the chassis frame of the vehicle on a rigid 
horizontal surface, fix the vehicle rigidly in position, close all 
windows, close and lock all doors, and secure any convertible top or 
removable roof structure in place over the occupant compartment. Remove 
roof racks or other non-structural components.
    S7.2 Orient the test device as shown in Figure 1 of this section, so 
that--
    (a) Its longitudinal axis is at a forward angle (in side view) of 5 
degrees below the horizontal, and is parallel to the vertical plane 
through the vehicle's longitudinal centerline;
    (b) Its transverse axis is at an outboard angle, in the front view 
projection, of 25 degrees below the horizontal.
    S7.3 Maintaining the orientation specified in S7.2--
    (a) Lower the test device until it initially makes contact with the 
roof of the vehicle.
    (b) Position the test device so that--
    (1) The longitudinal centerline on its lower surface is on the 
initial point of contact, or on the center of the initial contact area, 
with the roof; and
    (2) Except as specified in S7.4, the midpoint of the forward edge of 
the lower surface of the test device is within 10 mm of the transverse 
vertical plane 254 mm forward of the forwardmost point on the exterior 
surface of the roof, including windshield trim, that lies in the 
longitudinal vertical plane passing through the vehicle's longitudinal 
centerline.
    S7.4 If the vehicle being tested is a multipurpose passenger 
vehicle, truck, or bus that has a raised roof or altered roof, and the 
initial contact point of the test device is on the raised roof or 
altered roof to the rear of the roof over the front seat area, the plate 
is positioned so that the midpoint of the rearward edge of the lower 
surface of the test device is within 10 mm of the transverse vertical 
plane located at the rear of the roof over the front seat area.
    S7.5 Apply force so that the test device moves in a downward 
direction perpendicular to the lower surface of the test device at a 
rate of not more than 13 millimeters per second until reaching the force 
level specified in S5. Guide the test device so that throughout the test 
it moves, without rotation, in a straight line with its lower surface 
oriented as specified in S7.2(a) and S7.2(b). Complete the test within 
120 seconds.
    S7.6 Measure the distance that the test device moved, i.e., the 
distance between the original location of the lower surface of the test 
device and its location as the force level specified in S5 is reached.
    S8 Alternate test procedure for multipurpose passenger vehicles, 
trucks and buses that have a raised roof or altered roof manufactured 
until October 25, 2000 (see S5.1). Each vehicle shall be capable of 
meeting the requirements of S5 when tested in accordance with the 
following procedure.

[[Page 987]]

    S8.1 Place the sills or the chassis frame of the vehicle on a rigid 
horizontal surface, fix the vehicle rigidly in position, close all 
windows, close and lock all doors, and secure any convertible top or 
removable roof structure in place over the passenger compartment.
    S8.2 Orient the test device as shown in Figure 2, so that--
    (a) Its longitudinal axis is at a forward angle (side view) of 
5[deg] below the horizontal, and is parallel to the vertical plane 
through the vehicle's longitudinal centerline;
    (b) Its lateral axis is at a lateral outboard angle, in the front 
view projection, of 25[deg] below the horizontal;
    (c) Its lower surface is tangent to the surface of the vehicle; and
    (d) The initial contact point, or center of the initial contact 
area, is on the longitudinal centerline of the lower surface of the test 
device and 254 millimeters from the forwardmost point of that 
centerline.
    S8.3 Apply force in a downward direction perpendicular to the lower 
surface of the test device at a rate of not more than 13 millimeters per 
second until reaching a force in Newtons of 1\1/2\ times the unloaded 
vehicle weight of the tested vehicle, measured in kilograms and 
multiplied by 9.8. Complete the test within 120 seconds. Guide the test 
device so that throughout the test it moves, without rotation, in a 
straight line with its lower surface oriented as specified in S8.2(a) 
through S8.2(d).
    S8.4 Measure the distance that the test device moves, i.e., the 
distance between the original location of the lower surface of the test 
device and its location as the force level specified in S8.3 is reached.

[[Page 988]]

                        Figure 1 to Sec. 571.216
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27AP99.032


[[Page 989]]



                        Figure 2 to Sec. 571.216
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA00.089


[36 FR 23300, Dec. 8, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 21930, Aug. 14, 1973; 56 
FR 15517, Apr. 17, 1991; 58 FR 5633, Jan. 22, 1993; 60 FR 13647, Mar. 
14, 1995; 64 FR 22578, Apr. 27, 1999; 65 FR 4581, Jan. 31, 2000; 74 FR 
22384, May 12, 2009]

    Editorial Note: At 74 FR 22384, May 12, 2009, Sec. 571.216 was 
amended by revising S3; however, the amendment included two paragraphs 
(a).


<R05>
Sec. 571.216a  Standard No. 216a; Roof crush resistance; Upgraded standard.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes strength requirements for the 
passenger compartment roof.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries due to the crushing of the roof into the occupant compartment 
in rollover crashes.
    S3. Application, incorporation by reference, and selection of 
compliance options.
    S3.1 Application.
    (a) This standard applies to passenger cars, and to multipurpose 
passenger vehicles, trucks and buses with a GVWR of 4,536 kilograms 
(10,000 pounds) or less, according to the implementation schedule 
specified in S8 and S9 of this section. However, it does not apply to--
    (1) School buses;
    (2) Vehicles that conform to the rollover test requirements (S5.3) 
of Standard No. 208 (Sec. 571.208) by means that require no action by 
vehicle occupants;
    (3) Convertibles, except for optional compliance with the standard 
as an alternative to the rollover test requirement (S5.3) of Standard 
No. 208; or
    (4) Trucks built in two or more stages with a GVWR greater than 
2,722 kilograms (6,000 pounds) not built using a chassis cab or using an 
incomplete vehicle with a full exterior van body.
    (b) At the option of the manufacturer, vehicles within either of the 
following categories may comply with the roof crush requirements (S4) of 
Standard No. 220 (Sec. 571.220) instead of the requirements of this 
standard:
    (1) Vehicles built in two or more stages, other than vehicles built 
using a chassis cab;
    (2) Vehicles with a GVWR greater than 2,722 kilograms (6,000 pounds) 
that have an altered roof as defined by S4 of this section.

[[Page 990]]

    (c) Manufacturers may comply with the standard in this Sec. 
571.216a as an alternative to Sec. 571.216.
    S3.2 Incorporation by reference. Society of Automotive Engineers 
(SAE) Standard J826 ``Devices for Use in Defining and Measuring Vehicle 
Seating Accommodation,'' SAE J826 (rev. July 1995) is incorporated by 
reference in S7.2 of this section. The Director of the Federal Register 
has approved the incorporation by reference of this material in 
accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. A copy of SAE J826 
(rev. Jul 95) may be obtained from SAE at the Society of Automotive 
Engineers, Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096. Phone: 1-
724-776-4841; Web: http://www.sae.org. A copy of SAE J826 (July 1995) 
may be inspected at NHTSA's Technical Information Services, 1200 New 
Jersey Avenue, Washington, DC 20590, or at the National Archives and 
Records Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of 
this material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://
www.archives.gov/federal--register/code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--
locations.html.
    S3.3 Selection of compliance option. Where manufacturer options are 
specified, the manufacturer shall select the option by the time it 
certifies the vehicle and may not thereafter select a different option 
for the vehicle. Each manufacturer shall, upon the request from the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, provide information 
regarding which of the compliance options it selected for a particular 
vehicle or make/model.
    S4. Definitions.
    Altered roof means the replacement roof on a motor vehicle whose 
original roof has been removed, in part or in total, and replaced by a 
roof that is higher than the original roof. The replacement roof on a 
motor vehicle whose original roof has been replaced, in whole or in 
part, by a roof that consists of glazing materials, such as those in T-
tops and sunroofs, and is located at the level of the original roof, is 
not considered to be an altered roof.
    Convertible means a vehicle whose A-pillars are not joined with the 
B-pillars (or rearmost pillars) by a fixed, rigid structural member.
    S5. Requirements.
    S5.1 When the test device described in S6 is used to apply a force 
to a vehicle's roof in accordance with S7, first to one side of the roof 
and then to the other side of the roof:
    (a) The lower surface of the test device must not move more than 127 
millimeters, and
    (b) No load greater than 222 Newtons (50 pounds) may be applied to 
the head form specified in S5.2 of 49 CFR 571.201 located at the head 
position of a 50th percentile adult male in accordance with S7.2 of this 
section.
    S5.2 The maximum applied force to the vehicle's roof in Newtons is:
    (a) For vehicles with a GVWR of 2,722 kilograms (6,000 pounds) or 
less, any value up to and including 3.0 times the unloaded vehicle 
weight of the vehicle, measured in kilograms and multiplied by 9.8, and
    (b) For vehicles with a GVWR greater than 2,722 kilograms (6,000 
pounds), any value up to and including 1.5 times the unloaded vehicle 
weight of the vehicle, measured in kilograms and multiplied by 9.8.
    S6. Test device. The test device is a rigid unyielding block whose 
lower surface is a flat rectangle measuring 762 millimeters by 1,829 
millimeters.
    S7. Test procedure. Each vehicle must be capable of meeting the 
requirements of S5 when tested in accordance with the procedure in S7.1 
through S7.6.
    S7.1 Support the vehicle off its suspension and rigidly secure the 
sills and the chassis frame (when applicable) of the vehicle on a rigid 
horizontal surface(s) at a longitudinal attitude of 0 degrees <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees. Measure the longitudinal vehicle attitude 
along both the driver and passenger sill. Determine the lateral vehicle 
attitude by measuring the vertical distance between a level surface and 
a standard reference point on the bottom of the driver and passenger 
side sills. The difference between the vertical distance measured on the 
driver side and the passenger side sills is not more than <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 10 mm. Close all windows, close and lock all doors, and 
close and secure any moveable roof panel, moveable shade, or removable 
roof structure in place

[[Page 991]]

over the occupant compartment. Remove roof racks or other non-structural 
components. For a vehicle built on a chassis-cab incomplete vehicle that 
has some portion of the added body structure above the height of the 
incomplete vehicle, remove the entire added body structure prior to 
testing (the vehicle's unloaded vehicle weight as specified in S5 
includes the weight of the added body structure).
    S7.2 Adjust the seats in accordance with S8.3.1 of 49 CFR 571.214. 
Position the top center of the head form specified in S5.2 of 49 CFR 
571.201 at the location of the top center of the Head Restraint 
Measurement Device (HRMD) specified in 49 CFR 571.202a, in the front 
outboard designated seating position on the side of the vehicle being 
tested as follows:
    (a) Position the three dimensional manikin specified in Society of 
Automotive Engineers (SAE) Surface Vehicle Standard J826, revised July 
1995, ``Devices for Use in Defining and Measuring Vehicle Seating 
Accommodation,'' (incorporated by reference, see paragraph S3.2), in 
accordance to the seating procedure specified in that document, except 
that the length of the lower leg and thigh segments of the H-point 
machine are adjusted to 414 and 401 millimeters, respectively, instead 
of the 50th percentile values specified in Table 1 of SAE J826 (July 
1995).
    (b) Remove four torso weights from the three-dimensional manikin 
specified in SAE J826 (July 1995) (two from the left side and two from 
the right side), replace with two HRMD torso weights (one on each side), 
and attach and level the HRMD head form.
    (c) Mark the location of the top center of the HRMD in three 
dimensional space to locate the top center of the head form specified in 
S5.2 of 49 CFR 571.201.
    S7.3 Orient the test device as shown in Figure 1 of this section, so 
that--
    (a) Its longitudinal axis is at a forward angle (in side view) of 5 
degrees (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 degrees) below the horizontal, and 
is parallel to the vertical plane through the vehicle's longitudinal 
centerline;
    (b) Its transverse axis is at an outboard angle, in the front view 
projection, of 25 degrees below the horizontal (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 
0.5 degrees).
    S7.4 Maintaining the orientation specified in S7.3 of this section--
    (a) Lower the test device until it initially makes contact with the 
roof of the vehicle.
    (b) Position the test device so that--
    (1) The longitudinal centerline on its lower surface is within 10 mm 
of the initial point of contact, or on the center of the initial contact 
area, with the roof; and
    (2) The midpoint of the forward edge of the lower surface of the 
test device is within 10 mm of the transverse vertical plane 254 mm 
forward of the forwardmost point on the exterior surface of the roof, 
including windshield trim, that lies in the longitudinal vertical plane 
passing through the vehicle's longitudinal centerline.
    S7.5 Apply force so that the test device moves in a downward 
direction perpendicular to the lower surface of the test device at a 
rate of not more than 13 millimeters per second until reaching the force 
level specified in S5. Guide the test device so that throughout the test 
it moves, without rotation, in a straight line with its lower surface 
oriented as specified in S7.3(a) and S7.3(b). Complete the test within 
120 seconds.
    S7.6 Repeat the test on the other side of the vehicle.
    S8. Phase-in schedule for vehicles with a GVWR of 2,722 kilograms 
(6,000 pounds) or less.
    S8.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2012, and before 
September 1, 2013. For vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 
2012, and before September 1, 2013, the number of vehicles complying 
with this standard must not be less than 25 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2009, and before September 1, 
2012; or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2012, and 
before September 1, 2013.
    S8.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2013, and before 
September 1, 2014. For vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 
2013, and before September 1, 2014, the number of vehicles complying 
with this standard must not be less than 50 percent of:

[[Page 992]]

    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2010, and before September 1, 
2013; or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2013, and 
before September 1, 2014.
    S8.3 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2014, and before 
September 1, 2015. For vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 
2014, and before September 1, 2015, the number of vehicles complying 
with this standard must not be less than 75 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2011, and before September 1, 
2014; or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2014, and 
before September 1, 2015.
    S8.4 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2015. Except as 
provided in S8.8, each vehicle manufactured on or after September 1, 
2015 must comply with this standard.
    S8.5 Calculation of complying vehicles.
    (a) For purpose of complying with S8.1, a manufacturer may count a 
vehicle if it is certified as complying with this standard and is 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2012, but before September 1, 
2013.
    (b) For purposes of complying with S8.2, a manufacturer may count a 
vehicle if it:
    (1) Is certified as complying with this standard and is manufactured 
on or after September 1, 2012, but before September 1, 2014; and
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S8.1.
    (c) For purposes of complying with S8.3, a manufacturer may count a 
vehicle if it:
    (1) Is certified as complying with this standard and is manufactured 
on or after September 1, 2012, but before September 1, 2015; and
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S8.1 or S8.2.
    S8.6 Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S8.6.1 For the purpose of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer under S8.1 through S8.3, a vehicle produced by more 
than one manufacturer must be attributed to a single manufacturer as 
follows, subject to S8.6.2:
    (a) A vehicle that is imported must be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, must be attributed 
to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    S8.6.2 A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer must be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR Part 585, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S8.6.1.
    S8.7 Small volume manufacturers. Vehicles manufactured during any of 
the three years of the September 1, 2012 through August 31, 2015 phase-
in by a manufacturer that produces fewer than 5,000 vehicles for sale in 
the United States during that year are not subject to the requirements 
of S8.1, S8.2, and S8.3.
    S8.8 Final-stage manufacturers and alterers.
    Vehicles that are manufactured in two or more stages or that are 
altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) after having previously 
been certified in accordance with part 567 of this chapter are not 
subject to the requirements of S8.1 through S8.3. Instead, all vehicles 
produced by these manufacturers on or after September 1, 2016 must 
comply with this standard.
    S9 Vehicles with a GVWR above 2,722 kilograms (6,000 pounds).
    (a) Except as provided in S9(b), each vehicle manufactured on or 
after September 1, 2016 must comply with this standard.
    (b) Vehicles that are manufactured in two or more stages or that are 
altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) after having previously 
been certified in accordance with part 567 of this chapter are not 
subject to the requirements of S8.1 through S8.3. Instead, all vehicles 
produced by these manufacturers on or after September 1, 2017 must 
comply with this standard.

[[Page 993]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12MY09.063


[[Page 994]]



[74 FR 22384, May 12, 2009, as amended at 75 FR 17605, Apr. 7, 2010]


<R05>
Sec. 571.217  Standard No. 217; Bus emergency exits and window retention and 

release.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes requirements for the retention 
of windows other than windshields in buses, and establishes operating 
forces, opening dimensions, and markings for bus emergency exits.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to minimize the 
likelihood of occupants being thrown from the bus and to provide a means 
of readily accessible emergency egress.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to buses, except buses 
manufactured for the purpose of transporting persons under physical 
restraint.
    S4. Definitions. Adjacent seat means a designated seating position 
located so that some portion of its occupant space is not more than 10 
inches from an emergency exit, for a distance of at least 15 inches 
measured horizontally and parallel to the exit.
    Daylight opening means the maximum unobstructed opening of an 
emergency exit when viewed from a direction perpendicular to the plane 
of the opening.
    Mid-point of the passenger compartment means any point on a vertical 
transverse plane bisecting the vehicle longitudinal centerline that 
extends between the two vertical transverse planes which define the 
foremost and rearmost limits of the passenger compartment.
    Occupant space means the space directly above the seat and footwell, 
bounded vertically by the ceiling and horizontally by the normally 
positioned seat back and the nearest obstruction of occupant motion in 
the direction the seat faces.
    Passenger compartment means space within the school bus interior 
that is between a vertical transverse plane located 76 centimeters in 
front of the forwardmost passenger seating reference point and a 
vertical transverse plane tangent to the rear interior wall of the bus 
at the vehicle centerline.
    Post and roof bow panel space means the area between two adjacent 
post and roof bows.
    Push-out window means a vehicle window designed to open outward to 
provide for emergency egress.
    Sliding window means a bus window designed to open by moving 
vertically or horizontally to provide emergency egress.
    Wheelchair means a wheeled seat frame for the support and conveyance 
of a physically disabled person, comprising at least a frame, seat, and 
wheels.
    Wheelchair securement anchorage means the provision for transferring 
wheelchair securement device loads to the vehicle structure.
    Wheelchair securement device means a strap, webbing or other device 
used for securing a wheelchair to the school bus, including all 
necessary buckles and other fasteners.
    S5. Requirements.
    S5.1 Window retention. Except as provided in S5.1.2, each piece of 
window glazing and each surrounding window frame when tested in 
accordance with the procedure in S5.1.1 under the conditions of S6.1 
through S6.3, shall be retained by its surrounding structure in a manner 
that prevents the formation of any opening large enough to admit the 
passage of a 4-inch diameter sphere under a force, including the weight 
of the sphere, of 5 pounds until any one of the following events occurs:
    (a) A force of 1,200 pounds is reached.
    (b) At least 80 percent of the glazing thickness has developed 
cracks running from the load contact region to the periphery at two or 
more points, or shattering of the glazing occurs.
    (c) The inner surface of the glazing at the center of force 
application has moved relative to the window frame, along a line 
perpendicular to the undisturbed inner surface, a distance equal to one-
half of the square root of the minimum surface dimension measured 
through the center of the area of the entire sheet of window glazing.
    S5.1.1 An increasing force shall be applied to the window glazing 
through the head form specified in Figure 4, outward and perpendicular 
to the undisturbed inside surface at the center of the area of each 
sheet of window glazing, with a head form travel of 2 inches per minute.

[[Page 995]]

    S5.1.2 The requirements of this standard do not apply to a window 
whose minimum surface dimension measured through the center of its area 
is less than 8 inches.
    S5.2 Provision of emergency exits.
    S5.2.1 Buses other than school buses shall meet the requirements of 
either S5.2.2 or S5.2.3. School buses shall meet the requirements of 
S5.2.3.
    S5.2.1.1 A bus with GVWR of more than 10,000 pounds may satisfy the 
unobstructed openings requirement by providing at least one side door 
for each three passenger seating positions in the vehicle.
    S5.2.2 Buses other than school buses.
    S5.2.2.1 Buses other than school buses shall provide unobstructed 
openings for emergency exit which collectively amount, in total square 
centimeters, to at least 432 times the number of designated seating 
positions on the bus. At least 40 percent of the total required area of 
unobstructed openings, computed in the above manner, shall be provided 
on each side of a bus. However, in determining the total unobstructed 
openings provided by a bus, no emergency exit, regardless of its area, 
shall be credited with more than 3,458 square centimeters of the total 
area requirement.
    S5.2.2.2 Buses with GVWR of more than 10,000 pounds. Buses with a 
GVWR of more than 10,000 pounds shall meet the unobstructed openings 
requirements in S5.2.2.1 by providing side exits and at least one rear 
exit that conforms to S5.3 through S5.5. The rear exit shall meet the 
requirements of S5.3 through S5.5 when the bus is upright and when the 
bus is overturned on either side, with the occupant standing facing the 
exit. When the bus configuration precludes installation of an accessible 
rear exit, a roof exit that meets the requirements of S5.3 through S5.5 
when the bus is overturned on either side, with the occupant standing 
facing the exit, shall be provided in the rear half of the bus.
    S5.2.2.3 Buses with GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less. Buses other than 
school buses with GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less may meet the 
unobstructed openings requirement in S5.2.2.1 by providing:
    (a) Devices that meet the requirements of S5.3 through S5.5 without 
using remote controls or central power systems;
    (b) Windows that can be opened manually to a position that provides 
an opening large enough to admit unobstructed passage, keeping a major 
axis horizontal at all times, of an ellipsoid generated by rotating 
about its minor axis an ellipse having a major axis of 50 centimeters 
and a minor axis of 33 centimeters; or
    (c) Doors.
    S5.2.3 School buses. Except as provided in S5.2.3.4, each school bus 
shall comply with S5.2.3.1 through S5.2.3.3.
    S5.2.3.1. Each school bus shall be equipped with the exits specified 
in either S5.2.3.1(a) or S5.2.3.1(b), chosen at the option of the 
manufacturer.
    (a) One rear emergency door that opens outward and is hinged on the 
right side (either side in the case of a bus with a GVWR of 10,000 
pounds or less), and the additional exits, if any, specified by Table 1.
    (b) One emergency door on the vehicle's left side that is hinged on 
its forward side and meets the requirements of S5.2.3.2(a), and a push-
out rear window that provides a minimum opening clearance 41 centimeters 
high and 122 centimeters wide and meets the requirements of S5.2.3.2(c), 
and the additional exits, if any, specified by Table 2.

                                 Table 1
------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Seating capacity               Additional exits required *
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1-45...................................  None.
46-62..................................  1 left side exit door or 2 exit
                                          windows.
63-70..................................  1 left side exit door or 2 exit
                                          windows, and 1 roof exit.
71 and above...........................  1 left side exit door or 2 exit
                                          windows, and 1 roof exit, and
                                          any combination of door, roof,
                                          or windows such that the total
                                          capacity credit specified in
                                          Table 3 for these exits, plus
                                          70, is greater than the
                                          seating capacity of the bus.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Side emergency exit doors must meet the requirements of S5.2.3.2(a),
  emergency roof exits must meet the requirements of S5.2.3.2(b),
  emergency window exits must meet the requirements of S5.2.3.2(c).


                                 Table 2
------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Seating capacity               Additional exits required *
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1-57...................................  None.
58-74..................................  1 right side exit door or 2
                                          exit windows.

[[Page 996]]

 
75-82..................................  1 right side exit door or 2
                                          exit windows, and 1 roof exit.
83 and above...........................  1 right side exit door or 2
                                          windows, and 1 roof exit, and
                                          any combination of door, roof,
                                          or windows such that the total
                                          capacity credit specified in
                                          Table 3 for these exits plus
                                          82 is greater than the
                                          capacity of the bus.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Side emergency exit doors must meet the requirements of S5.2.3.2(a),
  emergency roof exits must meet the requirements of S5.2.3.2(b),
  emergency window exits must meet the requirements of S5.2.3.2(c).


                                 Table 3
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Capacity
                           Exit Type                             Credit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Side Door.....................................................        16
Window........................................................         8
Roof Exit.....................................................         8
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) The area of an opening equipped with a wheelchair lift may be 
credited toward the required additional exits if it meets the 
requirements of paragraphs (a) or (b) of S5.2.3.1 and if the lift folds 
or stows in such a manner that the area is available for use by persons 
not needing the lift. With the lift in the folded or stowed position, 
such opening is considered a side emergency exit door.
    S5.2.3.2 All emergency exits required by S5.2.3.1(a) and S5.2.3.1(b) 
shall meet the following criteria:
    (a) Side emergency exit doors.
    (1) Each side emergency exit door shall be hinged on its forward 
side.
    (2) The first side emergency exit door installed pursuant to Table 
1, shall be located on the left side of the bus and as near as 
practicable to the mid-point of the passenger compartment. A second side 
emergency exit door installed pursuant to Table 1 shall be located on 
the right side of the bus. In the case of a bus equipped with three side 
emergency door exits pursuant to Table 1, the third shall be located on 
the left side of the bus.
    (3) The first side emergency exit door installed pursuant to Table 2 
shall be located on the right side of the bus. A second side emergency 
door exit installed pursuant to Table 2 shall be located on the left 
side of the bus. In the case of a bus equipped with three side emergency 
door exits pursuant to Table 2, the third shall be located on the right 
side of the bus.
    (4) No two side emergency exit doors shall be located, in whole or 
in part, within the same post and roof bow panel space.
    (b) Emergency roof exit. (1) Each emergency roof exit shall be 
hinged on its forward side, and shall be operable from both inside and 
outside the vehicle.
    (2) In a bus equipped with a single emergency roof exit, the exit 
shall be located as near as practicable to the midpoint of the passenger 
compartment.
    (3) In a bus equipped with two emergency roof exits, one shall be 
located as near as practicable to a point equidistant between the 
midpoint of the passenger compartment and the foremost limit of the 
passenger compartment and the other shall be located as near as 
practicable to a point equidistant between the midpoint of the passenger 
compartment and the rearmost point of the passenger compartment.
    (4) In a bus equipped with three or more emergency roof exits, the 
roof exits shall be installed so that, to the extent practicable, the 
longitudinal distance between each pair of adjacent roof exits is the 
same and equal to the distance from the foremost point of the passenger 
compartment to the foremost roof exit and to the distance from the 
rearmost point of that compartment to the rearmost roof exit.
    (5) Except as provided in paragraph (b)(6) of this section, each 
emergency roof exit shall be installed with its longitudinal centerline 
coinciding with a longitudinal vertical plane passing through the 
longitudinal centerline of the school bus.
    (6) In a bus equipped with two or more emergency roof exits, for 
each roof exit offset from the longitudinal vertical plane specified in 
paragraph (b)(5) of this section, there shall be another roof exit 
offset from that plane an equal distance to the other side.
    (c) Emergency exit windows. A bus equipped with emergency exit 
windows shall have an even number of such windows, not counting the 
push-out rear window required by S5.2.3.1(b). Any side emergency exit 
windows shall be

[[Page 997]]

evenly divided between the right and left sides of the bus. School buses 
shall not be equipped with horizontally-sliding emergency exit windows. 
Further, except for buses equipped with rear push-out emergency exit 
windows in accordance with S5.2.3.1(b), school buses shall not be 
equipped with both sliding and push-out emergency exit windows.
    S5.2.3.3 The engine starting system of a bus shall not operate if 
any emergency exit is locked from either inside or outside the bus. For 
purposes of this requirement, ``locked'' means that the release 
mechanism cannot be activated and the exit opened by a person at the 
exit without a special device such as a key or special information such 
as a combination.
    S5.2.3.4 Each school bus manufactured before September 1, 1994 may, 
at the manufacturer's option, comply with either S5.2.3.4(a) or 
S5.2.3.4(b) instead of S5.2.3.1 through S5.2.3.3.
    (a) Each bus shall be equipped with one rear emergency door that 
opens outward and is hinged on the right side (either side in the case 
of a bus with a GVWR of 4,536 kilograms or less); or
    (b) Each bus shall be equipped with one emergency door on the 
vehicle's left side that is hinged on its forward side and meets the 
requirements of S5.2.3.2(a), and a push-out rear window that provides a 
minimum opening clearance 41 centimeters high and 122 centimeters wide 
and meets the requirements of S5.2.3.2(c).
    S5.3 Emergency exit release.
    S5.3.1 Each emergency exit not required by S5.2.3 shall be 
releasable by operating one or two mechanisms located within the regions 
specified in Figure 1, Figure 2, or Figure 3. The lower edge of the 
region in Figure 1, and Region B in Figure 2, shall be located 13 
centimeters above the adjacent seat, or 5 centimeters above the arm 
rest, if any, whichever is higher.
    S5.3.2 When tested under the conditions of S6., both before and 
after the window retention test required by S5.1, each emergency exit 
not required by S5.2.3 shall allow manual release of the exit by a 
single occupant using force applications each of which conforms, at the 
option of the manufacturer, either to S5.3.2 (a) or (b) of this section. 
Each exit shall have not more than two release mechanisms. In the case 
of exits with one release mechanism, the mechanism shall require two 
force applications to release the exit. In the case of exits with two 
release mechanisms, each mechanism shall require one force application 
to release the exit. At least one of the force applications for each 
exit shall differ from the direction of the initial motion to open the 
exit by not less than 90[deg] and no more than 180[deg].
    (a) Low-force application.
    (1) Location. As shown in Figure 1 or Figure 3.
    (2) Type of motion. Rotary or straight.
    (3) Magnitude. Not more than 20 pounds.
    (b) High force application.
    (1) Location. As shown in Figure 2 or Figure 3.
    (2) Type of motion. Straight, perpendicular to the undisturbed exit 
surface.
    (3) Magnitude. Not more than 60 pounds.
    S5.3.3 School bus emergency exit release.
    S5.3.3.1 When tested under the conditions of S6., both before and 
after the window retention test required by S5.1, each school bus 
emergency exit door shall allow manual release of the door by a single 
person, from both inside and outside the passenger compartment, using a 
force application that conforms to S5.3.3.1 (a) through (c) of this 
section, except a school bus with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less is not 
required to conform to S5.3.3.1 (a). The release mechanism shall operate 
without the use of remote controls or tools, and notwithstanding any 
failure of the vehicle's power system. When the release mechanism is not 
in the position that causes an emergency exit door to be closed and the 
vehicle's ignition is in the ``on'' position, a continuous warning sound 
shall be audible at the driver's seating position and in the vicinity of 
the emergency exit door.
    (a) Location: Within the high force access region shown in Figure 3A 
for a side emergency exit door, and in figure 3D for a rear emergency 
exit door.
    (b) Type of motion: Upward from inside the bus and, at the 
discretion of the manufacturer, from outside the bus. Buses with a GVWR 
of 10,000

[[Page 998]]

pounds or less shall provide interior release mechanisms that operate by 
either an upward or pull-type motion. The pull-type motion shall be used 
only when the release mechanism is recessed in such a manner that the 
handle, level, or other activating device, before being activated, does 
not protrude beyond the rim of the recessed receptacle.
    (c) Magnitude of force: Not more than 178 newtons.
    S5.3.3.2 When tested under the conditions of S6., both before and 
after the window retention test required by S5.1, each school bus 
emergency exit window shall allow manual release of the exit by a single 
person, from inside the passenger compartment, using not more than two 
release mechanisms located in specified low-force or high-force regions 
(at the option of the manufacturer) with force applications and types of 
motions that conform to either S5.3.3.2 (a) or (b) of this section. In 
the case of windows with one release mechanism, the mechanism shall 
require two force applications to release the exit. In the case of 
windows with two release mechanisms, each mechanism shall require one 
application to release the exit. At least one of the force applications 
for each window shall differ from the direction of the initial motion to 
open the exit by no less than 90[deg] and no more than 180[deg]. Each 
release mechanism shall operate without the use of remote controls or 
tools, and notwithstanding any failure of the vehicle's power system. 
When a release mechanism is open and the vehicle's ignition is in the 
``on'' position, a continuous warning shall be audible at the drivers 
seating position and in the vicinity of that emergency exit.
    (a) Emergency exit windows--Low-force application.
    (1) Location: Within the low-force access regions shown in Figures 1 
and 3 for an emergency exit window.
    (2) Type of motion: Rotary or straight.
    (3) Magnitude: Not more than 89 newtons.
    (b) Emergency exit windows--High-force application.
    (1) Location: Within the high-force access regions shown in Figures 
2 and 3 for an emergency exit window.
    (2) Type of motion: Straight and perpendicular to the undisturbed 
exit surface.
    (3) Magnitude: Not more than 178 newtons.
    S5.3.3.3 When tested under the conditions of S6., both before and 
after the window retention test required by S5.1, each school bus 
emergency roof exit shall allow manual release of the exit by a single 
person from both inside and outside the passenger compartment, using not 
more than two release mechanisms located at specified low-force or high-
force regions (at the option of the manufacturer) with force 
applications and types of motions that conform either to S5.3.3.3 (a) or 
(b) of this section. In the case of roof exits with one release 
mechanism, the mechanism shall require two force applications to release 
the exit. In the case of roof exits with two release mechanisms, each 
mechanism shall require one application to release the exit. At least 
one of the force applications for each roof exit shall differ from the 
direction of the initial push-out motion of the exit by no less than 
90[deg] and no more than 180[deg].
    (a) Emergency roof exits--Low-force application.
    (1) Location: Within the low force access regions shown in Figure 
3B, in the case of buses whose roof exits are not offset from the plane 
specified in S5.2.3.2(b)(5). In the case of buses which have roof exits 
offset from the plane specified in S5.2.3.2(b)(5), the amount of offset 
shall be used to recalculate the dimensions in Figure 3B for the offset 
exits.
    (2) Type of motion: Rotary or straight.
    (3) Magnitude: Not more than 89 newtons.
    (b) Emergency roof exits--High-force application.
    (1) Location: Within the high force access regions shown in Figure 
3B, in the case of buses whose roof exits are not offset from the plane 
specified in S5.2.3.2(b)(5). In the case of buses which have roof exits 
offset from the plane specified in S5.2.3.2(b)(5), the amount of offset 
shall be used to recalculate the dimensions in Figure 3B for the offset 
exits.
    (2) Type of motion: Straight and perpendicular to the undisturbed 
exit surface.

[[Page 999]]

    (3) Magnitude: Not more than 178 newtons.
    S5.4 Emergency exit opening.
    S5.4.1 After the release mechanism has been operated, each emergency 
exit not required by S5.2.3 shall, under the conditions of S6., both 
before and after the window retention test required by S5.1, using the 
reach distances and corresponding force levels specified in S5.3.2, 
allow manual opening by a single occupant to a position that provides an 
opening large enough to admit unobstructed passage, keeping a major axis 
horizontal at all times, of an ellipsoid generated by rotating about its 
minor axis an ellipse having a major axis of 50 centimeters and a minor 
axis of 33 centimeters.
    S5.4.2 School bus emergency exit opening.
    S5.4.2.1 School buses with a GVWR of more than 10,000 pounds.
    (a) Emergency exit doors. After the release mechanism has been 
operated, each emergency exit door of a school bus shall, under the 
conditions of S6., before and after the window retention test required 
by S5.1, using the force levels specified in S5.3.3, be manually 
extendable by a single person to a position that permits:
    (1) In the case of a rear emergency exit door, an opening large 
enough to permit unobstructed passage into the bus of a rectangular 
parallelepiped 1,145 millimeters (45 inches) high, 610 millimeters (24 
inches) wide, and 305 millimeters (12 inches) deep, keeping the 1,145 
millimeter (45 inch) dimension vertical, the 610 (24 inch) millimeter 
dimension parallel to the opening, and the lower surface in contact with 
the floor of the bus at all times, until the bottom edge of the rearmost 
surface of the parallelepiped is tangent to the plane of the door 
opening; and
    (2) In the case of a side emergency exit door, an opening at least 
114 centimeters high and 61 centimeters wide.
    (i) Except as provided in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section, no 
portion of a seat or a restraining barrier shall be installed within the 
area bounded by the opening of a side emergency exit door, a vertical 
transverse plane tangent to the rearward edge of the door opening frame, 
a vertical transverse plane parallel to that plane at a distance of 30 
centimeters forward of that plane, and a longitudinal vertical plane 
passing through the longitudinal centerline of the bus. (See Figure 5A).
    (ii) A seat bottom may be located within the area described in 
paragraph (a)(2)(i) of this section if the seat bottom pivots and 
automatically assumes and retains a vertical position when not in use, 
so that no portion of the seat bottom is within the area described in 
paragraph (i) when the seat bottom is vertical. (See Figure 5B).
    (iii) No portion of a seat or restraining barrier located forward of 
the area described in paragraph (a)(2)(i) of this section and between 
the door opening and a longitudinal vertical plane passing through the 
longitudinal centerline of the bus shall extend rearward of a vertical 
transverse plane tangent to the forwardmost portion of a latch mechanism 
on the door. (See Figures 5B and 5C.)
    (3)(i) Each emergency exit door of a school bus shall be equipped 
with a positive door opening device that, after the release mechanism 
has been operated, under the conditions of S6, before and after the 
window retention test required by S5.1--
    (A) Bears the weight of the door;
    (B) Keeps the door from closing past the point at which the door is 
perpendicular to the side of the bus body, regardless of the body's 
orientation; and
    (C) Provides a means for release or override.
    (ii) The positive door opening device shall perform the functions 
specified in paragraph (a)(3)(i) (A) and (B) of this section without the 
need for additional action beyond opening the door past the point at 
which the door is perpendicular to the side of the bus body.
    (b) Emergency roof exits. After the release mechanism has been 
operated, each emergency roof exit of a school bus shall, under the 
conditions of S6, before and after the window retention test required by 
S5.1, using the force levels specified in S5.3.3, be manually extendable 
by a single person to a position that permits an opening at least 41 
centimeters high and 41 centimeters wide.
    (c) Emergency exit windows. After the release mechanism has been 
operated, each emergency exit window of a

[[Page 1000]]

school bus shall, under the conditions of S6., both before and after the 
window retention test of S5.1, using force levels specified in S5.3.3.2, 
be manually extendable by a single occupant to a position that provides 
an opening large enough to admit unobstructed passage, keeping a major 
axis horizontal at all times, of an ellipsoid generated by rotating 
about its minor axis an ellipse having a major axis of 50 centimeters 
and a minor axis of 33 centimeters.
    S5.4.2.2 School buses with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less. A school 
bus with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less shall conform to all the 
provisions of S5.4.2, except that the parallelepiped dimension for the 
opening of the rear emergency door or doors shall be 45 inches high, 22 
inches wide, and six inches deep.
    S5.4.3 Restriction on wheelchair anchorage location.
    S5.4.3.1 Except as provided in paragraph S5.4.3.2 of this section, 
no portion of a wheelchair securement anchorage shall be located in a 
school bus such that:
    (a) In the case of side emergency exit doors, any portion of the 
wheelchair securement anchorage is within the space bounded by the 
interior side wall and emergency exit door opening, transverse vertical 
planes 305 mm (12 inches) forward and rearward of the center of any side 
emergency exit door restricted area, and a longitudinal vertical plane 
through the longitudinal centerline of the school bus, as shown in 
Figure 6A and Figure 6B.
    (b) In the case of rear emergency exit doors in school buses, using 
the parallelepiped described in S5.4.2.1(a)(1) (for school buses with a 
GVWR greater than 10,000 lb) or S5.4.2.2 (for school buses with a GVWR 
of 10,000 lb or less), when the parallelepiped is positioned, as 
described in S5.4.2.1(a), flush with the floor and with the rear surface 
of the parallelepiped tangent to the opening of the rear emergency exit 
door, there must not be any portion of a wheelchair securement anchorage 
within the space occupied by the parallelepiped or within the downward 
vertical projection of the parallelepiped, as shown in Figure 6C.
    S5.4.3.2 The restriction in S5.4.3.1(a) of this section does not 
apply to tracks or track-type devices that are used for mounting seats 
and/or for wheelchair securement devices.
    S5.5 Emergency exit identification.
    S5.5.1 In buses other than school buses, and except for windows 
serving as emergency exits in accordance with S5.2.2.3(b) and doors in 
buses with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less, each emergency exit door 
shall have the designation ``Emergency Door'' or ``Emergency Exit,'' and 
every other emergency exit shall have the designation ``Emergency Exit'' 
followed by concise operating instructions describing each motion 
necessary to unlatch and open the exit, located within 16 centimeters of 
the release mechanism.

    Examples: (1) Lift to Unlatch, Push to Open
    (2) Lift Handle and Push out to Open


When a release mechanism is not located within an occupant space of an 
adjacent seat, a label meeting the requirements of S5.5.2 that indicates 
the location of the nearest release mechanism shall be placed within the 
occupant space.

    Example: ``Emergency Exit Instructions Located Next to Seat Ahead''

    S5.5.2 In buses other than school buses. Except as provided in 
S5.5.2.1, each marking shall be legible, when the only source of light 
is the normal nighttime illumination of the bus interior, to occupants 
having corrected visual acuity of 20/40 (Snellen ratio) seated in the 
adjacent seat, seated in the seat directly adjoining the adjacent seat, 
and standing in the aisle location that is closest to that adjacent 
seat. The marking shall be legible from each of these locations when the 
other two corresponding locations are occupied.
    S5.5.2.1 If the exit has no adjacent seat, the marking must meet the 
legibility requirements of S5.5.2 for occupants standing in the aisle 
location nearest to the emergency exit, except for a roof exit, which 
must meet the legibility requirements for occupants positioned with 
their backs against the floor opposite the roof exit.
    S5.5.3 School Bus.
    (a) Each school bus emergency exit provided in accordance with 
S5.2.3.1 shall have the designation ``Emergency Door'' or ``Emergency 
Exit,'' as appropriate, in letters at least 5 centimeters

[[Page 1001]]

high, of a color that contrasts with its background. For emergency exit 
doors, the designation shall be located at the top of, or directly 
above, the emergency exit door on both the inside and outside surfaces 
of the bus. The designation for roof exits shall be located on an inside 
surface of the exit, or within 30 centimeters of the roof exit opening. 
For emergency window exits, the designation shall be located at the top 
of, or directly above, or at the bottom of the emergency window exit on 
both the inside and outside surfaces of the bus.
    (b) Concise operating instructions describing the motions necessary 
to unlatch and open the emergency exit shall be located within 15 
centimeters of the release mechanism on the inside surface of the bus. 
These instructions shall be in letters at least 1 centimeter high and of 
a color that contrasts with its background.

    Examples: (1) Lift to Unlatch, Push to Open
    (2) Turn Handle, Push Out to Open

    (c) Each opening for a required emergency exit shall be outlined 
around its outside perimeter with a retroreflective tape with a minimum 
width of 2.5 centimeters and either red, white, or yellow in color, that 
when tested under the conditions specified in S6.1 of Standard No. 131 
(49 CFR 571.131), meets the criteria specified in Table 1 of that 
section.
    (d) On the inside surface of each school bus with one or more 
wheelchair anchorage positions, there shall be a label directly beneath 
or above each ``Emergency Door'' or ``Emergency Exit'' designation 
specified by paragraph (a) of S5.5.3 of this standard for an emergency 
exit door or window. The label shall state in letters at least 25 mm 
(one inch) high, the words ``DO NOT BLOCK'' in a color that contrasts 
with the background of the label.
    S6. Test conditions.
    S6.1 The vehicle is on a flat, horizontal surface.
    S6.2 The inside of the vehicle and the outside environment are kept 
at any temperature from 70[deg] to 85 [deg]Fahrenheit for 4 hours 
immediately preceding the tests, and during the tests.
    S6.3 For the window retention test, windows are installed, closed, 
and latched (where latches are provided) in the condition intended for 
normal bus operation.
    S6.4 For the emergency exit release and extension tests, windows are 
installed as in S6.3, seats, armrests, and interior objects near the 
windows are installed as for normal use, and seats are in the upright 
position.

[[Page 1002]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.114


[[Page 1003]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.115


[[Page 1004]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.116


[[Page 1005]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.117


[[Page 1006]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.118


[[Page 1007]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.119


[[Page 1008]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.120


[[Page 1009]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.121


[[Page 1010]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19AP02.000

                          Figure 6B [Reserved]

[[Page 1011]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19AP02.002

                          Figure 6D [Reserved]

[[Page 1012]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.122


[37 FR 9395, May 10, 1972]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.217 see the List of CFR Sections Affected which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.


<R05>
Sec. 571.218  Standard No. 218; Motorcycle helmets.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes minimum performance 
requirements for helmets designed for use by motorcyclists and other 
motor vehicle users.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries to motorcyclists and other motor vehicle users resulting from 
head impacts.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to all helmets designed for 
use by motorcyclists and other motor vehicle users.
    S4. Definitions.
    Basic plane means a plane through the centers of the right and left 
external ear openings and the lower edge of the eye sockets (Figure 1) 
of a reference headform (Figure 2) or test headform.

[[Page 1013]]

    Helmet positioning index means the distance in inches, as specified 
by the manufacturer, from the lowest point of the brow opening at the 
lateral midpoint of the helmet to the basic plane of a reference 
headform, when the helmet is firmly and properly positioned on the 
reference headform.
    Midsagittal plane means a longitudinal plane through the apex of a 
reference headform or test headform that is perpendicular to the basic 
plane (Figure 3).
    Reference headform means a measuring device contoured to the 
dimensions of one of the three headforms described in Table 2 and 
Figures 5 through 8 with surface markings indicating the locations of 
the basic, mid-sagittal, and reference planes, and the centers of the 
external ear openings.
    Reference plane means a plane above and parallel to the basic plane 
on a reference headform or test headform (Figure 2) at the distance 
indicated in Table 2.
    Retention system means the complete assembly by which the helmet is 
retained in position on the head during use.
    Test headform means a test device contoured to the dimensions of one 
of the three headforms described in Table 2 and Figures 5 through 8 with 
surface markings indicating the locations of the basic, mid-sagittal, 
and reference planes.
    S5. Requirements. Each helmet shall meet the requirements of S5.1, 
S5.2, and S5.3 when subjected to any conditioning procedure specified in 
S6.4, and tested in accordance with S7.1, S7.2, and S7.3.
    S5.1 Impact attenuation. When an impact attenuation test is 
conducted in accordance with S7.1, all of the following requirements 
shall be met:
    (a) Peak accelerations shall not exceed 400g;
    (b) Accelerations in excess of 200g shall not exceed a cumulative 
duration of 2.0 milliseconds; and
    (c) Accelerations in excess of 150g shall not exceed a cumulative 
duration of 4.0 milliseconds.
    S5.2 Penetration. When a penetration test is conducted in accordance 
with S7.2, the striker shall not contact the surface of the test 
headform.
    S5.3 Retention system.
    S5.3.1 When tested in accordance with S7.3:
    (a) The retention system or its components shall attain the loads 
specified without separation; and
    (b) The adjustable portion of the retention system test device shall 
not move more than 1 inch (2.5 cm) measured between preliminary and test 
load positions.
    S5.3.2 Where the retention system consists of components which can 
be independently fastened without securing the complete assembly, each 
such component shall independently meet the requirements of S5.3.1.
    S5.4 Configuration. Each helmet shall have a protective surface of 
continuous contour at all points on or above the test line described in 
S6.2.3. The helmet shall provide peripheral vision clearance of at least 
105[deg] to each side of the mid-sagittal plane, when the helmet is 
adjusted as specified in S6.3. The vertex of these angles, shown in 
Figure 3, shall be at the point on the anterior surface of the reference 
headform at the intersection of the mid-sagittal and basic planes. The 
brow opening of the helmet shall be at least 1 inch (2.5 cm) above all 
points in the basic plane that are within the angles of peripheral 
vision (see Figure 3).
    S5.5 Projections. A helmet shall not have any rigid projections 
inside its shell. Rigid projections outside any helmet's shell shall be 
limited to those required for operation of essential accessories, and 
shall not protrude more than 0.20 inch (5 mm).
    S5.6 Labeling.
    S5.6.1 Each helmet shall be labeled permanently and legibly, in a 
manner such that the label(s) can be read easily without removing 
padding or any other permanent part, with the following:
    (a) Manufacturer's name or identification.
    (b) Precise model designation.
    (c) Size.
    (d) Month and year of manufacture. This may be spelled out (for 
example, June 1988), or expressed in numerals (for example, 6/88).
    (e) The symbol DOT, constituting the manufacturer's certification 
that the

[[Page 1014]]

helmet conforms to the applicable Federal motor vehicle safety 
standards. This symbol shall appear on the outer surface, in a color 
that contrasts with the background, in letters at least \3/8\ inch (1 
cm) high, centered laterally with the horizontal centerline of the 
symbol located a minimum of 1\1/8\ inches (2.9 cm) and a maximum of 1\3/
8\ inches (3.5 cm) from the bottom edge of the posterior portion of the 
helmet.
    (f) Instructions to the purchaser as follows:
    (1) ``Shell and liner constructed of (identify type(s) of 
materials).
    (2) ``Helmet can be seriously damaged by some common substances 
without damage being visible to the user. Apply only the following: 
(Recommended cleaning agents, paints, adhesives, etc., as appropriate).
    (3) ``Make no modifications. Fasten helmet securely. If helmet 
experiences a severe blow, return it to the manufacturer for inspection, 
or destroy it and replace it.''
    (4) Any additional relevant safety information should be applied at 
the time of purchase by means of an attached tag, brochure, or other 
suitable means.
    S5.7 Helmet positioning index. Each manufacturer of helmets shall 
establish a positioning index for each helmet he manufactures. This 
index shall be furnished immediately to any person who requests the 
information, with respect to a helmet identified by manufacturer, model 
designation, and size.
    S6. Preliminary test procedures. Before subjecting a helmet to the 
testing sequence specified in S7., prepare it according to the 
procedures in S6.1, S6.2, and S6.3.
    S6.1 Selection of appropriate headform.
    S6.1.1 A helmet with a manufacturer's designated discrete size or 
size range which does not exceed 6\3/4\ (European size: 54) is tested on 
the small headform. A helmet with a manufacturer's designated discrete 
size or size range which exceeds 6\3/4\, but does not exceed 7\1/2\ 
(European size: 60) is tested on the medium headform. A helmet with a 
manufacturer's designated discrete size or size range which exceeds 7\1/
2\ is tested on the large headform.
    S6.1.2 A helmet with a manufacturer's designated size range which 
includes sizes falling into two or all three size ranges described in 
S6.1.1 is tested on each headform specified for each size range.
    S6.2 Reference marking.
    S6.2.1 Use a reference headform that is firmly seated with the basic 
and reference planes horizontal. Place the complete helmet to be tested 
on the appropriate reference headform, as specified in S6.1.1 and 
S6.1.2.
    S6.2.2 Apply a 10-pound (4.5 kg) static vertical load through the 
helmet's apex. Center the helmet laterally and seat it firmly on the 
reference headform according to its helmet positioning index.
    S6.2.3 Maintaining the load and position described in S6.2.2, draw a 
line (hereinafter referred to as ``test line'') on the outer surface of 
the helmet coinciding with portions of the intersection of that service 
with the following planes, as shown in Figure 2:
    (a) A plane 1 inch (2.5 cm) above and parallel to the reference 
plane in the anterior portion of the reference headform;
    (b) A vertical transverse plane 2.5 inches (6.4 cm) behind the point 
on the anterior surface of the reference headform at the intersection of 
the mid-sagittal and reference planes;
    (c) The reference plane of the reference headform;
    (d) A vertical transverse plane 2.5 inches (6.4. cm) behind the 
center of the external ear opening in a side view; and
    (e) A plane 1 inch (2.5 cm) below and parallel to the reference 
plane in the posterior portion of the reference headform.
    S6.3 Helmet positioning.
    S6.3.1 Before each test, fix the helmet on a test headform in the 
position that conforms to its helmet positioning index. Secure the 
helmet so that it does not shift position before impact or before 
application of force during testing.
    S6.3.2 In testing as specified in S7.1 and S7.2, place the retention 
system in a position such that it does not interfere with free fall, 
impact or penetration.
    S6.4 Conditioning.
    S6.4.1 Immediately before conducting the testing sequence specified 
in S7,

[[Page 1015]]

condition each test helmet in accordance with any one of the following 
procedures:
    (a) Ambient conditions. Expose to a temperature of 70 [deg]F(21 
[deg]C) and a relative humidity of 50 percent for 12 hours.
    (b) Low temperature. Expose to a temperature of 14 [deg]F(-10 
[deg]C) for 12 hours.
    (c) High temperature. Expose to a temperature of 122 [deg]F(50 
[deg]C) for 12 hours.
    (d) Water immersion. Immerse in water at a temperature of 77 
[deg]F(25 [deg]C) for 12 hours.
    S6.4.2 If during testing, as specified in S7.1.3 and S7.2.3, a 
helmet is returned to the conditioning environment before the time out 
of that environment exceeds 4 minutes, the helmet is kept in the 
environment for a minimum of 3 minutes before resumption of testing with 
that helmet. If the time out of the environment exceeds 4 minutes, the 
helmet is returned to the environment for a minimum of 3 minutes for 
each minute or portion of a minute that the helmet remained out of the 
environment in excess of 4 minutes or for a maximum of 12 hours, 
whichever is less, before the resumption of testing with that helmet.
    S7. Test conditions.
    S7.1 Impact attenuation test.
    S7.1.1 Impact attenuation is measured by determining acceleration 
imparted to an instrumented test headform on which a complete helmet is 
mounted as specified in S6.3, when it is dropped in guided free fall 
upon a fixed hemispherical anvil and a fixed flat steel anvil.
    S7.1.2 Each helmet is impacted at four sites with two successive 
identical impacts at each site. Two of these sites are impacted upon a 
flat steel anvil and two upon a hemispherical steel anvil as specified 
in S7.1.10 and S7.1.11. The impact sites are at any point on the area 
above the test line described in paragraph S6.2.3, and separated by a 
distance not less than one-sixth of the maximum circumference of the 
helmet in the test area.
    S7.1.3 Impact testing at each of the four sites, as specified in 
S7.1.2, shall start at two minutes, and be completed by four minutes, 
after removal of the helmet from the conditioning environment.
    S7.1.4 (a) The guided free fall drop height for the helmet and test 
headform combination onto the hemispherical anvil shall be such that the 
minimum impact speed is 17.1 feet/second (5.2 m/sec). The minimum drop 
height is 54.5 inches (138.4 cm). The drop height is adjusted upward 
from the minimum to the extent necessary to compensate for friction 
losses.
    (b) The guided free fall drop height for the helmet and test 
headform combination onto the flat anvil shall be such that the minimum 
impact speed is 19.7 ft./sec (6.0 m/sec). The minimum drop height is 72 
inches (182.9 cm). The drop height is adjusted upward from the minimum 
to the extent necessary to compensate for friction losses.
    S7.1.5 Test headforms for impact attenuation testing are constructed 
of magnesium alloy (K-1A), and exhibit no resonant frequencies below 
2,000 Hz.
    S7.1.6 The monorail drop test system is used for impact attenuation 
testing.
    S7.1.7 The weight of the drop assembly, as specified in Table 1, is 
the combined weight of the test headform and the supporting assembly for 
the drop test. The weight of the supporting assembly is not less than 
2.0 lbs. and not more than 2.4 lbs. (0.9 to 1.1 kg). The supporting 
assembly weight for the monorail system is the drop assembly weight 
minus the combined weight of the test headform, the headform's clamp 
down ring, and its tie down screws.
    S7.1.8 The center of gravity of the test headform is located at the 
center of the mounting ball on the supporting assembly and lies within a 
cone with its axis vertical and forming a 10[deg] included angle with 
the vertex at the point of impact. The center of gravity of the drop 
assembly lies within the rectangular volume bounded by x = -0.25 inch (-
0.64 cm), x = 0.85 inch (2.16 cm), y = 0.25 inch (0.64 cm), and y = -
0.25 inch (-0.64 cm) with the origin located at the center of gravity of 
the test headform. The rectangular volume has no boundary along the z-
axis. The x-y-z axes are mutually perpendicular and have positive or 
negative designations in accordance with the right-hand rule (See Figure 
5). The origin of the coordinate axes also is located at the center of 
the mounting ball on the

[[Page 1016]]

supporting assembly (See Figures 6, 7, and 8). The x-y-z axes of the 
test headform assembly on a monorail drop test equipment are oriented as 
follows: From the origin, the x-axis is horizontal with its positive 
direction going toward and passing through the vertical centerline of 
the monorail. The positive z-axis is downward. The y-axis also is 
horizontal and its direction can be decided by the z- and x-axes, using 
the right-hand rule.
    S7.1.9 The acceleration transducer is mounted at the center of 
gravity of the test headform with the sensitive axis aligned to within 
5[deg] of vertical when the test headform assembly is in the impact 
position. The acceleration data channel complies with SAE Recommended 
Practice J211 JUN 80, Instrumentation for Impact Tests, requirements for 
channel class 1,000.
    S7.1.10 The flat anvil is constructed of steel with a 5-inch (12.7 
cm) minimum diameter impact face, and the hemispherical anvil is 
constructed of steel with a 1.9 inch (4.8 cm) radius impact face.
    S7.1.11 The rigid mount for both of the anvils consists of a solid 
mass of at least 300 pounds (136.1 kg), the outer surface of which 
consists of a steel plate with minimum thickness of 1 inch (2.5 cm) and 
minimum surface area of 1 ft \2\ (929 cm\2\ ).
    S7.1.12 The drop system restricts side movement during the impact 
attenuation test so that the sum of the areas bounded by the 
acceleration-time response curves for both the x- and y-axes (horizontal 
axes) is less than five percent of the area bounded by the acceleration-
time response curve for the vertical axis.
    S7.2 Penetration test.
    S7.2.1 The penetration test is conducted by dropping the penetration 
test striker in guided free fall, with its axis aligned vertically, onto 
the outer surface of the complete helmet, when mounted as specified in 
S6.3, at any point above the test line, described in S6.2.3, except on a 
fastener or other rigid projection.
    S7.2.2 Two penetration blows are applied at least 3 inches (7.6 cm) 
apart, and at least 3 inches (7.6 cm) from the centers of any impacts 
applied during the impact attenuation test.
    S7.2.3 The application of the two penetration blows, specified in 
S7.2.2, starts at two minutes and is completed by four minutes, after 
removal of the helmet from the conditioning environment.
    S7.2.4 The height of the guided free fall is 118.1 inches (3 m), as 
measured from the striker point to the impact point on the outer surface 
of the test helmet.
    S7.2.5 The contactable surface of the penetration test headform is 
constructed of a metal or metallic alloy having a Brinell hardness 
number no greater than 55, which will permit ready detection should 
contact by the striker occur. The surface is refinished if necessary 
before each penetration test blow to permit detection of contact by the 
striker.
    S7.2.6 The weight of the penetration striker is 6 pounds, 10 ounces 
(3 kg).
    S7.2.7 The point of the striker has an included angle of 60[deg], a 
cone height of 1.5 inches (3.8 cm), a tip radius of 0.02 inch (standard 
0.5 millimeter radius) and a minimum hardness of 60 Rockwell, C-scale.
    S7.2.8 The rigid mount for the penetration test headform is as 
described in S7.1.11.
    S7.3 Retention system test.
    S7.3.1 The retention system test is conducted by applying a static 
tensile load to the retention assembly of a complete helmet, which is 
mounted, as described in S6.3, on a stationary test headform as shown in 
Figure 4, and by measuring the movement of the adjustable portion of the 
retention system test device under tension.
    S7.3.2 The retention system test device consists of both an 
adjustable loading mechanism by which a static tensile load is applied 
to the helmet retention assembly and a means for holding the test 
headform and helmet stationary. The retention assembly is fastened 
around two freely moving rollers, both of which have a 0.5 inch (1.3 cm) 
diameter and a 3-inch (7.6 cm) center-to-center separation, and which 
are mounted on the adjustable portion of the tensile loading device 
(Figure 4). The helmet is fixed on the test headform as necessary to 
ensure that it does not move during the application

[[Page 1017]]

of the test loads to the retention assembly.
    S7.3.3 A 50-pound (22.7 kg) preliminary test load is applied to the 
retention assembly, normal to the basic plane of the test headform and 
symmetrical with respect to the center of the retention assembly for 30 
seconds, and the maximum distance from the extremity of the adjustable 
portion of the retention system test device to the apex of the helmet is 
measured.
    S7.3.4 An additional 250-pound (113.4 kg) test load is applied to 
the retention assembly, in the same manner and at the same location as 
described in S7.3.3, for 120 seconds, and the maximum distance from the 
extremity of the adjustable portion of the retention system test device 
to the apex of the helmet is measured.

                        Appendix to Sec. 571.218

       Table 1--Weights for Impact Attenuation Test Drop Assembly
------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Test headform size                   Weight \1\--1b(kg)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Small.....................................  7.8 (3.5 kg).
Medium....................................  11.0 (5.0 kg).
Large.....................................  13.4 (6.1 kg).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Combined weight of instrumented test headform and supporting
  assembly for drop test.

  [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.123
  

[[Page 1018]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.124


[[Page 1019]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.125


[[Page 1020]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.126


[[Page 1021]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.127


[[Page 1022]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.128


[[Page 1023]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.129


[[Page 1024]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.130


[[Page 1025]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.131


[[Page 1026]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.132


[[Page 1027]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.133


[[Page 1028]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.134


[38 FR 22391, Aug. 20, 1973, as amended at 39 FR 3554, Jan. 28, 1974; 45 
FR 15181, Mar. 10, 1980; 53 FR 11288, Apr. 6, 1988; 53 FR 12529, Apr. 
15, 1988]

    Effective Date Note: At 76 FR 28160, May 13, 2011, Sec. 571.218 was 
amended by adding two definitions in S4, S5.6.2, and by revising S5.6.1, 
S6.4.1, S7.1.2, S7.1.4(a) and (b), S7.1.9, S7.2.4, S7.2.6, S7.2.7, 
S7.3.1, and S7.3.2, Table 1, and Figures 7 and 8, effective May 13, 
2013. For the convenience of the user, the added and revised text is set 
forth as follows:


<R05>
Sec. 571.218  Standard No. 218; Motorcycle Helmets.

                                * * * * *

    S4 Definitions

                                * * * * *

[[Page 1029]]

    Discrete size means a numerical value that corresponds to the 
diameter of an equivalent circle representing the helmet interior in 
inches (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.25 inch) or to the circumference of the 
equivalent circle in centimeters (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.64 
centimeters).

                                * * * * *

    Impact site means the point on the helmet where the helmet shell 
first contacts the test anvil during the impact attenuation test.

                                * * * * *

    S5.6.1 On a label or labels separate from the certification label 
required by S5.6.2, each helmet shall be labeled permanently and 
legibly, in a manner such that the label(s) can be read easily without 
removing padding or any other permanent part, with the following:
    (a) Manufacturer's name.
    (b) Discrete size.
    (c) Month and year of manufacture. This may be spelled out (for 
example, June 2010), or expressed in numerals (for example, 6/10).
    (d) Instructions to the purchaser as follows:
    (1) ``Shell and liner constructed of (identify type(s) of 
materials).''
    (2) ``Helmet can be seriously damaged by some common substances 
without damage being visible to the user. Apply only the following: 
(Recommended cleaning agents, paints, adhesives, etc., as 
appropriate).''
    (3) ``Make no modifications. Fasten helmet securely. If helmet 
experiences a severe blow, return it to the manufacturer for inspection, 
or destroy it and replace it.''
    (4) Any additional relevant safety information should be applied at 
the time of purchase by means of an attached tag, brochure, or other 
suitable means.
    S5.6.2 Certification. Each helmet shall be labeled permanently and 
legibly with a label, constituting the manufacturer's certification that 
the helmet conforms to the applicable Federal motor vehicle safety 
standards, that is separate from the label(s) used to comply with 
S5.6.1, and complies with paragraphs (a) through (c) of this section.
    (a) Content, format, and appearance. The label required by paragraph 
S5.6.2 shall have the following content, format, and appearance:
    (1) The symbol ``DOT,'' horizontally centered on the label, in 
letters not less than 0.38 inch (1.0 cm) high.
    (2) The term ``FMVSS No. 218,'' horizontally centered beneath the 
symbol DOT, in letters not less than 0.09 inches (0.23 cm) high.
    (3) The word ``CERTIFIED,'' horizontally centered beneath the term 
``FMVSS No. 218,'' in letters not less than 0.09 inches (0.23 cm) high.
    (4) The precise model designation, horizontally centered above the 
symbol DOT, in letters and/or numerals not less than 0.09 inch (0.23 cm) 
high.
    (5) The manufacturer's name and/or brand, horizontally centered 
above the model designation, in letters and/or numerals not less than 
0.09 inch (0.23 cm) high.
    (6) All symbols, letters and numerals shall be in a color that 
contrasts with the background of the label.
    (b) Other information. No information, other than the information 
specified in subparagraph (a), shall appear on the label.
    (c) Location. The label shall appear on the outer surface of the 
helmet and be placed so that it is centered laterally with the 
horizontal centerline of the DOT symbol located a minimum of 1 inch (2.5 
cm) and a maximum of 3 inches (7.6 cm) from the bottom edge of the 
posterior portion of the helmet.

                                * * * * *

    S6.4.1 Immediately before conducting the testing sequence specified 
in S7, condition each test helmet in accordance with any one of the 
following procedures:
    (a) Ambient conditions. Expose to any temperature from 61 [deg]F to 
and including 79 [deg]F (from 16 [deg]C to and including 26 [deg]C) and 
any relative humidity from 30 to and including 70 percent for a minimum 
of 4 hours.
    (b) Low temperature. Expose to any temperature from 5 [deg]F to and 
including 23 [deg]F (from -15 [deg]C to and including -5 [deg]C) for a 
minimum of 4 hours and no more than 24 hours.
    (c) High temperature. Expose to any temperature from 113 [deg]F to 
and including 131 [deg]F (from 45 [deg]C to and including 55 [deg]C) for 
a minimum of 4 hours and no more than 24 hours.
    (d) Water immersion. Immerse in water at any temperature from 61 
[deg]F to and including 79 [deg]F (from 16 [deg]C to and including 26 
[deg]C) for a minimum of 4 hours and no more than 24 hours.

                                * * * * *

    S7.1.2 Each helmet is impacted at four sites with two successive 
impacts at each site. Two of these sites are impacted upon a flat steel 
anvil and two upon a hemispherical steel anvil as specified in S7.1.10 
and S7.1.11. The impact sites are at any point on the area above the 
test line described in paragraph S6.2.3, and separated by a distance not 
less than one-sixth of the maximum circumference of the helmet in the 
test area. For each site, the location where the helmet first contacts 
the anvil on the second impact shall not be greater than 0.75 inch (1.9 
cm)

[[Page 1030]]

from the location where the helmet first contacts the anvil on the first 
impact.

                                * * * * *

    S7.1.4(a) The guided free fall drop height for the helmet and test 
headform combination onto the hemispherical anvil shall be such that the 
impact speed is any speed from 16.4 ft/s to and including 17.7 ft/s 
(from 5.0 m/s to and including 5.4 m/s).
    (b) The guided free fall drop height for the helmet and test 
headform combination onto the flat anvil shall be such that the impact 
speed is any speed from 19.0 ft/s to and including 20.3 ft/s (from 5.8 
m/s to and including 6.2 m/s).

                                * * * * *

    S7.1.9 The acceleration transducer is mounted at the center of 
gravity of the test headform with the sensitive axis aligned to within 
5[deg] of vertical when the test headform assembly is in the data impact 
position. The acceleration data channel complies with the SAE 
Recommended Practice J211/1, revised March 1995 (incorporated by 
reference, see Sec. 571.5) requirements for channel class 1,000.''

                                * * * * *

    S7.2.4 The height of the guided free fall is 118.1 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.6 in (3 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.015 m), as measured 
from the striker point to the impact point on the outer surface of the 
test helmet.

                                * * * * *

    S7.2.6 The weight of the penetration striker is not less than 6 
pounds, 8 ounces and not more than 6 pounds, 12 ounces (2.95 to 3.06 
kg).
    S7.2.7 The point of the striker has an included angle of 60 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5[deg], a cone height of 1.5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 
0.015 in. (3.8 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.038 cm), a tip radius of 0.02 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.004 in. (0.5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.1 mm), 
and a minimum hardness of 60 Rockwell, C-scale.

                                * * * * *

    S7.3.1 The retention system test is conducted by applying a quasi-
static tensile load at any rate from 0.4 to and including 1.2 inch/min 
(from 1.0 to and including 3.0 cm/min) to the retention assembly of a 
complete helmet, which is mounted, as described in S6.3, on a stationary 
test headform as shown in Figure 4, and by measuring the movement of the 
adjustable portion of the retention system test device under tension.
    S7.3.2 The retention system test device consists of both an 
adjustable loading mechanism by which a quasi-static tensile load is 
applied at any rate from 0.4 to and including 1.2 inch/min (from 1.0 to 
and including 3.0 cm/min) to the helmet retention assembly and a means 
for holding the test headform and helmet stationary. The retention 
assembly is fastened around two freely moving rollers, both of which 
have a 0.5 inch (1.3 cm) diameter and a 3 inch (7.6 cm) center-to-center 
separation, and which are mounted on the adjustable portion of the 
tensile loading device (Figure 4). The helmet is fixed on the test 
headform as necessary to ensure that it does not move during the 
application of the test loads to the retention assembly.

                                * * * * *

    Table 1--Weight Ranges for Impact Attenuation Test Drop Assembly
------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Test headform size                Weight range \1\--lb kg)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Small.....................................  7.6-8.0 (3.4-3.6)
Medium....................................  10.8-11.2 (4.9-5.1)
Large.....................................  13.2-13.6 (6.0-6.2)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Combined weight of instrumented test headform and supporting
  assembly for drop test.

                                * * * * *

[[Page 1031]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13MY11.000


[[Page 1032]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13MY11.001


<R05>
Sec. 571.219  Standard No. 219; Windshield zone intrusion.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies limits for the displacement into 
the windshield area of motor vehicle components during a crash.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce crash 
injuries and fatalities that result from occupants contacting vehicle 
components displaced near or through the windshield.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars and to 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses of 4,536 kilograms or 
less gross vehicle weight rating. However, it does not apply to forward 
control vehicles, walk-in van-type vehicles, or to open-body-type 
vehicles with fold-down or removable windshields.
    S4. Definitions. Daylight Opening (DLO) means the maximum 
unobstructed opening through the glazing surface, including reveal or 
garnish moldings adjoining the surface, as measured parallel to the 
outer surface of the glazing material.

[[Page 1033]]

    S5. Requirement. When the vehicle travelling longitudinally forward 
at any speed up to and including 48 km/h impacts a fixed collision 
barrier that is perpendicular to the line of travel of the vehicle, 
under the conditions of S7, no part of the vehicle outside the occupant 
compartment, except windshield molding and other components designed to 
be normally in contact with the windshield, shall penetrate the 
protected zone template, affixed according to S6, to a depth of more 
than 6 mm, and no such part of a vehicle shall penetrate the inner 
surface of that portion of the windshield, within the DLO, below the 
protected zone defined in S6.
    S6. Protected zone template.
    S6.1 The lower edge of the protected zone is determined by the 
following procedure (See Figure 1).
    (a) Place a 165 mm diameter rigid sphere, with a mass of 6.8 kg in a 
position such that it simultaneously contacts the inner surface of the 
windshield glazing and the surface of the instrument panel, including 
padding. If any accessories or equipment such as the steering control 
system obstruct positioning of the sphere, remove them for the purposes 
of this procedure.
    (b) Draw the locus of points on the inner surface of the windshield 
contactable by the sphere across the width of the instrument panel. From 
the outermost contactable points, extend the locus line horizontally to 
the edges of the glazing material.
    (c) Draw a line on the inner surface of the windshield below and 13 
mm distant from the locus line.
    (d) The lower edge of the protected zone is the longitudinal 
projection onto the outer surface of the windshield of the line 
determined in S6.1(c).
    S6.2 The protected zone is the space enclosed by the following 
surfaces, as shown in Figure 1:
    (a) The outer surface of the windshield in its precrash 
configuration.
    (b) The locus of points 76 mm outward along perpendiculars drawn to 
each point on the outer surface of the windshield.
    (c) The locus of lines forming a 45[deg] angle with the outer 
surface of the windshield at each point along the top and side edges of 
the outer surface of the windshield and the lower edge of the protected 
zone determined in S6.1, in the plane perpendicular to the edge at that 
point.
    S6.3 A template is cut or formed from Styrofoam, type DB, cut cell, 
to the dimensions of the zone as determined in S6.2. The template is 
affixed to the windshield so that it delineates the protected zone and 
remains affixed throughout the crash test.
    S7. Test conditions. The requirement of S5. shall be met under the 
following conditions:
    S7.1 The protected zone template is affixed to the windshield in the 
manner described in S6.
    S7.2 The hood, hood latches, and any other hood retention components 
are engaged prior to the barrier crash.
    S7.3 Adjustable cowl tops or other adjustable panels in front of the 
windshield are in the position used under normal operating conditions 
when windshield wiping systems are not in use.
    S7.4 The parking brake is disengaged and the transmission is in 
neutral.
    S7.5 Tires are inflated to the vehicle manufacturer's 
specifications.
    S7.6 The fuel tank is filled to any level from 90 to 95 per cent of 
capacity.
    S7.7 The vehicle, including test devices and instrumentation, is 
loaded as follows:
    (a) Except as specified in S7.6, a passenger car is loaded to its 
unloaded vehicle weight plus its rated cargo and luggage capacity 
weight, secured in the luggage area, plus a 50th-percentile test dummy 
as specified in part 572 of this chapter at each front outboard 
designated seating position and at any other position whose protection 
system is required to be tested by a dummy under the provisions of 
Standard No. 208. Each dummy is restrained only by means that are 
installed for protection at its seating position.
    (b) Except as specified in S7.6, a multipurpose passenger vehicle, 
truck or bus is loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight, plus 136 kg or 
its rated cargo and luggage capacity, whichever is less, secured to the 
vehicle, plus a 50th-percentile test dummy as specified in part 572 of 
this chapter at each front outboard designated seating postion

[[Page 1034]]

and at any other position whose protection system is required to be 
tested by a dummy under the provisions of Standard No. 208. Each dummy 
is restrained only by means that are installed for protection at its 
seating position. The load is distributed so that the mass on each axle 
as measured at the tire-ground interface is in proportion to its GAWR. 
If the mass on any axle when the vehicle is loaded to its unloaded 
vehicle weight plus dummy mass exceeds the axle's proportional share of 
the test mass, the remaining mass is placed so that the mass on that 
axle remains the same. For the purposes of this section, unloaded 
vehicle weight does not include the mass of work-performing accessories. 
Vehicles are tested to a maximum unloaded vehicle weight of 2,495 kg.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.007


[40 FR 25462, June 16, 1975, as amended at 40 FR 53033, Nov. 14, 1975; 
41 FR 54946, Dec. 16, 1976; 45 FR 22046, Apr. 3, 1980; 63 FR 28946, May 
27, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 571.220  Standard No. 220; School bus rollover protection.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes performance requirements for 
school bus rollover protection.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce the number of 
deaths and the severity of injuries that result from failure of the 
school bus body structure to withstand forces encountered in rollover 
crashes.
    S3. Applicability. This standard applies to school buses.
    S4. Requirements. When a force in Newtons equal to 1\1/2\ times the 
unloaded vehicle weight in kilograms multiplied by 9.8 m/sec\2\ is 
applied to the roof of the vehicle's body structure through a force 
application plate as specified in S5, Test procedures--

[[Page 1035]]

    (a) The downward vertical movement at any point on the application 
plate shall not exceed 130 mm and
    (b) Each emergency exit of the vehicle provided in accordance with 
Standard No. 217 (Sec. 571.217) shall be capable of opening as 
specified in that standard during the full application of the force and 
after release of the force, except that an emergency exit located in the 
roof of the vehicle is not required to be capable of being opened during 
the application of the force. A particular vehicle (i.e., test specimen) 
need not meet the emergency exit opening requirement after release of 
force if it is subjected to the emergency exit opening requirements 
during the full application of the force.
    S5. Test procedures. Each vehicle shall be capable of meeting the 
requirements of S4. when tested in accordance with the procedures set 
forth below.
    S5.1 With any non-rigid chassis-to-body mounts replaced with 
equivalent rigid mounts, place the vehicle on a rigid horizontal surface 
so that the vehicle is entirely supported by means of the vehicle frame. 
If the vehicle is constructed without a frame, place the vehicle on its 
body sills. Remove any components which extend upward from the vehicle 
roof.
    S5.2 Use a flat, rigid, rectangular force application plate that is 
measured with respect to the vehicle roof longitudinal and lateral 
centerlines,
    (a) In the case of a vehicle with a GVWR of more than 4,536 kg, 305 
mm shorter than the vehicle roof and 914 mm wide; and
    (b) In the case of a vehicle with a GVWR of 4,536 kg or less, 127 mm 
longer and 127 mm wider than the vehicle roof. For purposes of these 
measurements, the vehicle roof is that structure, seen in the top 
projected view, that coincides with the passenger and driver compartment 
of the vehicle.
    S5.3 Position the force application plate on the vehicle roof so 
that its rigid surface is perpendicular to a vertical longitudinal plane 
and it contacts the roof at not less than two points, and so that, in 
the top projected view, its longitudinal centerline coincides with the 
longitudinal centerline of the vehicle, and its front and rear edges are 
an equal distance inside the front and rear edges of the vehicle roof at 
the centerline.
    S5.4 Apply an evenly-distributed vertical force in the downward 
direction to the force application plate at any rate not more than 13 mm 
per second, until a force of 2,224 N has been applied.
    S5.5 Apply additional vertical force in the downward direction to 
the force application plate at a rate of not more than 13 mm per second 
until the force specified in S4. has been applied, and maintain this 
application of force.
    S5.6 Measure the downward movement of any point on the force 
application plate which occurred during the application of force in 
accordance with S5.5.
    S5.7 To test the capability of the vehicle's emergency exits to open 
in accordance with S4.(b)--
    (a) In the case of testing under the full application of force, open 
the emergency exits as specified in S4.(b) while maintaining the force 
applied in accordance with S5.4 and S5.5; and
    (b) In the case of testing after the release of all force, release 
all downward force applied to the force application plate and open the 
emergency exits as specified in S4.(b).
    S6. Test conditions. The following conditions apply to the 
requirements specified in S4.
    S6.1 Temperature. The ambient temperature is any level between 0 
[deg]C and 32 [deg]C.
    S6.2 Windows and doors. Vehicle windows, doors, and emergency exits 
are in the fully-closed position, and latched but not locked.

[41 FR 3875, Jan. 27, 1976, as amended at 41 FR 36026, 36027, Aug. 26, 
1976; 63 FR 28948, May 27, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 571.221  Standard No. 221; School bus body joint strength.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes requirements for the strength 
of the body panel joints in school bus bodies.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries resulting from the structural collapse of school bus bodies 
during crashes.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to school buses.

[[Page 1036]]

    S4. Definitions. Body component means a part of a bus body made from 
a single piece of homogeneous material or from a single piece of 
composite material such as plywood.
    Body panel means a body component used on the exterior or interior 
surface to enclose the bus' occupant space.
    Body panel joint means the area of contact or close proximity 
between the edges of a body panel and another body component, including 
but not limited to floor panels, and body panels made of composite 
materials such as plastic or plywood, excluding trim and decorative 
parts which do not contribute to the strength of the bus body, members 
such as rub rails which are entirely outside of body panels, ventilation 
panels, components provided for functional purposes, and engine access 
covers.
    Bus body means that portion of a bus that encloses the bus occupant 
space, including the floor, but excluding the bumpers and chassis frame 
and any structure forward of the passenger compartment.
    Maintenance access panel means a body panel which must be moved or 
removed to provide access to one or more serviceable component(s).
    Passenger compartment means space within the school bus interior 
that is between a vertical transverse plane located 762 mm in front of 
the forwardmost passenger seating reference point and including a 
vertical transverse plane tangent to the rear interior wall of the bus 
at the vehicle centerline.
    Serviceable component means any part of the bus, of either a 
mechanical or electrical nature, which is explicitly identified by the 
bus chassis and/or body manufacturer in the owner's manual or factory 
service manual as requiring routine maintenance actions at intervals of 
one year or less. Tubing, wires and harnesses are considered to be 
serviceable components only at their attachments.
    S5 Requirements.
    S5.1 Except as provided in S5.2, each body panel joint, including 
small, curved, and complex joints, when tested in accordance with the 
procedure of S6, shall hold the body panel to the member to which it is 
joined when subjected to a force of 60 percent of the tensile strength 
of the weakest joined body panel determined pursuant to S6.2.
    S5.1.1 Body panels attached to each other shall have no unattached 
segment at the joint longer than 203 mm.
    S5.2 Exclusions
    S5.2.1 The requirements of S5.1 do not apply to--
    (a) Any interior maintenance access panel or joint which lies 
forward of the passenger compartment.
    (b) Any interior maintenance access panel within the passenger 
compartment that does not exceed 305 mm when measured across any two 
points diametrically on opposite sides of the opening.
    (c) Trim and decorative parts which do not contribute to the 
strength of the joint, support members such as rub rails which are 
entirely outside of body panels, doors and windows, ventilation panels, 
and engine access covers.
    S6 Procedure
    S6.1 Preparation of the test specimen.
    S6.1.1 If a body panel joint is 203 mm or longer, cut a test 
specimen that consists of any 203 mm segment of the joint, together with 
a portion of the bus body whose dimensions are those specified in Figure 
1, so that the specimen's centerline is perpendicular to the joint at 
the midpoint of the joint segment. Where the body panel joint is not 
fastened continuously, select the segment so that it does not bisect a 
spot weld or a discrete fastener. Support members which contribute to 
the strength of a body panel joint, such as rub rails on the outside of 
body panels or underlying structure attached to joint members, shall 
remain attached to the test specimen, except that material may be 
removed from the support members as necessary to clear the gripping 
areas of the joint members being tested.
    S6.1.2 If a joint is less than 203 mm long, cut a test specimen with 
enough of the adjacent material to permit it to be held in the tension 
testing machine specified in S6.3.
    S6.1.3 Prepare the test specimen in accordance with the preparation 
procedures specified in the 1989 edition of the Annual Book of American 
Society

[[Page 1037]]

for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Standards.
    S6.2 Determination of minimum allowable strength. For purposes of 
determining the minimum allowable joint strength, determine the tensile 
strengths of the joined body components as follows:
    (a) If the mechanical properties of a joint component material are 
specified by the ASTM in the 1989 Annual Book of ASTM Standards, the 
lowest value of that material's thickness and tensile strength per unit 
of area shown in that source shall be used.
    (b) If the mechanical properties of a material are not specified by 
the ASTM in the 1989 Annual Book of ASTM Standards, determine its 
tensile strength by cutting a sheet specimen from outside the joint 
region of the bus body in accordance with Figure 1 of E 8-89 Standard 
Test Methods of Tension Testing of Metallic Materials, in Volume 03.01 
of the 1989 Annual Book of ASTM Standards, and by testing it in 
accordance with S6.3.
    (c) The cross sectional area of material removed to facilitate the 
installation of fasteners shall be subtracted from the cross-sectional 
area of the panel in the determination of the tensile strength of the 
weakest joined body panel.
    S6.3 Strength Test.
    S6.3.1 The joint specimen is gripped on opposite sides of the joint 
in a tension testing machine in accordance with the 1989 Annual Book of 
ASTM Standards.
    S6.3.2 Adjust the testing machine grips so that the applied force on 
the joint is at 90 degrees plus or minus 3 degrees from the joint 
centerline, as shown in Figure 1.
    S6.3.3 A tensile force is applied to the specimen by separating the 
heads of the testing machine at any uniform rate not less than 3 mm and 
not more than 10 mm per minute until the specimen separates.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13DE01.236


[41 FR 3872, Jan. 27, 1976, as amended at 41 FR 36027, Aug. 26, 1976; 67 
FR 64366, 64367, Dec. 13, 2002; 68 FR 6360, Feb. 7, 2003]

    Editorial Note: At 65 FR 11754, Mar. 6, 2000, Sec. 571.221 was 
amended by revising S5.2.1(a), effective Apr. 5, 2000. However, 
paragraph S5.2.1(a) does not exist in the text in effect at that time. 
The revised text reads as follows:

[[Page 1038]]


<R05>
Sec. 571.221  Standard No. 221, School bus body joint strength.

                                * * * * *

    S5.2.1 The requirements of S5.1.1 and S5.1.2 do not apply to--
    (a) Any interior maintenance access panel which lies forward of the 
passenger compartment, or which is less than 305 mm when measured across 
any two points diametrically on opposite sides of the opening.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 571.222  Standard No. 222; School bus passenger seating and crash 

protection.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes occupant protection 
requirements for school bus passenger seating and restraining barriers.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce the number of 
deaths and the severity of injuries that result from the impact of 
school bus occupants against structures within the vehicle during 
crashes and sudden driving maneuvers.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to school buses.
    S4. Definitions. Contactable surface means any surface within the 
zone specified in S5.3.1.1 that is contactable from any direction by the 
test device described in S6.6, except any surface on the front of a seat 
back or restraining barrier 76 mm or more below the top of the seat back 
or restraining barrier.
    Fixed occupancy seat means a bench seat equipped with Type 2 seat 
belts that has a permanent configuration regarding the number of seating 
positions on the seat. The number of seating positions on the bench seat 
cannot be increased or decreased.
    Flexible occupancy seat means a bench seat equipped with Type 2 seat 
belts that can be reconfigured so that the number of seating positions 
on the seat can change. The seat has a minimum occupancy configuration 
and maximum occupancy configuration, and the number of passengers 
capable of being carried in the minimum occupancy configuration must 
differ from the number of passengers capable of being carried in the 
maximum occupancy configuration.
    Maximum occupancy configuration means, on a bench seat equipped with 
Type 2 seat belts, an arrangement whereby the lap belt portion of the 
Type 2 seat belts is such that the maximum number of occupants can be 
belted.
    Minimum occupancy configuration means, on a bench seat equipped with 
Type 2 seat belts, an arrangement whereby the lap belt portion of the 
Type 2 seat belts is such that the minimum number of occupants can be 
belted.
    School bus passenger seat means a seat in a school bus, other than 
the driver's seat.
    Seat bench width means the maximum transverse width of the bench 
seat cushion.
    Small occupant seating position means the center seating position on 
a flexible occupancy seat in a maximum occupancy configuration, if the 
torso belt portion of the Type 2 seat belt is intended to restrain 
occupants whose dimensions range from those of a 50th percentile 6 year-
old child only to those of a 50th percentile 10 year-old child and the 
torso belt anchor point cannot achieve a minimum height of 520 mm above 
the seating reference point, as specified by S4.1.3.2(a) of 49 CFR 
571.210.
    Wheelchair means a wheeled seat frame for the support and conveyance 
of a physically disabled person, comprised of at least a frame, seat, 
and wheels.
    Wheelchair occupant restraint anchorage means the provision for 
transferring wheelchair occupant restraint system loads to the vehicle 
structure.
    Wheelchair securement anchorage means the provision for transferring 
wheelchair securement device loads to the vehicle structure.
    Wheelchair securement device means a strap, webbing or other device 
used for securing a wheelchair to the school bus, including all 
necessary buckles and other fasteners.
    S4.1 Determination of the number of seating positions and seat belt 
positions
    (a) The number of seating positions considered to be in a bench seat 
for vehicles manufactured before October 21, 2011 is expressed by the 
symbol W, and calculated as the seat bench width in millimeters divided 
by 381 and rounded to the nearest whole number.

[[Page 1039]]

    (b) The number of seating positions and the number of Type 1 seat 
belt positions considered to be in a bench seat for vehicles 
manufactured on or after October 21, 2011 is expressed by the symbol W, 
and calculated as the seat bench width in millimeters divided by 380 and 
rounded to the nearest whole number.
    (c) Except as provided in S4.1(d), the number of Type 2 seat belt 
positions on a flexible occupancy seat in a minimum occupancy 
configuration or a fixed occupancy seat for vehicles manufactured on or 
after October 21, 2011 is expressed by the symbol Y, and calculated as 
the seat bench width in millimeters divided by 380 and rounded to the 
next lowest whole number. The minimum seat bench width for a seat 
equipped with a Type 2 seat belt is 380 mm. See Table 1 for an 
illustration.
    (d) A flexible occupancy seat meeting the requirements of S4.1(c) 
may also have a maximum occupancy configuration with Y +1 Type 2 seat 
belt positions, if the minimum seat bench width for this configuration 
is Y +1 times 330 mm. See Table 1 for an illustration.
    (e) A flexible occupancy seat equipped with Type 2 seat belts in a 
maximum occupancy configuration may have up to one single small occupant 
seating position.

                     Table 1--Number of Seating Positions as a Function of Seat Bench Width
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Seat bench width (mm)
           Seating configuration           ---------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               380-659       660-759       760-989      990-1139      1140-1319
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Minimum or Fixed Occupancy................            1             1             2             2             3
Maximum Occupancy.........................            1             2             2             3             3
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S5. Requirements.
    (a) Large school buses.
    (1) Each school bus manufactured before October 21, 2011 with a 
gross vehicle weight rating of more than 4,536 kg (10,000 pounds) shall 
be capable of meeting any of the requirements set forth under this 
heading when tested under the conditions of S6. However, a particular 
school bus passenger seat (i.e., a test specimen) in that weight class 
need not meet further requirements after having met S5.1.2 and S5.1.5, 
or having been subjected to either S5.1.3, S5.1.4, or S5.3.
    (2) Each school bus manufactured on or after October 21, 2011 with a 
gross vehicle weight rating of more than 4,536 kg (10,000 pounds) shall 
be capable of meeting any of the requirements set forth under this 
heading when tested under the conditions of S6 of this standard or Sec. 
571.210. However, a particular school bus passenger seat (i.e., a test 
specimen) in that weight class need not meet further requirements after 
having met S5.1.2 and S5.1.5, or having been subjected to either S5.1.3, 
S5.1.4, S5.1.6 (if applicable), or S5.3. If S5.1.6.5.5(b) is applicable, 
a particular test specimen need only meet S5.1.6.5.5(b)(1) or (2) as 
part of meeting S5.1.6 in its entirety. Each vehicle with voluntarily 
installed Type 1 seat belts and seat belt anchorages at W seating 
positions in a bench seat, voluntarily installed Type 2 seat belts and 
seat belt anchorages at Y seat belt positions in a fixed occupancy seat, 
or voluntarily installed Type 2 seat belts and seat belt anchorages at Y 
and Y + 1 seat belt positions in a flexible occupancy seat, shall also 
meet the requirements of:
    (i) S4.4.3.3 of Standard No. 208 (49 CFR 571.208);
    (ii) Standard No. 209 (49 CFR 571.209), as they apply to school 
buses; and,
    (iii) Standard No. 210 (49 CFR 571.210) as it applies to school 
buses with a gross vehicle weight rating greater than 10,000 pounds.
    (b) Small school buses. Each vehicle with a gross vehicle weight 
rating of 4,536 kg (10,000 pounds) or less shall be capable of meeting 
the following requirements at all seating positions:
    (1)(i) In the case of vehicles manufactured before September 1, 
1991, the requirements of Sec. Sec. 571.208, 571.209, and 571.210 as 
they apply to multipurpose passenger vehicles;
    (ii) In the case of vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 
1991, the requirements of S4.4.3.3 of Sec. 571.208 and the requirements 
of Sec. Sec. 571.209 and 571.210 as they apply to school buses

[[Page 1040]]

with a gross vehicle weight rating of 4,536 kg or less;
    (iii) In the case of vehicles manufactured on or after October 21, 
2011 the requirements of S4.4.3.3(b) of Sec. 571.208 and the 
requirements of Sec. Sec. 571.207, 571.209 and 571.210 as they apply to 
school buses with a gross vehicle weight rating of 4,536 kg or less; 
and,
    (2) The requirements of S5.1.2, S5.1.3, S5.1.4, S5.1.5, S5.1.6, 
S5.1.7, S5.3, S5.4 and S5.5 of this standard. However, the requirements 
of Sec. Sec. 571.208 and 571.210 shall be met at Y seat belt positions 
in a fixed occupancy seat, and at Y and Y + 1 seat belt positions for a 
flexible occupancy seat. A particular school bus passenger seat (i.e. a 
test specimen) in that weight class need not meet further requirements 
after having met S5.1.2 and S5.1.5, or after having been subjected to 
either S5.1.3, S5.1.4, S5.1.6, or S5.3 of this standard or Sec. 
571.207, Sec. 571.210 or Sec. 571.225.
    S5.1 Seating requirements. School bus passenger seats shall be 
forward facing.
    S5.1.1 [Reserved]
    S5.1.2 Seat back height, position, and surface area.
    (a) For school buses manufactured before October 21, 2009, each 
school bus passenger seat must be equipped with a seat back that has a 
vertical height of at least 508 mm (20 inches) above the seating 
reference point. Each school bus passenger seat must be equipped with a 
seat back that, in the front projected view, has front surface area 
above the horizontal plane that passes through the seating reference 
point, and below the horizontal plane 508 mm (20 inches) above the 
seating reference point, of not less than 90 percent of the seat bench 
width in millimeters multiplied by 508.
    (b) For school buses manufactured on or after October 21, 2009, each 
school bus passenger seat must be equipped with a seat back that has a 
vertical height of at least 610 mm (24 inches) above the seating 
reference point. The minimum total width of the seat back at 610 mm (24 
inches) above the seating reference point shall be 75 percent of the 
maximum width of the seat bench. Each school bus passenger seat must be 
equipped with a seat back that, in the front projected view, has front 
surface area above the horizontal plane that passes through the seating 
reference point, and below the horizontal plane 610 mm (24 inches) above 
the seating reference point, of not less than 90 percent of the seat 
bench width in millimeters multiplied by 610.
    S5.1.3 Seat performance forward. When a school bus passenger seat 
that has another seat behind it is subjected to the application of force 
as specified in S5.1.3.1 and S5.1.3.2, and subsequently, the application 
of additional force to the seat back as specified in S5.1.3.3 and 
S5.1.3.4:
    (a) The seat back force/deflection curve shall fall within the zone 
specified in Figure 1;
    (b) Seat back deflection shall not exceed 356 mm; (for determination 
of (a) and (b) the force/deflection curve describes only the force 
applied through the upper loading bar, and only the forward travel of 
the pivot attachment point of the upper loading bar, measured from the 
point at which the initial application of 44 N of force is attained.)
    (c) The seat shall not deflect by an amount such that any part of 
the seat moves to within 102 mm of any part of another school bus 
passenger seat or restraining barrier in its originally installed 
position;
    (d) The seat shall not separate from the vehicle at any attachment 
point; and
    (e) Seat components shall not separate at any attachment point.
    S5.1.3.1 Position the loading bar specified in S6.5 so that it is 
laterally centered behind the seat back with the bar's longitudinal axis 
in a transverse plane of the vehicle and in any horizontal plane between 
102 mm above and 102 mm below the seating reference point of the school 
bus passenger seat behind the test specimen.
    S5.1.3.2 Apply a force of 3,114W newtons horizontally in the forward 
direction through the loading bar at the pivot attachment point. Reach 
the specified load in not less than 5 nor more than 30 seconds.
    S5.1.3.3 No sooner than 1.0 second after attaining the required 
force, reduce that force to 1,557W newtons and,

[[Page 1041]]

while maintaining the pivot point position of the first loading bar at 
the position where the 1,557W newtons is attained, position a second 
loading bar described in S6.5 so that it is laterally centered behind 
the seat back with the bar's longitudinal axis in a transverse plane of 
the vehicle and in the horizontal plane 406 mm above the seating 
reference point of the school bus passenger seat behind the test 
specimen, and move the bar forward against the seat back until a force 
of 44 N has been applied.
    S5.1.3.4 Apply additional force horizontally in the forward 
direction through the upper bar until 452W joules of energy have been 
absorbed in deflecting the seat back (or restraining barrier). Apply the 
additional load in not less than 5 seconds nor more than 30 seconds. 
Maintain the pivot attachment point in the maximum forward travel 
position for not less than 5 seconds nor more than 10 seconds and 
release the load in not less than 5 nor more than 30 seconds. (For the 
determination of S5.1.3.4 the force/deflection curve describes only the 
force applied through the upper loading bar, and the forward and 
rearward travel distance of the upper loading bar pivot attachment point 
measured from the position at which the initial application of 44 N of 
force is attained.)
    S5.1.4 Seat performance rearward. When a school bus passenger seat 
that has another seat behind it is subjected to the application of force 
as specified in S5.1.4.1 and S5.1.4.2:
    (a) Seat back force shall not exceed 9,786 N;
    (b) Seat back deflection shall not exceed 254 mm; (for determination 
of (a) and (b) the force/deflection curve describes only the force 
applied through the loading bar, and only the rearward travel of the 
pivot attachment point of the loading bar, measured from the point at 
which the initial application of 222 N is attained.
    (c) The seat shall not deflect by an amount such that any part of 
the seat moves to within 102 mm of any part of another passenger seat in 
its originally installed position;
    (d) The seat shall not separate from the vehicle at any attachment 
point; and
    (e) Seat components shall not separate at any attachment point.
    S5.1.4.1 Position the loading bar described in S6.5 so that it is 
laterally centered forward of the seat back with the bar's longitudinal 
axis in a transverse plane of the vehicle and in the horizontal plane 
343 mm above the seating reference point of the test specimen, and move 
the loading bar rearward against the seat back until a force of 222 N 
has been applied.
    S5.1.4.2 Apply additional force horizontally rearward through the 
loading bar until 316W joules (J) of energy has been absorbed in 
deflecting the seat back. Apply the additional load in not less than 5 
seconds nor more than 30 seconds. Maintain the pivot attachment point in 
the maximum rearward travel position for not less than 5 seconds nor 
more than 10 seconds and release the load in not less than 5 seconds nor 
more than 30 seconds. (For determination of S5.1.4.2 the force 
deflection curve describes the force applied through the loading bar and 
the rearward and forward travel distance of the loading bar pivot 
attachment point measured from the position at which the initial 
application of 222 N of force is attained.)
    S5.1.5 Seat cushion latching and retention.
    (a) School bus passenger seat cushions equipped with attachment 
devices that allow for the seat cushion to be removable without tools or 
to flip up must have a self-latching mechanism that latches when 
subjected to the conditions specified in S5.1.5.1. The seat cushion 
shall not separate from the seat at any attachment point when subjected 
to the conditions specified in S5.1.5.2 after being subjected to the 
conditions of S5.1.5.1.
    (b) School bus passenger seat cushions that are removable only with 
the use of tools shall not separate from the seat at any attachment 
point when subjected to the conditions of S5.1.5.2.
    S5.1.5.1 Release the seat cushion self-latching mechanism. Lift the 
seat cushion then place the seat cushion back in the down position 
without activating the self-latching mechanism, if possible. Apply a 
downward force of 216 N (48.4 pounds) to the center of the seat cushion. 
The downward force shall be

[[Page 1042]]

applied in any period of not less than 1 and not more than 5 seconds, 
and maintained for 5 seconds.
    S5.1.5.2 Apply an upward force of 5 times the weight of the seat 
cushion to the center of the bottom of the seat cushion. The upward 
force shall be applied in any period of not less than 1 and not more 
than 5 seconds, and maintained for 5 seconds.
    S5.1.6 Quasi-static test of compartmentalization and Type 2 seat 
belt performance. This section applies to school buses manufactured on 
or after October 21, 2011 with a gross vehicle weight rating expressed 
in the first column of Tables 2 through 4, and that are equipped with 
Type 2 seat belt assemblies.
    (a) Except as provided in S5.1.6(b), when tested under the 
conditions of S5.1.6.5.1 through S5.1.6.5.6, the criteria specified in 
S5.1.6.1 and S5.1.6.2 must be met.
    (b) A school bus passenger seat that does not have another seat 
behind it is not loaded with the upper and lower loading bars as 
specified in S5.1.6.5.2, S5.1.6.5.3, and S5.1.6.5.7 and is excluded from 
the requirements of S5.1.6.1(b).
    S5.1.6.1 Displacement limits. In Tables 2 and 3, AH is the height in 
millimeters of the school bus torso belt anchor point specified by 
S4.1.3.2(a) of Standard No. 210 (49 CFR 571.210) and [Phi] is the angle 
of the posterior surface of the seat back defined in S5.1.6.3 of this 
standard.
    (a) Any school bus torso belt anchor point, as defined in S3 of 
Standard No. 210, must not displace horizontally forward from its 
initial position (when [Phi] was determined) more than the value in 
millimeters calculated from the following expression in the second 
column of Table 2:

           Table 2--Torso Belt Anchor Point Displacement Limit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                Displacement limit in
        Gross vehicle weight rating                  millimeters
------------------------------------------------------------------------
More than 4,536 kg (10,000 pounds)........  (AH + 100) (tan[Phi] + 0.242/
                                             cos[Phi])
Less than or equal to 4,536 kg (10,000      (AH + 100) (tan[Phi] + 0.356/
 pounds).                                    cos[Phi])
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) A point directly rearward of any school bus torso belt anchor 
point, as defined in S3 of Standard No. 210 (49 CFR 571.210) on the rear 
facing surface of the seat back, must not displace horizontally forward 
from its initial position (when [Phi] was determined) more than the 
value in millimeters calculated from the following expression in the 
second column of Table 3:

               Table 3--Seat Back Point Displacement Limit
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                Displacement limit in
        Gross vehicle weight rating                  millimeters
------------------------------------------------------------------------
More than 4,536 kg (10,000 pounds)........  (AH + 100) (tan[Phi] + 0.174/
                                             cos[Phi])
Less than or equal to 4,536 kg (10,000      (AH + 100) (tan[Phi] + 0.259/
 pounds).                                    cos[Phi])
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S5.1.6.2 Slippage of device used to achieve torso belt adjusted 
height. If the torso belt adjusted height, as defined in S3 of Standard 
No. 210 (49 CFR 571.210), is achieved without the use of an adjustable 
torso belt anchorage, the adjustment device must not slip more than 25 
mm (1.0 inches) along the webbing or guide material upon which it moves 
for the purpose of adjusting the torso belt height.
    S5.1.6.3 Angle of the posterior surface of a seat back. If the seat 
back inclination is adjustable, the seat back is placed in the 
manufacturer's normal design riding position. If such a position is not 
specified, the seat back is positioned so it is in the most upright 
position. Position the loading bar specified in S6.5 of this standard so 
that it is laterally centered behind the seat back with the bar's 
longitudinal axis in a transverse plane of the vehicle in a horizontal 
plane within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 6 mm (0.25 inches) of the horizontal 
plane passing through the seating reference point and move the bar 
forward against the seat back until a force of 44 N (10 pounds) has been 
applied. Position a second loading bar as described in S6.5 of this 
standard so that it is laterally centered behind the seat back with the 
bar's longitudinal axis in a transverse plane of the vehicle and in the 
horizontal plane 406 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 6 mm (16 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.25 inches) above the seating reference point, and 
move the bar forward against the seat back until a force of 44 N (10 
pounds) has been applied. Determine the angle from vertical of a line in 
the longitudinal vehicle plane that passes through the geometric center 
of

[[Page 1043]]

the cross-section of each cylinder, as shown in Figure 8. That angle is 
the angle of the posterior surface of the seat back.
    S5.1.6.4 The seat back must absorb 452W joules of energy when 
subjected to the force specified in S5.1.6.5.7.
    S5.1.6.5 Quasi-static test procedure.
    S5.1.6.5.1 Adjust the seat back as specified in S5.1.6.3. Place all 
torso anchor points in their highest position of adjustment. If the 
torso belt adjusted height, as defined in S3 of FMVSS No. 210, is 
achieved by a method other than an adjustable anchor point, initially 
place the torso belt adjusted height at its highest position. Then move 
the adjustment device 38 mm (1.5 inches) downward with respect to its 
webbing or guide material.
    S5.1.6.5.2 Position the lower loading bar specified in S6.5 of this 
standard so that it is laterally centered behind the seat back with the 
bar's longitudinal axis in a transverse plane of the vehicle and in any 
horizontal plane between 102 mm (4 inches) above and 102 mm (4 inches) 
below the seating reference point of the school bus passenger seat 
behind the test specimen. Position the upper loading bar described in 
S6.5 so that it is laterally centered behind the seat back with the 
bar's longitudinal axis in a transverse plane of the vehicle and in the 
horizontal plane 406 mm (16 inches) above the seating reference point of 
the school bus passenger seat behind the test specimen.
    S5.1.6.5.3 Apply a force of 3,114W N (700W pounds) horizontally in 
the forward direction through the lower loading bar specified at S6.5 at 
the pivot attachment point. Reach the specified load in not less than 5 
and not more than 30 seconds. No sooner than 1.0 second after attaining 
the required force, reduce that force to 1,557W N (350W pounds) and 
maintain the pivot point position of the loading bar at the position 
where the 1,557W N (350W pounds) is attained until the completion of 
S5.1.6.5.7 of this standard.
    S5.1.6.5.4 Position the body block specified in Figure 3 of FMVSS 
No. 210 (49 CFR 571.210) under each torso belt (between the torso belt 
and the seat back) in the passenger seat and apply a preload force of 
600 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 50 N (135 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 11 pounds) 
on each body block in a forward direction parallel to the longitudinal 
centerline of the vehicle pursuant to the specifications of Standard No. 
210 (49 CFR 571.210). After preload application is complete, the origin 
of the 203 mm body block radius at any point across the 102 mm body 
block thickness shall lie within the zone defined by S5.1.6.5.4(a) and 
S5.1.6.5.4(b) as shown in Figure 9:
    (a) At or rearward of a transverse vertical plane of the vehicle 
located 100 mm longitudinally forward of the seating reference point.
    (b) Within 75 mm of the horizontal plane located midway between the 
horizontal plane passing through the school bus torso belt adjusted 
height, specified in S3 of Standard No. 210 (49 CFR 571.210), and the 
horizontal plane 100 mm below the seating reference point.
    S5.1.6.5.5 Load application.
    (a) Fixed Occupancy Seat. For school buses with the gross vehicle 
weight rating listed in the first column of Table 4, if the expression 
in the second column is true, simultaneously apply the force listed in 
the third column to each body block.

       Table 4--Torso Body Block Forces for Fixed Occupancy Seats
------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Gross vehicle weight rating      True expression      Applied force
------------------------------------------------------------------------
More than 4,536 kg (10,000        ((seat bench width  3,300 N (742
 pounds).                          in mm)--(380Y))     pounds).
                                   <= 25 mm (1 inch).
More than 4,536 kg (10,000        ((seat bench width  5,000 N (1,124
 pounds).                          in mm)--(380Y))     pounds).
                                   <ls-thn-eq> 25 mm
                                   (1 inch).
Less than or equal to 4,536 kg    ((seat bench width  5,000 N (1,124
 (10,000 pounds).                  in mm)--(380Y))     pounds).
                                   <= 25 mm (1 inch).
Less than or equal to 4,536 kg    ((seat bench width  7,500 N (1,686
 (10,000 pounds).                  in mm)--(380Y))     pounds).
                                   <ls-thn-eq> 25 mm
                                   (1 inch).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Flexible Occupancy Seat.
    (1) For school buses with the gross vehicle weight rating listed in 
the first

[[Page 1044]]

column of Table 5 and a bench seat in the maximum occupancy 
configuration for a flexible occupancy seat of Y+1 seat belt positions 
as specified in S4.1(d), simultaneously apply the force listed in the 
second column of Table 5 to each body block.

   Table 5--Torso Body Block Forces in Maximum Occupancy Configuration
------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Gross vehicle weight rating                 Applied force
------------------------------------------------------------------------
More than 4,536 kg (10,000 pounds)........  3,300 N (742 pounds).
Less than or equal to 4,536 kg (10,000      5,000 N (1,124 pounds).
 pounds).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (2) For a flexible occupancy seat in the minimum occupant 
configuration, apply the forces to each body block as specified in 
S5.1.6.5.5(a).
    S5.1.6.5.6 Reach the specified load in not less than 5 and not more 
than 30 seconds. While maintaining the load, measure the school bus 
torso belt anchor point and seat back point horizontal displacement and 
then remove the body block.
    S5.1.6.5.7 Move the upper bar forward against the seat back until a 
force of 44 N has been applied. Apply an additional force horizontally 
in the forward direction through the upper bar until 452W joules of 
energy have been absorbed in deflecting the seat back. The maximum 
travel of the pivot attachment point for the upper loading bar shall not 
exceed 356 mm as measured from the position at which the initial 
application of 44 N of force is attained and the maximum load must stay 
below the upper boundary of the force/deflection zone in Figure 1. Apply 
the additional load in not less than 5 seconds and not more than 30 
seconds. Maintain the pivot attachment point at the maximum forward 
travel position for not less than 5 seconds, and not more than 10 
seconds and release the load in not less than 5 seconds and not more 
than 30 seconds. (For the determination of S5.1.6.5.7, the energy 
calculation describes only the force applied through the upper loading 
bar, and the forward and rearward travel distance of the upper loading 
bar pivot attachment point measured from the position at which the 
application in this section of 44 N of force is attained.)
    S5.1.7 Buckle side length limit. This section applies to rear 
passenger seats on school buses manufactured on or after October 21, 
2011 that are equipped with Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assemblies. All 
portions of the buckle/latchplate assembly must remain rearward of the 
limit plane defined in S5.1.7.1 when tested under the conditions of 
S5.1.7.2.
    S5.1.7.1 Buckle/latchplate limit plane. Establish a transverse limit 
plane 65 mm from the SgRP that is perpendicular to a transverse plane 
that passes through the SgRP at an angle of 50 degrees to the 
horizontal.
    S5.1.7.2 Load application. Insert the seat belt latchplate into the 
seat belt buckle. Apply a 20 N load to the buckle/latchplate assembly 
whose vector is in a vertical longitudinal plane. Apply the load along 
the centerline of the webbing attached to the latchplate at least 100mm 
from the nearest point on the latchplate. The load may be applied at any 
angle in the range of 30 to 75 degrees from horizontal.
    S5.2 Restraining barrier requirements. Each vehicle shall be 
equipped with a restraining barrier forward of any designated seating 
position that does not have the rear surface of another school bus 
passenger seat within 610 mm of its seating reference point, measured 
along a horizontal longitudinal line through the seating reference point 
in the forward direction.
    S5.2.1 Barrier-seat separation. The horizontal distance between the 
restraining barrier's rear surface and the seating reference point of 
the seat in front of which the barrier is required shall not be more 
than 610 mm measured along a horizontal longitudinal line through the 
seating reference point in the forward direction.
    S5.2.2 Barrier height, position, and rear surface area. The position 
and rear surface area of the restraining barrier shall be such that, in 
a front projected view of the bus, each point of the barrier's perimeter 
coincides with or lies outside of the perimeter of the minimum seat back 
area required by S5.1.2 for the seat immediately rearward of the 
restraining barrier.
    S5.2.3 Barrier performance forward. When force is applied to the 
restraining barrier in the same manner as specified

[[Page 1045]]

in S5.1.3.1 through S5.1.3.4 for seating performance tests:
    (a) The restraining barrier force/deflection curve shall fall within 
the zone specified in Figure 1;
    (b) Restraining barrier deflection shall not exceed 356 mm; (for 
computation of (a) and (b) the force/deflection curve describes only the 
force applied through the upper loading bar, and only the forward travel 
of the pivot attachment point of the loading bar, measured from the 
point at which the initial application of 44 N of force is attained.)
    (c) Restraining barrier deflection shall not interfere with normal 
door operation;
    (d) The restraining barrier shall not separate from the vehicle at 
any attachment point; and
    (e) Restraining barrier components shall not separate at any 
attachment point.
    S5.3 Impact zone requirements.
    S5.3.1 Head protection zone. Any contactable surface of the vehicle 
within any zone specified in S5.3.1.1 shall meet the requirements of 
S5.3.1.2 and S5.3.1.3. However, a surface area that has been contacted 
pursuant to an impact test need not meet further requirements contained 
in S5.3.
    S5.3.1.1 The head protection zones in each vehicle are the spaces in 
front of each school bus passenger seat which are not occupied by bus 
sidewall, window, or door structure and which, in relation to that seat 
and its seating reference point, are enclosed by the following planes;
    (a) Horizontal planes 305 mm and 1016 mm above the seating reference 
point;
    (b) A vertical longitudinal plane tangent to the inboard (aisle 
side) edge of the seat; and
    (c) A vertical longitudinal plane 83 mm inboard of the outboard edge 
of the seat;
    (d) Vertical transverse planes through and 762 mm forward of the 
reference point.
    S5.3.1.2 Head form impact requirement. When any contactable surface 
of the vehicle within the zones specified in S5.3.1.1 is impacted from 
any direction at 6.7 m/s by the head form described in S6.6, the axial 
acceleration at the center of gravity of the head form shall be such 
that the expression
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.016


shall not exceed 1,000 where ``a'' is the axial acceleration expressed 
as a multiple of ``g'' (the acceleration due to gravity), and 
``t<INF>1</INF>'' and ``t<INF>2</INF>'' are any two points in time 
during the impact.
    S5.3.1.3 Head form force distribution. When any contactable surface 
of the vehicle within the zones specified in S5.3.1.1 is impacted from 
any direction at 6.7 m/s by the head form described in S6.6, the energy 
necessary to deflect the impacted material shall be not less than 4.5 
joules before the force level on the head form exceeds 667 N. When any 
contactable surface within such zones is impacted by the head form from 
any direction at 1.5 m/s the contact area on the head form surface shall 
be not less than 1,935 mm\2\.
    S5.3.2 Leg protection zone. Any part of the seat backs or 
restraining barriers in the vehicle within any zone specified in 
S5.3.2.1 shall meet the requirements of S5.3.2.2.
    S5.3.2.1 The leg protection zones of each vehicle are those parts of 
the school bus passenger seat backs and restraining barriers bounded by 
horizontal planes 305 mm above and 102 mm below the seating reference 
point of the school bus passenger seat immediately behind the seat back 
or restraining barrier.
    S5.3.2.2 When any point on the rear surface of that part of a seat 
back or restraining barrier within any zone specified in S5.3.2.1 is 
impacted from any direction at 4.9 m/s by the knee form specified in 
S6.7, the resisting force of the impacted material shall not exceed 
2,669 N and the contact area on the knee form surface shall not be less 
than 1,935 mm\2\.
    S5.4 Each school bus having one or more locations designed for 
carrying a person seated in a wheelchair shall comply with S5.4.1 
through S5.4.4 at each such wheelchair location.
    S5.4.1 Wheelchair securement anchorages. Each wheelchair location 
shall

[[Page 1046]]

have not less than four wheelchair securement anchorages complying with 
S5.4.1.1 through S5.4.1.3.
    S5.4.1.1 Each wheelchair securement anchorage shall have a 
wheelchair securement device complying with S5.4.2 attached to it.
    S5.4.1.2 The wheelchair securement anchorages at each wheelchair 
location shall be situated so that--
    (a) A wheelchair can be secured in a forward-facing position.
    (b) The wheelchair can be secured by wheelchair securement devices 
at two locations in the front and two locations in the rear.
    (c) The front wheel of a three-wheeled wheelchair can be secured.
    S5.4.1.3 Each wheelchair securement anchorage shall be capable of 
withstanding a force of 13,344 Newtons applied as specified in 
paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section. When more than one 
securement device share a common anchorage, the anchorage shall be 
capable of withstanding a force of 13,344 Newtons multiplied by the 
number of securement devices sharing that anchorage.
    (a) The initial application force shall be applied at an angle of 
not less than 30 degrees, but not more than 60 degrees, measured from 
the horizontal. (See Figure 4.)
    (b) The horizontal projection of the force direction shall be within 
a horizontal arc of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>45 degrees relative to a 
longitudinal line which has its origin at the anchorage location and 
projects rearward for an anchorage whose wheelchair securement device is 
intended to secure the front of the wheelchair and forward for an 
anchorage whose wheelchair securement device is intended to secure the 
rear of the wheelchair. (See Figure 4.)
    (c) The force shall be applied at the onset rate of not more than 
133,440 Newtons per second.
    (d) The 13,344 Newton force shall be attained in not more than 30 
seconds, and shall be maintained for 10 seconds.
    S5.4.2 Wheelchair securement devices. Each wheelchair securement 
device shall--
    (a) If incorporating webbing or a strap--
    (1) Comply with the requirements for Type 1 safety belt systems in 
S4.2, S4.3, and S4.4(a) of FMVSS No. 209, Seat Belt Assemblies; and
    (2) Provide a means of adjustment to remove slack from the device.
    (b) If not incorporating webbing or a strap, limit movement of the 
wheelchair through either the equipment design or a means of adjustment.
    S5.4.3 Wheelchair occupant restraint anchorages.
    S5.4.3.1 Each wheelchair location shall have:
    (a) Not less than one anchorage for the upper end of the upper torso 
restraint; and
    (b) Not less than two floor anchorages for wheelchair occupant 
pelvic and upper torso restraint.
    S5.4.3.2 Each wheelchair occupant restraint floor anchorage shall be 
capable of withstanding a force of 13,344 Newtons applied as specified 
in paragraphs (a) through (d). When more than one wheelchair occupant 
restraint share a common anchorage, the anchorage shall be capable of 
withstanding a force of 13,344 Newtons multiplied by the number of 
occupant restraints sharing that anchorage.
    (a) The initial application force shall be applied at an angle of 
not less than 45 degrees, but not more than 80 degrees, measured from 
the horizontal. (See Figure 5.)
    (b) The horizontal projection of the force direction shall be within 
a horizontal arc of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>45 degrees relative to a 
longitudinal line which has its origin at the anchorage and projects 
forward. (See Figure 5.)
    (c) The force shall be applied at an onset rate of not more than 
133,440 Newtons per second.
    (d) The 13,344 Newton force shall be attained in not more than 30 
seconds, and shall be maintained for 10 seconds.
    (e) When a wheelchair securement device and an occupant restraint 
share a common anchorage, including occupant restraint designs that 
attach the occupant restraint to the securement device or the 
wheelchair, the loads specified by S5.4.1.3 and S5.4.3.2 shall be 
applied simultaneously, under the conditions specified in S5.4.3.2 (a) 
and (b). (See Figure 6.)
    S5.4.3.3 Each anchorage for a wheelchair occupant upper torso 
restraint shall be capable of withstanding a force

[[Page 1047]]

of 6,672 Newtons applied as specified in paragraphs (a) through (d).
    (a) The initial application force shall be applied at a vertical 
angle of not less than zero degrees, but not more than 40 degrees, below 
a horizontal plane which passes through the anchorage. (See Figure 7.)
    (b) The projection of the force direction onto the horizontal plane 
shall be within zero degrees and 45 degrees as measured from a 
longitudinal line with its origin at the anchorage and projecting 
forward. (See Figure 7.)
    (c) The force shall be applied at the onset rate of not more than 
66,720 Newtons per second.
    (d) The 6,672 Newton force shall be attained in not more than 30 
seconds, and shall be maintained for 10 seconds.
    S5.4.4 Wheelchair occupant restraints.
    (a) Each wheelchair location shall have wheelchair occupant pelvic 
and upper torso restraints attached to the anchorages required by 
S5.4.3.
    (b) Each wheelchair occupant restraint shall comply with the 
requirements for Type 2 safety belt systems in S4.2, S4.3, and S4.4(b) 
of FMVSS No. 209, Seat Belt Assemblies.
    S5.5 Labeling. (a) A small occupant seating position must be 
permanently and legibly marked or labeled with the phrase: ``Do Not Sit 
In Middle Seat If Over Age 10''. The phrase must be comprised of no more 
than two lines of text. The label must be placed on the torso belt 
portion of the Type 2 seat belt. It must be plainly visible and easily 
readable when the seat belt is in a stored position. The distance from 
the top edge of the top line of text to the bottom edge of the bottom 
line of text must be at least 35 mm. If the label is sewn on, it must be 
stitched around its entire perimeter.
    (b) [Reserved]
    S6. Test conditions. The following conditions apply to the 
requirements specified in S5.
    S6.1 Test surface. The bus is at rest on a level surface.
    S6.2 Tires. Tires are inflated to the pressure specified by the 
manufacturer for the gross vehicle weight rating.
    S6.3 Temperature. The ambient temperature is any level between 0 
degrees C and 32 degrees C.
    S6.4 Seat back position. If adjustable, a seat back is adjusted to 
its most upright position.
    S6.5 Loading bar. The loading bar is a rigid cylinder with an 
outside diameter of 152 mm that has hemispherical ends with radii of 76 
mm and with a surface roughness that does not exceed 1.6 [micro]m, root 
mean square. The length of the loading bar is 102 mm less than the width 
of the seat back in each test. The stroking mechanism applies force 
through a pivot attachment at the center point of the loading bar which 
allows the loading bar to rotate in a horizontal plane 30 degrees in 
either direction from the transverse position.
    S6.5.1 A vertical or lateral force of 17,792 N applied externally 
through the pivot attachment point of the loading bar at any position 
reached during a test specified in this standard shall not deflect that 
point more than 25 mm.
    S6.6 Head form. The head form for the measurement of acceleration is 
a rigid surface comprised of two hemispherical shapes, with total 
equivalent mass of 5.2 kg. The first of the two hemispherical shapes has 
a diameter of 166 mm. The second of the two hemispherical shapes has a 
50 mm diameter and is centered as shown in Figure 3 to protrude from the 
outer surface of the first hemispherical shape. The surface roughness of 
the hemispherical shapes does not exceed 1.6 [micro]m, root mean square.
    S6.6.1 The direction of travel of the head form is coincidental with 
the straight line connecting the centerpoints of the two spherical outer 
surfaces which constitute the head form shape.
    S6.6.2 The head form is instrumented with an acceleration sensing 
device whose output is recorded in a data channel that conforms to the 
requirements for a 1,000 Hz channel class as specified in SAE 
Recommended Practice J211a, December 1971. The head form exhibits no 
resonant frequency below three times the frequency of the channel class. 
The axis of the acceleration sensing device coincides with the straight 
line connecting the centerpoints of the two hemispherical outer surfaces 
which constitute the head form shape.

[[Page 1048]]

    S6.6.3 The head form is guided by a stroking device so that the 
direction of travel of the head form is not affected by impact with the 
surface being tested at the levels called for in the standard.
    S6.7 Knee form. The knee form for measurement of force is a rigid 76 
millimeter-diameter cylinder, with an equivalent weight of 44 N that has 
one hemispherical end with a 38 mm radius forming a contact surface of 
the knee form. The hemispherical surface roughness does not exceed 1.6 
[micro]m, root mean square.
    S6.7.1 The direction of travel of the knee form is coincidental with 
the centerline of the rigid cylinder.
    S6.7.2 The knee form is instrumented with an acceleration sensing 
device whose output is recorded in a data channel that conforms to the 
requirements of a 600 Hz channel class as specified in the SAE 
Recommended Practice J211a, December 1971. The knee form exhibits no 
resonant frequency below three times the frequency of the channel class. 
The axis of the acceleration sensing device is aligned to measure 
acceleration along the centerline of the cylindrical knee form.
    S6.7.3 The knee form is guided by a stroking device so that the 
direction of travel of the knee form is not affected by impact with the 
surface being tested at the levels called for in the standard.
    S6.8 The head form, knee form, and contactable surfaces are clean 
and dry during impact testing.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.008


[[Page 1049]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.009


[[Page 1050]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.010


[[Page 1051]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.141


[[Page 1052]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.142


[[Page 1053]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.143


[[Page 1054]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.144


[[Page 1055]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21OC08.059


[[Page 1056]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21OC08.060


[41 FR 4018, Jan. 28, 1976]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.222 see the List of CFR Sections Affected which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.


<R05>
Sec. 571.223  Standard No. 223; Rear impact guards.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for rear impact 
guards for trailers and semitrailers.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce the number of 
deaths and serious injuries that occur when light duty vehicles collide 
with the rear end of trailers and semitrailers.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to rear impact guards for 
trailers and semitrailers subject to Federal Motor Safety Standard No. 
224, Rear Impact Protection (Sec. 571.224).
    S4. Definitions.
    In this standard, directional terms such as bottom, center, height, 
horizontal, longitudinal, transverse, and rear refer to directions 
relative to the vehicle orientation when the guard is oriented as if it 
were installed on a vehicle according to the installation instructions 
in S5.5 of this section.

[[Page 1057]]

    Chassis means the load supporting frame structure of a motor 
vehicle.
    Guard width means the maximum horizontal guard dimension that is 
perpendicular to the longitudinal vertical plane passing through the 
longitudinal centerline of the vehicle when the guard is installed on 
the vehicle according to the installation instructions in S5.5 of this 
section.
    Horizontal member means the structural member of the guard that 
meets the configuration requirements of S5.1.1 through 5.1.3 of Sec. 
571.224, Rear Impact Protection, when the guard is installed on a 
vehicle according to the guard manufacturer's installation instructions.
    Hydraulic guard means a guard designed to use fluid properties to 
provide resistance force to deformation.
    Rear impact guard means a device installed on or near the rear of a 
vehicle so that when the vehicle is struck from the rear, the device 
limits the distance that the striking vehicle's front end slides under 
the rear end of the impacted vehicle.
    Rigid test fixture means a supporting structure on which a rear 
impact guard can be mounted in the same manner it is mounted to a 
vehicle. The rigid test fixture is designed to resist the forces applied 
to the rear impact guard without significant deformation, such that a 
performance requirement of this standard must be met no matter how small 
an amount of energy is absorbed by the rigid test fixture.
    S5. Requirements.
    S5.1 Projected Vertical Height. The horizontal member of each guard, 
when viewed from the rear as it would be installed on a trailer pursuant 
to the installation instructions or procedures required by S5.5 of this 
standard, shall have a vertical height of at least 100 mm at each point 
across the guard width, when projected horizontally on a transverse 
vertical plane. Those installation instructions or procedures shall 
specify that the guard is to be mounted so that all portions of the 
horizontal member necessary to achieve a 100 mm high projected vertical 
height are located not more than 305 mm forward of the vehicle's rear 
extremity, as defined in S4 of 49 CFR 571.224, Rear Impact Protection. 
See Figure 1 of this section.
    S5.2 Strength and Energy Absorption. When tested under the 
procedures of S6 of this section, each guard shall comply with the 
strength requirements of S5.2.1 of this section at each test location 
and the energy absorption requirements of S5.2.2 of this section at test 
location P3, as specified in S6.4 of this section. However, a particular 
guard (i.e., test specimen) need not be tested at more than one 
location.
    S5.2.1 Guard Strength. The guard must resist the force levels 
specified in S5.2.1 (a) through (c) of this section without deflecting 
by more than 125 mm.
    (a) A force of 50,000 N at test location P1 on either the left or 
the right side of the guard as defined in S6.4(a) of this section.
    (b) A force of 50,000 N at test location P2 as defined in S6.4(b) of 
this section.
    (c) A force of 100,000 N at test location P3 on either the left or 
the right side of the guard as defined in S6.4(c) of this section.
    S5.2.2 Guard Energy Absorption. A guard, other than a hydraulic 
guard, shall absorb by plastic deformation within the first 125 mm of 
deflection at least 5,650 J of energy at each test location P3. See 
Figure 2 of this section.
    S5.3 Labeling. Each guard shall be permanently labeled with the 
information specified in S5.3 (a) through (c) of this section. The 
information shall be in English and in letters that are at least 2.5 mm 
high. The label shall be placed on the forward or rearward facing 
surface of the horizontal member of the guard, provided that the label 
does not interfere with the retroreflective sheeting required by 
S5.7.1.4.1(c) of FMVSS No. 108 (49 CFR 571.108), and is readily 
accessible for visual inspection.
    (a) The guard manufacturer's name and address.
    (b) The statement: ``Manufactured in --------'' (inserting the month 
and year of guard manufacture).
    (c) The letters ``DOT'', constituting a certification by the guard 
manufacturer that the guard conforms to all requirements of this 
standard.
    S5.4 Guard Attachment Hardware. Each guard, other than a guard that 
is to be installed on a vehicle manufactured by the manufacturer of the

[[Page 1058]]

guard, shall be accompanied by all attachment hardware necessary for 
installation of the guard on the chassis of the motor vehicle for which 
it is intended.
    S5.5 Installation Instructions. The manufacturer of rear impact 
guards for sale to vehicle manufacturers shall include with each guard 
printed instructions in English for installing the guard, as well as a 
diagram or schematic depicting proper guard installation. The 
manufacturer of a rear impact guard for one of its own vehicles shall 
prepare and keep a copy of installation procedures applicable to each 
vehicle/guard combination for a period of one year from the date of 
vehicle manufacture and provide them to NHTSA on request. The 
instructions or procedures shall specify:
    (a) Vehicles on which the guard can be installed. Vehicles may be 
designated by listing the make and model of the vehicles for which the 
guard is suitable, or by specifying the design elements that would make 
any vehicle an appropriate host for the particular guard (e.g., vehicles 
with frame rails of certain spacing and gauge of steel).
    (b) A description of the chassis surface to which the guard will be 
attached, including frame design types with dimensions, material 
thickness, and tire track width. This description shall be detailed 
enough to permit the agency to locate and duplicate the chassis surface 
during compliance testing.
    (c) An explanation of the method of attaching the guard to the 
chassis of each vehicle make and model listed or to the design elements 
specified in the instructions or procedures. The principal aspects of 
vehicle chassis configuration that are necessary to the proper 
functioning of the guard shall be specified. If the chassis strength is 
inadequate for the guard design, the instructions or procedures shall 
specify methods for adequately reinforcing the vehicle chassis. 
Procedures for properly installing any guard attachment hardware shall 
be provided.
    S6. Guard Test Procedures. The procedures for determining compliance 
with S5.2 of this section are specified in S6.1 through S6.6 of this 
section.
    S6.1 Preparation of Hydraulic Guards. For hydraulic guards, the 
horizontal member of the guard is deflected in a forward direction until 
the hydraulic unit(s) have reached the full extent of their designed 
travel or 610 mm, whichever occurs first. The hydraulic units are 
compressed before the application of force to the guard in accordance 
with S6.6 of this section and maintained in this condition throughout 
the testing under S6.6 of this section.
    S6.2 Guard Installation for Strength and Energy Absorption Tests.
    (a) The rear impact guard is attached to a test device.
    (b) The test device for the compliance test will be whichever of the 
following devices, if either was used, the manufacturer used as a basis 
for its certification of the guard in S5.3(c) of this section. If the 
manufacturer did not use one of these devices or does not specify a 
device when asked by the agency, the agency may choose either of the 
following devices--
    (1) A rigid test fixture. In the case of testing on a rigid test 
fixture NHTSA will consult the installation instructions or procedures 
to determine the surface or structure that the guard is supposed to be 
mounted to and mount it to the rigid test fixture in the same way.
    (2) A complete trailer for which installation of the guard is 
suitable, as provided in the manufacturer's installation instructions or 
procedures required by S5.5 of this section. The trailer chassis is 
secured so that it behaves essentially as a fixed object during the 
test, such that the test must be passed no matter how little it moves 
during the test.
    (c) The guard is attached in accordance with the instructions or 
procedures for guard attachment provided by the guard manufacturer for 
that guard as required by S5.5 of this section.
    S6.3 Force Application Device. The force application device employed 
in S6.6 of this section consists of a rectangular solid made of rigid 
steel. The steel solid is 203 mm in height, 203 mm in width, and 25 mm 
in thickness. The 203 mm by 203 mm face of the block is used as the 
contact surface for application of the forces specified in S5.2.1 (a)

[[Page 1059]]

through (c) of this section. Each edge of the contact surface of the 
block has a radius of curvature of 5 mm plus or minus 1 mm.
    S6.4 Test Locations. With the guard mounted to the rigid test 
fixture or to a complete trailer, determine the test locations P1, P2, 
and P3 in accordance with the procedure set forth in S6.4 (a) through 
(c) of this section. See Figure 1 of this section.
    (a) Test location P1 is the point on the rearmost surface of the 
horizontal member of the guard that:
    (1) Is located at a distance of \3/8\ of the guard width from the 
vertical longitudinal plane passing through center of the guard;
    (2) Lies on either side of the center of the guard's horizontal 
member; and
    (3) Is 50 mm above the bottom of the guard.
    (b) Test location P2 is the point on the rearmost surface of the 
horizontal member of the guard that:
    (1) Lies in the longitudinal vertical plane passing through the 
center of the guard's horizontal member; and
    (2) Is 50 mm above the bottom of the guard.
    (c) Test location P3 is any point on the rearmost surface of the 
horizontal member of the guard that:
    (1) Is not less than 355 mm and not more than 635 mm from the 
vertical longitudinal plane passing through center of the guard;
    (2) Lies on either the right or left side of the horizontal member 
of the guard; and
    (3) Is 50 mm above the bottom of the guard.
    S6.5 Positioning of Force Application Device. Before applying any 
force to the guard, locate the force application device such that:
    (a) The center point of the contact surface of the force application 
device is aligned with and touching the guard test location, as defined 
by the specifications of S6.4 of this section.
    (b) The longitudinal axis of the force application device passes 
through the test location and is perpendicular to the transverse 
vertical plane that is tangent to the rearmost surface of the guard's 
horizontal member.
    S6.6 Force Application. After the force application device has been 
positioned according to S6.5 of this section, apply the loads specified 
in S5.2.1 of this section. Load application procedures are specified in 
the S6.6 (a) through (d) of this section.
    (a) Using the force application device, apply force to the guard in 
a forward direction such that the displacement rate of the force 
application device is the rate, plus or minus 10 percent, designated by 
the guard manufacturer within the range of 2.0 cm per minute to 9.0 cm 
per minute. If the guard manufacturer does not designate a rate, any 
rate within that range may be chosen.
    (b) If conducting a strength test to satisfy the requirement of 
S5.2.1 of this section, the force is applied until the forces specified 
in S5.2.1 of this section have been exceeded, or until the displacement 
of the force application device has reached at least 125 mm, whichever 
occurs first.
    (c) If conducting a test to be used for the calculation of energy 
absorption levels to satisfy the requirement of S5.2.2 of this section, 
apply the force to the guard until displacement of the force application 
device has reached 125 mm. For calculation of guard energy absorption, 
the value of force is recorded at least ten times per 25 mm of 
displacement of the contact surface of the loading device. Reduce the 
force until the guard no longer offers resistance to the force 
application device. Produce a force vs. deflection diagram of the type 
shown in Figure 2 of this section using this information. Determine the 
energy absorbed by the guard by calculating the shaded area bounded by 
the curve in the force vs. deflection diagram and the abscissa (X-axis).
    (d) During each force application, the force application device is 
guided so that it does not rotate. At all times during the application 
of force, the location of the longitudinal axis of the force application 
device remains constant.

[[Page 1060]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.145


[[Page 1061]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.146


[61 FR 2030, Jan. 24, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 3662, Jan. 26, 1998; 69 
FR 67662, Nov. 19, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 571.224  Standard No. 224; Rear impact protection.

    S1. Scope. This standard establishes requirements for the 
installation of rear impact guards on trailers and semitrailers with a 
gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 4,536 kg or more.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce the number of 
deaths and serious injuries occurring when light duty vehicles impact 
the rear of trailers and semitrailers with a GVWR of 4,536 kg or more.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to trailers and semitrailers 
with a GVWR of 4,356 kg or more. The standard does not apply to pole 
trailers, pulpwood trailers, road construction controlled horizontal 
discharge trailers, special purpose vehicles, wheels back vehicles, or 
temporary living quarters as defined in 49 CFR 529.2. If a cargo tank 
motor vehicle, as defined in 49 CFR 171.8, is certified to carry 
hazardous materials and has a rear bumper or rear end protection device 
conforming with 49 CFR part 178 located in the area of the horizontal 
member of the rear underride guard required by this standard, the guard 
need not comply with the energy absorption requirement (S5.2.2) of 49 
CFR 571.223.
    S4. Definitions.
    Chassis means the load supporting frame structure of a motor 
vehicle.
    Horizontal member means the structural member of the guard that 
meets the configuration requirements of S5.1

[[Page 1062]]

of this section when the guard is installed on the vehicle according to 
the installation instructions or procedures required by S5.5 of Sec. 
571.223, Rear Impact Guards.
    Low chassis vehicle means a trailer or semitrailer having a chassis 
that extends behind the rearmost point of the rearmost tires and a lower 
rear surface that meets the configuration requirements of S5.1.1 through 
5.1.3 of this section.
    Outer or Outboard means away from the trailer centerline and toward 
the side extremities of the trailer.
    Pulpwood trailer means a trailer that is designed exclusively for 
harvesting logs or pulpwood and constructed with a skeletal frame with 
no means for attachment of a solid bed, body, or container.
    Rear extremity means the rearmost point on a vehicle that is above a 
horizontal plane located 560 mm above the ground and below a horizontal 
plane located 1,900 mm above the ground when the vehicle is configured 
as specified in S5.1 of this section and when the vehicle's cargo doors, 
tailgate, or other permanent structures are positioned as they normally 
are when the vehicle is in motion. Nonstructural protrusions such as 
taillights, rubber bumpers, hinges and latches are excluded from the 
determination of the rearmost point.
    Road construction controlled horizontal discharge trailer means a 
trailer or semitrailer that is equipped with a mechanical drive and a 
conveyor to deliver asphalt and other road building materials, in a 
controlled horizontal manner, into a lay down machine or paving 
equipment for road construction and paving operations.
    Rounded corner means a guard's outermost end that curves upward or 
forward toward the front of the vehicle, or both.
    Side extremity means the outermost point on a vehicle's side that is 
located above a horizontal plane 560 mm above the ground, below a 
horizontal plane located 190 cm above the ground, and between a 
transverse vertical plane tangent to the rear extremity of the vehicle 
and a transverse vertical plane located 305 mm forward of that plane 
when the vehicle is configured as specified in S5.1 of this section. 
Non-structural protrusions such as taillights, hinges, rubber bumpers, 
and latches are excluded from the determination of the outermost point.
    Special purpose vehicle means a trailer or semitrailer that:
    (1) Has work performing equipment that, while the vehicle is in 
transit, resides in or moves through any portion of the space bounded:
    (i) Vertically from the ground to a horizontal plane 660 mm above 
the ground;
    (ii) Laterally the full width of the trailer, determined by the 
trailer's side extremities as defined in S4 of this section; and
    (iii) From the rear extremity of the trailer as defined in S4 of 
this section to a transverse vertical plane 305 mm forward of the rear 
extremity of the trailer; or
    (2) Is equipped with a loading platform that, while the vehicle is 
in transit, is completely stowed in the space bounded by a plane tangent 
to the underside of the vehicle, the ground, the rear extremity of the 
vehicle, and the rearmost axle, and that, when operated, deploys from 
its stowed position to the rear of the vehicle through any portion of 
the space described above.
    Wheels back vehicle means a trailer or semitrailer whose rearmost 
axle is permanently fixed and is located such that the rearmost surface 
of tires of the size recommended by the vehicle manufacturer for the 
vehicle on that axle is not more than 305 mm forward of the transverse 
vertical plane tangent to the rear extremity of the vehicle.
    S5. Requirements.
    S5.1 Installation; vehicle configuration. Each vehicle shall be 
equipped with a rear impact guard certified as meeting Federal Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standard No. 223, Rear Impact Guards (Sec. 571.223). 
When the vehicle to which the guard is attached is resting on level 
ground, unloaded, with its full capacity of fuel, and with its tires 
inflated and air suspension, if so equipped, pressurized in accordance 
with the manufacturer's recommendations, the guard shall comply with the 
requirements of S5.1.1 through S5.1.3 of this section. See Figure 1 of 
this section.

[[Page 1063]]

    S5.1.1 Guard width. The outermost surfaces of the horizontal member 
of the guard shall extend outboard to within 100 mm of the longitudinal 
vertical planes that are tangent to the side extremities of the vehicle, 
but shall not extend outboard of those planes. See Figure 1 of this 
section.
    S5.1.2 Guard height. The vertical distance between the bottom edge 
of the horizontal member of the guard and the ground shall not exceed 
560 mm at any point across the full width of the member. Notwithstanding 
this requirement, guards with rounded corners may curve upward within 
255 mm of the longitudinal vertical planes that are tangent to the side 
extremities of the vehicle. See Figure 1 of this section.
    S5.1.3 Guard rear surface. At any height 560 mm or more above the 
ground, the rearmost surface of the horizontal member of the guard shall 
be located as close as practical to a transverse vertical plane tangent 
to the rear extremity of the vehicle, but no more than 305 mm forward of 
that plane. Notwithstanding this requirement, the horizontal member may 
extend rearward of the plane, and guards with rounded corners may curve 
forward within 255 mm of the longitudinal vertical planes that are 
tangent to the side extremities of the vehicle.
    S5.2 Installation Requirements. Guards shall be attached to the 
vehicle's chassis by the vehicle manufacturer in accordance with the 
installation instructions or procedures provided pursuant to S5.5 of 
Standard No. 223, Rear Impact Guards (Sec. 571.223). The vehicle must 
be of a type identified in the installation instructions as appropriate 
for the guard.

[[Page 1064]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.147


[61 FR 2035, Jan. 24, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 3662, Jan. 26, 1998; 69 
FR 64500, Nov. 5, 2004; 69 FR 67668, Nov. 19, 2004; 71 FR 9277, Feb. 23, 
2006]


<R05>
Sec. 571.225  Standard No. 225; Child restraint anchorage systems.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard establishes requirements for 
child restraint anchorage systems to ensure their proper location and 
strength for the effective securing of child restraints, to reduce the 
likelihood of the anchorage systems' failure, and to increase the 
likelihood that child restraints are properly secured and thus more 
fully achieve their potential effectiveness in motor vehicles.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars; to trucks 
and multipurpose passenger vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating 
(GVWR) of 3,855 kilograms (8,500 pounds) or less; and to

[[Page 1065]]

buses (including school buses) with a GVWR of 4,536 kg (10,000 lb) or 
less. This standard does not apply to walk-in van-type vehicles, 
vehicles manufactured to be sold exclusively to the U.S. Postal Service, 
shuttle buses, and funeral coaches.
    S3. Definitions.
    Child restraint anchorage means any vehicle component, other than 
Type I or Type II seat belts, that is involved in transferring loads 
generated by a child restraint system to the vehicle structure.
    Child restraint anchorage system means a vehicle system that is 
designed for attaching a child restraint system to a vehicle at a 
particular designated seating position, consisting of:
    (a) Two lower anchorages meeting the requirements of S9; and
    (b) A tether anchorage meeting the requirements of S6.
    Child restraint fixture (CRF) means the fixture depicted in Figures 
1 and 2 of this standard that simulates the dimensions of a child 
restraint system, and that is used to determine the space required by 
the child restraint system and the location and accessibility of the 
lower anchorages.
    Funeral coach means a vehicle that contains only a front row of 
occupant seats, is designed exclusively for transporting a body and 
casket and that is equipped with features to secure a casket in place 
during operation of the vehicle.
    Rear designated seating position means any designated seating 
position (as that term is defined at Sec. 571.3) that is rearward of 
the front seats(s).
    Seat bight means the area close to and including the intersection of 
the surfaces of the vehicle seat cushion and the seat back.
    SFAD 1 means Static Force Application Device 1 shown in Figures 12 
to 16 of this standard.
    SFAD 2 means Static Force Application Device 2 shown in Figures 17 
and 18 of this standard.
    Shuttle bus means a bus with only one row of forward-facing seating 
positions rearward of the driver's seat.
    Tether anchorage means a user-ready, permanently installed vehicle 
system that transfers loads from a tether strap through the tether hook 
to the vehicle structure and that accepts a tether hook.
    Tether strap means a strap that is secured to the rigid structure of 
the seat back of a child restraint system, and is connected to a tether 
hook that transfers the load from that system to the tether anchorage.
    Tether hook means a device, illustrated in Figure 11 of Standard No. 
213 (Sec. 571.213), used to attach a tether strap to a tether 
anchorage.
    S4. General vehicle requirements.
    S4.1 Each tether anchorage and each child restraint anchorage system 
installed, either voluntarily or pursuant to this standard, in any new 
vehicle manufactured on or after September 1, 1999, shall comply with 
the configuration, location, marking and strength requirements of this 
standard. The vehicle shall be delivered with written information, in 
English, on how to appropriately use those anchorages and systems.
    S4.2 For passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1999 
and before September 1, 2000, not less than 80 percent of the 
manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles (not including 
convertibles), as set forth in S13, shall be equipped with a tether 
anchorage as specified in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of S4.2, except as 
provided in S5.
    (a) Each vehicle with three or more forward-facing rear designated 
seating positions shall be equipped with a tether anchorage conforming 
to the requirements of S6 at no fewer than three forward-facing rear 
designated seating positions. The tether anchorage of a child restraint 
anchorage system may count towards the three required tether anchorages. 
In each vehicle with a forward-facing rear designated seating position 
other than an outboard designated seating position, at least one tether 
anchorage (with or without the lower anchorages of a child restraint 
anchorage system) shall be at such a designated seating position. In a 
vehicle with three or more rows of seating positions, at least one of 
the tether anchorages (with or without the lower anchorages of a child 
restraint anchorage system) shall be installed at a forward-facing 
seating position in the second row if such a forward-facing

[[Page 1066]]

seating position is available in that row.
    (b) Each vehicle with not more than two forward-facing rear 
designated seating positions shall be equipped with a tether anchorage 
conforming to the requirements of S6 at each forward-facing rear 
designated seating position. The tether anchorage of a child restraint 
anchorage system may count toward the required tether anchorages.
    (c) Each vehicle without any forward-facing rear designated seating 
position shall be equipped with a tether anchorage conforming to the 
requirements of S6 at each front forward-facing passenger seating 
position.
    S4.3 Each vehicle manufactured on or after September 1, 2000 and 
before September 1, 2002, shall be equipped as specified in paragraphs 
(a) and (b) of S4.3, except as provided in S5.
    (a) A specified percentage of each manufacturer's yearly production, 
as set forth in S14, shall be equipped as follows:
    (1) Each vehicle with three or more forward-facing rear designated 
seating positions shall be equipped with a child restraint anchorage 
system conforming to the requirements of S9 at not fewer than two 
forward-facing rear designated seating positions. In a vehicle with 
three or more rows of seating positions, at least one of the child 
restraint anchorage systems shall be at a forward-facing seating 
position in the second row if such a forward-facing seating position is 
available in that row.
    (2) Each vehicle with not more than two forward-facing rear 
designated seating positions shall be equipped with a child restraint 
anchorage system conforming to the requirements of S9 at each forward-
facing rear designated seating position.
    (b) Each vehicle, including a vehicle that is counted toward the 
percentage of a manufacturer's yearly production required to be equipped 
with child restraint anchorage systems, shall be equipped as described 
in S4.3(b)(1), (2) or (3), subject to S13.
    (1) Each vehicle with three or more forward-facing rear designated 
seating positions shall be equipped with a tether anchorage conforming 
to the requirements of S6 at no fewer than three forward-facing rear 
designated seating positions. The tether anchorage of a child restraint 
anchorage system may count towards the three required tether anchorages. 
In each vehicle with a forward-facing rear designated seating position 
other than an outboard designated seating position, at least one tether 
anchorage (with or without the lower anchorages of a child restraint 
anchorage system) shall be at such a designated seating position. In a 
vehicle with three or more rows of seating positions, at least one of 
the tether anchorages (with or without the lower anchorages of a child 
restraint anchorage system) shall be installed at a forward-facing 
seating position in the second row if such a forward-facing seating 
position is available in that row.
    (2) Each vehicle with not more than two forward-facing rear 
designated seating positions shall be equipped with a tether anchorage 
conforming to the requirements of S6 at each forward-facing rear 
designated seating position. The tether anchorage of a child restraint 
anchorage system may count toward the required tether anchorages.
    (3) Each vehicle without any forward-facing rear designated seating 
position shall be equipped with a tether anchorage conforming to the 
requirements of S6 at each front passenger seating position.
    S4.4 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2002 shall be 
equipped as specified in paragraphs (a) through (c) of S4.4, except as 
provided in S5.
    (a) Each vehicle with three or more forward-facing rear designated 
seating positions shall be equipped as specified in S4.4(a)(1) and (2).
    (1) Each vehicle shall be equipped with a child restraint anchorage 
system conforming to the requirements of S9 at not fewer than two 
forward-facing rear designated seating positions. At least one of the 
child restraint anchorage systems shall be installed at a forward-facing 
seating position in the second row in each vehicle that has three or 
more rows, if such a forward-facing seating position is available in 
that row.
    (2) Each vehicle shall be equipped with a tether anchorage 
conforming to

[[Page 1067]]

the requirements of S6 at a third forward-facing rear designated seating 
position. The tether anchorage of a child restraint anchorage system may 
count towards the third required tether anchorage. In each vehicle with 
a forward-facing rear designated seating position other than an outboard 
designated seating position, at least one tether anchorage (with or 
without the lower anchorages of a child restraint anchorage system) 
shall be at such a designated seating position.
    (b) Each vehicle with not more than two forward-facing rear 
designated seating positions shall be equipped with a child restraint 
anchorage system conforming to the requirements of S9 at each forward-
facing rear designated seating position.
    (c) Each vehicle without any forward-facing rear designated seating 
position shall be equipped with a tether anchorage conforming to the 
requirements of S6 at each front forward-facing passenger seating 
position.
    S4.5 As an alternative to complying with the requirements of S4.2 
through S4.4 that specify the number of tether anchorages that are 
required in a vehicle and the designated seating positions for which 
tether anchorages must be provided, a vehicle manufactured from 
September 1, 1999 to August 31, 2004 may, at the manufacturer's option 
(with said option irrevocably selected prior to, or at the time of, 
certification of the vehicle), meet the requirements of this S4.5. This 
alternative ceases to be available on and after September 1, 2004. A 
tether anchorage conforming to the requirements of S6 must be 
installed--
    (a) For each designated seating position, other than that of the 
driver, in a vehicle that has only one row of designated seating 
positions;
    (b) For each forward-facing designated seating position in the 
second row of seating positions in a passenger car or truck;
    (c) For each of any two forward-facing designated seating positions 
in the second row of seating positions in a multipurpose passenger 
vehicle that has five or fewer designated seating positions; and,
    (d) For each of any three forward-facing designated seating 
positions that are located to the rear of the first row of designated 
seating positions in a multipurpose passenger vehicle that has six or 
more designated seating positions.
    S4.6 Adjustable seats. (a) A vehicle that is equipped with a 
forward-facing rear designated seating position that can be relocated 
such that it is capable of being used at either an outboard or non-
outboard forward-facing seating position shall be considered as having a 
forward-facing non-outboard seating position. Such an adjustable seat 
must be equipped with a tether anchorage (with or without the lower 
anchorages of a child restraint anchorage system) if the vehicle does 
not have another forward-facing non-outboard seating position that is so 
equipped.
    (b) Tether and lower anchorages shall be available for use at all 
times, except when the seating position for which it is installed is not 
available for use because the vehicle seat has been removed or converted 
to an alternate use such as the carrying of cargo.
    S5. General exceptions.
    (a) Convertibles and school buses are excluded from the requirements 
to be equipped with tether anchorages.
    (b) A vehicle may be equipped with a built-in child restraint system 
conforming to the requirements of Standard No. 213 (49 CFR 571.213) 
instead of one of the required tether anchorages or child restraint 
anchorage systems.
    (c)(1) Each vehicle that--
    (i) Does not have a rear designated seating position and that thus 
meets the conditions in S4.5.4.1(a) of Standard No. 208 (Sec. 571.208); 
and
    (ii) Has an air bag on-off switch meeting the requirements of S4.5.4 
of Standard No. 208 (Sec. 571.208), shall have a child restraint 
anchorage system for a designated passenger seating position in the 
front seat, instead of only a tether anchorage. In the case of 
convertibles, the front designated passenger seating position need have 
only the two lower anchorages meeting the requirements of S9 of this 
standard.
    (iii) For vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2002, each 
vehicle that does not have a rear designated seating position, and does 
not have an air bag installed at front passenger designated seating 
positions pursuant to a

[[Page 1068]]

temporary exemption granted by NHTSA under 49 CFR Part 555, must have a 
child restraint anchorage system installed at a front passenger 
designated seating position. In the case of convertibles, the front 
designated passenger seating position need have only the two lower 
anchorages meeting the requirements of S9 of this standard.
    (2) Each vehicle that--
    (i) Has a rear designated seating position and meets the conditions 
in S4.5.4.1(b) of Standard No. 208 (Sec. 571.208); and,
    (ii) Has an air bag on-off switch meeting the requirements of S4.5.4 
of Standard 208 (Sec. 571.208), shall have a child restraint anchorage 
system for a designated passenger seating position in the front seat, 
instead of a child restraint anchorage system that is required for the 
rear seat. In the case of convertibles, the front designated passenger 
seating position need have only the two lower anchorages meeting the 
requirements of S9 of this standard.
    (iii) For vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2002, each 
vehicle that has a rear designated seating position and meets the 
conditions in S4.5.4.1(b) of Standard No. 208 (Sec. 571.208), and does 
not have an air bag installed at front passenger designated seating 
positions pursuant to a temporary exemption granted by NHTSA under 49 
CFR Part 555, must have a child restraint anchorage system installed at 
a front passenger designated seating position in place of one of the 
child restraint anchorage systems that is required for the rear seat. In 
the case of convertibles, the front designated passenger seating 
position need have only the two lower anchorages meeting the 
requirements of S9 of this standard.
    (d) A vehicle that does not have an air bag on-off switch meeting 
the requirements of S4.5.4 of Standard No. 208 (Sec. 571.208), shall 
not have any child restraint anchorage system installed at a front 
designated seating position.
    (e) A vehicle with a rear designated seating position for which 
interference with transmission and/or suspension components prevents the 
location of the lower bars of a child restraint anchorage system 
anywhere within the zone described by S9.2 or S15.1.2.2(b) such that the 
attitude angles of S15.1.2.2(a) could be met, is excluded from the 
requirement to provide a child restraint anchorage system at that 
position. However, except as provided elsewhere in S5 of this standard, 
for vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2001, such a vehicle 
must have a tether anchorage at a front passenger designated seating 
position.
    S6. Requirements for tether anchorages.
    S6.1 Configuration of the tether anchorage. Each tether anchorage 
shall:
    (a) Permit the attachment of a tether hook of a child restraint 
system meeting the configuration and geometry specified in Figure 11 of 
Standard No. 213 (Sec. 571.213);
    (b) Be accessible without the need for any tools other than a 
screwdriver or coin;
    (c) Once accessed, be ready for use without the need for any tools; 
and
    (d) Be sealed to prevent the entry of exhaust fumes into the 
passenger compartment.
    S6.2 Location of the tether anchorage. A vehicle manufactured on or 
after September 1, 1999 and before September 1, 2004 may, at the 
manufacturer's option (with said option irrevocably selected prior to, 
or at the time of, certification of the vehicle), meet the requirements 
of S6.2.1 or S6.2.2. Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2004 
must meet the requirements of S6.2.1 of this standard.
    S6.2.1 Subject to S6.2.1.1 and S6.2.1.2, the part of each tether 
anchorage that attaches to a tether hook must be located within the 
shaded zone shown in Figures 3 to 7 of this standard of the designated 
seating position for which it is installed. The zone is defined with 
reference to the seating reference point (see Sec. 571.3). (For 
purposes of the figures, ``H Point'' is defined to mean seating 
reference point.) A tether anchorage may be recessed in the seat back, 
provided that it is not in the strap wrap-around area at the top of the 
vehicle seat back. For the area under the vehicle seat, the forwardmost 
edge of the shaded zone is defined by the torso line reference plane.
    S6.2.1.1 In the case of passenger cars and multipurpose passenger 
vehicles manufactured before September 1, 2004,

[[Page 1069]]

the part of each user-ready tether anchorage that attaches to a tether 
hook may, at the manufacturer's option (with said option selected prior 
to, or at the time of, certification of the vehicle), instead of 
complying with S6.2.1, be located within the shaded zone shown in 
Figures 8 to 11 of this standard of the designated seating position for 
which it is installed, relative to the shoulder reference point of the 
three dimensional H-point machine described in section 3.1 of SAE 
Standard J826 (June 1992), (incorporation by reference; see Sec. 
571.5), such that--
    (a) The H-point of the three dimensional H-point machine is 
located--
    (1) At the actual H-point of the seat, as defined in section 
2.2.11.3 of SAE Recommended Practice J1100 (June 1993), (incorporation 
by reference; see Sec. 571.5), at the full rearward and downward 
position of the seat; or
    (2) In the case of a designated seating position that has a child 
restraint anchorage system, midway between vertical longitudinal planes 
passing through the lateral center of the bar in each of the two lower 
anchorages of that system; and
    (b) The back pan of the H-point machine is at the same angle to the 
vertical as the vehicle seat back with the seat adjusted to its full 
rearward and full downward position and the seat back in its most 
upright position.
    S6.2.1.2 In the case of a vehicle that--
    (a) Has a user-ready tether anchorage for which no part of the 
shaded zone shown in Figures 3 to 7 of this standard of the designated 
seating position for which the anchorage is installed is accessible 
without removing a seating component of the vehicle; and
    (b) Has a tether strap routing device that is--
    (1) Not less than 65 mm behind the torso line for that seating 
position, in the case of a flexible routing device or a deployable 
routing device, measured horizontally and in a vertical longitudinal 
plane; or
    (2) Not less than 100 mm behind the torso line for that seating 
position, in the case of a fixed rigid routing device, measured 
horizontally and in a vertical longitudinal plane, the part of that 
anchorage that attaches to a tether hook may, at the manufacturer's 
option (with said option selected prior to, or at the time of, 
certification of the vehicle) be located outside that zone.
    (c) The measurement of the location of the flexible or deployable 
routing device described in S6.2.1.2(b)(1) is made with SFAD 2 properly 
attached to the lower anchorages. A 40 mm wide nylon tether strap is 
routed through the routing device and attached to the tether anchorage 
in accordance with the written instructions required by S12 of this 
standard. The forwardmost contact point between the strap and the 
routing device must be within the stated limit when the tether strap is 
flat against the top surface of the SFAD and tensioned to 55 to 65 N. In 
seating positions without lower anchorages of a child restraint 
anchorage system, the SFAD 2 is held with its central lateral plane in 
the central vertical longitudinal plane of the seating position. The 
adjustable anchor attaching bars of the SFAD 2 are replaced by spacers 
that end flush with the back surface of the SFAD.
    S6.2.2 Subject to S6.2.2.1 and S6.2.2.2, the portion of each user-
ready tether anchorage that is designed to bind with a tether strap hook 
shall be located within the shaded zone shown in Figures 3 to 7 of this 
standard of the designated seating position for which it is installed, 
with reference to the H-point of a template described in section 3.1 of 
SAE Standard J826 (June 1992) (incorporation by reference; see Sec. 
571.5), if:
    (a) The H-point of the template is located--
    (1) At the unique Design H-point of the designated seating position, 
as defined in section 2.2.11.1 of SAE Recommended Practice J1100 (June 
1993) (incorporation by reference; see Sec. 571.5), at the full 
downward and full rearward position of the seat, or--
    (2) In the case of a designated seating position that has a means of 
affixing the lower portion of a child restraint system to the vehicle, 
other than a vehicle seat belt, midway between the two lower restraint 
system anchorages;
    (b) The torso line of the template is at the same angle to the 
transverse vertical plane as the vehicle seat back

[[Page 1070]]

with the seat adjusted to its full rearward and full downward position 
and the seat back in its most upright position; and
    (c) The template is positioned in the vertical longitudinal plane 
that contains the H-point of the template.
    S6.2.2.1 In passenger cars and multipurpose passenger vehicles 
manufactured before September 1, 2004, the portion of each user-ready 
tether anchorage to which a tether strap hook attaches may be located 
within the shaded zone shown in Figures 8 to 11 of the designated 
seating position for which it is installed, with reference to the 
shoulder reference point of a template described in section 3.1 of SAE 
Standard J826 (June 1992) (incorporation by reference; see Sec. 571.5), 
if:
    (a) The H-point of the template is located--
    (1) At the unique Design H-point of the designated seating position, 
as defined in section 2.2.11.1 of SAE Recommended Practice J1100 (June 
1993) (incorporation by reference; see Sec. 571.5), at the full 
downward and full rearward position of the seat, or--
    (2) In the case of a designated seating position that has a means of 
affixing the lower portion of a child restraint system to the vehicle, 
other than a vehicle seat belt, midway between the two lower restraint 
system anchorages;
    (b) The torso line of the template is at the same angle to the 
vertical plane as the vehicle seat back with the seat adjusted to its 
full rearward and full downward position and the seat back in its most 
upright position; and
    (c) The template is positioned in the vertical longitudinal plane 
that contains the H-point of the template.
    S6.2.2.2 The portion of a user-ready tether anchorage in a vehicle 
that is designed to bind with the tether strap hook may be located 
outside the shaded zone referred to in S6.2.2, if no part of the shaded 
zone is accessible without removing a seating component of the vehicle 
and the vehicle is equipped with a routing device that--
    (a) Ensures that the tether strap functions as if the portion of the 
anchorage designed to bind with the tether strap hook were located 
within the shaded zone;
    (b) Is at least 65 mm behind the torso line, in the case of a non-
rigid-webbing-type routing device or a deployable routing device, or at 
least 100 mm behind the torso line, in the case of a fixed rigid routing 
device; and
    (c) When tested after being installed as it is intended to be used, 
is of sufficient strength to withstand, with the user-ready tether 
anchorage, the load referred to in S6.3.4 or S6.3.4.1, as applicable.
    S6.3 Strength requirements for tether anchorages. Subject to S6.3.2, 
a vehicle manufactured on or after September 1, 1999, and before 
September 1, 2004 may, at the manufacturer's option (with said option 
irrevocably selected prior to, or at the time of, certification of the 
vehicle), meet the requirements of S6.3.1 or S6.3.4. Vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2004 and before September 1, 2005 
must meet the requirements of S6.3.1 of this standard, except as 
provided in S16 of this standard. Vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2005 must meet the requirements of S6.3.1.
    S6.3.1 Subject to S6.3.2, when tested in accordance with S8, after 
preloading the device with a force of 500 N, the tether anchorage must 
not separate completely from the vehicle seat or seat anchorage or the 
structure of the vehicle.
    S6.3.2 In vehicles manufactured before September 1, 2004, each user-
ready tether anchorage in a row of designated seating positions in a 
passenger car may, at the manufacturer's option (with said option 
selected prior to, or at the time of, certification of the vehicle), 
instead of complying with S6.3.1, withstand the application of a force 
of 5,300 N, when tested in accordance with S8.2, such that the anchorage 
does not release the belt strap specified in S8.2 or allow any point on 
the tether anchorage to be displaced more than 125 mm.
    S6.3.3 Provisions for simultaneous and sequential testing. (a) In 
the case of vehicle seat assemblies equipped with more than one tether 
anchorage system, the force referred to in S6.3.1 and S6.3.2 may, at the 
agency's option, be applied simultaneously to each of those tether 
anchorages. However, that force may not be applied simultaneously to

[[Page 1071]]

tether anchorages for any two adjacent seating positions whose midpoints 
are less than 400 mm apart, as measured in accordance with S6.3.3(a)(1) 
and (2) and Figure 20.
    (1) The midpoint of the seating position lies in the vertical 
longitudinal plane that is equidistant from vertical longitudinal planes 
through the geometric center of each of the two lower anchorages at the 
seating position. For those seating positions that do not provide lower 
anchorages, the midpoint of the seating position lies in the vertical 
longitudinal plane that passes through the SgRP of the seating position.
    (2) Measure the distance between the vertical longitudinal planes 
passing through the midpoints of the adjacent seating positions, as 
measured along a line perpendicular to the planes.
    (b) A tether anchorage of a particular child restraint anchorage 
system will not be tested with the lower anchorages of that anchorage 
system if one or both of those lower anchorages have been previously 
tested under this standard.
    S6.3.4 Subject to subsections S6.3.4.1 and S6.3.4.2, every user-
ready tether anchorage in a row of designated seating positions shall, 
when tested, withstand the application of a force of 10,000 N--
    (a) Applied by means of one of the following types of test devices, 
installed as a child restraint system would be installed in accordance 
with the manufacturer's installation instructions, namely,
    (1) SFAD 1, to test a tether anchorage at a designated seating 
position that does not have a child restraint anchorage system; or
    (2) SFAD 2, to test a tether anchorage at a designated seating 
position that has a child restraint anchorage system;
    (b) Applied--
    (1) In a forward direction parallel to the vehicle's vertical 
longitudinal plane through the X point on the test device, and,
    (2) Initially, along a horizontal line or along any line below or 
above that line that is at an angle to that line of not more than 5 
degrees;
    (c) Approximately linearly over a time, at the option of the vehicle 
manufacturer, of not more than 30 seconds, at any onset force rate of 
not more than 135 000 N/s; and
    (d) Maintained at a 10,000 N level for one second.
    S6.3.4.1 In a passenger car manufactured before September 1, 2004, 
every user-ready tether anchorage in a row of designated seating 
positions must, when tested, subject to subsection S6.3.4.2, withstand 
the application of a force of 5,300 N, which force must be--
    (a) Applied by means of a belt strap that--
    (1) Extends not less than 250 mm forward from the vertical plane 
touching the rear top edge of the vehicle seat back,
    (2) Is fitted at one end with suitable hardware for applying the 
force and at the other end with a bracket for the attachment of the 
user-ready tether anchorage, and
    (3) Passes over the top of the vehicle seat back as shown in Figure 
19 of this standard;
    (b) Applied--
    (1) In a forward direction parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal 
vertical plane, and
    (2) Initially, along a horizontal line or along any line below that 
line that is at an angle to that line of not more than 20 degrees;
    (c) Attained within 30 seconds, at any onset force rate of not more 
than 135,000 N/s; and
    (d) Maintained at a 5,300 N level for one second.
    S6.3.4.2 If the zones in which tether anchorages are located overlap 
and if, in the overlap area, a user-ready tether anchorage is installed 
that is designed to accept the tether strap hooks of two restraint 
systems simultaneously, both portions of the tether anchorage that are 
designed to bind with a tether strap hook shall withstand the force 
referred to in subsection S6.3.4 or S6.3.4.1, as the case may be, 
applied to both portions simultaneously.
    S6.3.4.3 Provisions for simultaneous and sequential testing. (a) In 
the case of vehicle seat assemblies equipped with more than one tether 
anchorage system, the force referred to in S6.3.4, 6.3.4.1 or S6.3.4.2 
may, at the agency's option, be applied simultaneously to

[[Page 1072]]

each of those tether anchorages. However, that force may not be applied 
simultaneously to tether anchorages for any two adjacent seating 
positions whose midpoints are less than 400 mm apart, as measured in 
accordance with S6.3.4.3(a)(1) and (2) and Figure 20.
    (1) The midpoint of the seating position lies in the vertical 
longitudinal plane that is equidistant from vertical longitudinal planes 
through the geometric center of each of the two lower anchorages at the 
seating position. For those seating positions that do not provide lower 
anchorages, the midpoint of the seating position lies in the vertical 
longitudinal plane that passes through the SgRP of the seating position.
    (2) Measure the distance between the vertical longitudinal planes 
passing through the midpoints of the adjacent seating positions, as 
measured along a line perpendicular to the planes.
    (b) A tether anchorage of a particular child restraint anchorage 
system will not be tested with the lower anchorages of that anchorage 
system if one or both of those lower anchorages have been previously 
tested under this standard.
    S6.3.4.4 The strength requirement tests shall be conducted with the 
vehicle seat adjusted to its full rearward and full downward position 
and the seat back in its most upright position. When SFAD 2 is used in 
testing and cannot be attached to the lower anchorages with the seat 
back in this position, adjust the seat back as recommended by the 
manufacturer in its instructions for attaching child restraints. If no 
instructions are provided, adjust the seat back to the position that 
enables SFAD 2 to attach to the lower anchorages that is the closest to 
the most upright position.
    S7. Test conditions for testing tether anchorages.
    The test conditions described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of S7 apply 
to the test procedures in S8.
    (a) Vehicle seats are adjusted to their full rearward and full 
downward position and the seat back is placed in its most upright 
position. When SFAD 2 is used in testing and cannot be attached to the 
lower anchorages with the seat back in this position, adjust the seat 
back as recommended by the manufacturer in its instructions for 
attaching child restraints. If no instructions are provided, adjust the 
seat back to the position that enables SFAD 2 to attach to the lower 
anchorages that is the closest to the most upright position.
    (b) Head restraints are adjusted in accordance with the 
manufacturer's instructions, provided pursuant to S12, as to how the 
head restraints should be adjusted when using the child restraint 
anchorage system. If instructions with regard to head restraint 
adjustment are not provided pursuant to S12, the head restraints are 
adjusted to any position.
    S8 Test procedures. Each vehicle shall meet the requirements of 
S6.3.1 and S6.3.3 when tested according to the following procedures. 
Where a range of values is specified, the vehicle shall be able to meet 
the requirements at all points within the range. For the testing 
specified in these procedures, the SFAD used in the test has a tether 
strap consisting of webbing material with an elongation limit of 4 
percent at a tensile load of 65,000 N (14,612 lb). Pretension the tether 
strap with 53.5 N to 67 N of preload prior to the test. The strap is 
fitted at one end with a high strength steel tether hook for attachment 
to the tether anchorage. The tether hook meets the specifications in 
Standard No. 213 (49 CFR Sec. 571.213) as to the configuration and 
geometry of tether hooks required by the standard. A steel cable is 
connected to the X point through which the test force is applied.
    S8.1 Apply the force specified in S6.3.1 as follows--
    (a) Use the following specified test device, as appropriate:
    (1) SFAD 1, to test a tether anchorage at a designated seating 
position that does not have a child restraint anchorage system; or,
    (2) SFAD 2, to test a tether anchorage at a designated seating 
position that has a child restraint anchorage system.
    (b) Attach the SFAD 1 to the vehicle seat using the vehicle belts or 
the SFAD 2 to the lower anchorages of the child restraint anchorage 
system, as appropriate, and attach the test device to the tether 
anchorage, in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions

[[Page 1073]]

provided pursuant to S12 of this standard. For the testing specified in 
this procedure, if SFAD 1 cannot be attached using the vehicle belts 
because of the location of the vehicle belt buckle, the test device is 
attached by material whose breaking strength is equal to or greater than 
the breaking strength of the webbing for the seat belt assembly 
installed as original equipment at that seating position. The geometry 
of the attachment duplicates the geometry, at the pre-load point, of the 
attachment of the originally installed seat belt assembly. All belt 
systems (including the tether) used to attach the test device are 
tightened to a tension of not less than 53.5 N and not more than 67 N on 
the webbing portion of the belt. For SFAD 1, apply a rearward force of 
135 N <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>15 N, in a horizontal plane through point 
``X'' of SFAD 1. While maintaining the force, tighten the vehicle seat 
belt to a tension of not less than 53.5 N and not more than 67 N 
measured at the lap portion of the seat belt and maintain the tension 
during the preload, lock the seat belt retractor, and tighten the tether 
belt strap to remove all slack. A rearward force of 135 N <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>15 N is applied to the center of the lower front 
crossmember of SFAD 2 to press the device against the seat back as the 
fore-aft position of the rearward extensions of the SFAD is adjusted to 
remove any slack or tension.
    (c) Apply the force--
    (1) Initially, in a forward direction in a vertical longitudinal 
plane and through the Point X on the test device; and
    (2) Initially, along a line through the X point and at an angle of 
10 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees above the horizontal. Apply a preload 
force of 500 N to measure the angle; and then
    (3) Increase the pull force as linearly as practicable to a full 
force application of 15,000 N in not less than 24 seconds and not more 
than 30 seconds, and maintain at a 15,000 N level for 1 second.
    S8.2 Apply the force specified in S6.3.2 as follows:
    (a) Attach a belt strap, and tether hook, to the user-ready tether 
anchorage. The belt strap extends not less than 250 mm forward from the 
vertical transverse plane touching the rear top edge of the vehicle seat 
back, and passes over the top of the vehicle seat back as shown in 
Figure 19 of this standard;
    (b) Apply the force at the end of the belt strap--
    (1) Initially, in a forward direction in a vertical longitudinal 
plane that is parallel to the vehicle's longitudinal centerline;
    (2) Initially, along a horizontal line or along any line below or 
above that line that is at an angle to that line of not more than 20 
degrees;
    (3) So that the force is attained within 30 seconds, at any onset 
rate of not more than 135,000 N/s; and
    (4) Maintained at a 5,300 N level for a minimum of 1 second.
    S9 Requirements for the lower anchorages of the child restraint 
anchorage system. As an alternative to complying with the requirements 
of S9, a vehicle manufactured on or after September 1, 1999 and before 
September 1, 2004 may, at the manufacturer's option (with said option 
irrevocably selected prior to, or at the time of, certification of the 
vehicle), meet the requirements in S15 of this standard. Vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2004 and before September 1, 2005 
must meet all of the requirements of S9 of this standard, except as 
provided in S16 of this standard with regard to S9.4. Vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 must meet all the 
requirements of S9 of this standard.
    S9.1 Configuration of the lower anchorages
    S9.1.1 The lower anchorages shall consist of two bars that--
    (a) Are 6 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>.1 mm in diameter;
    (b) Are straight, horizontal and transverse;
    (c) As shown in Figure 21, are:
    (i) Not less than 25 mm in length, and
    (ii) Are not more than 60 mm in length between the anchor bar 
supports or other structural members of the vehicle that restrict 
lateral movement of the components of a child restraint that are 
designed to attach to the bars, measured in a vertical plane 7 mm 
rearward of the vertical plane that is tangent of the rearward face of 
the anchor bar.

[[Page 1074]]

    (d) For bars installed in vehicles manufactured on or after March 1, 
2005, the bars must not be capable of being stowable (foldable or 
otherwise stowable).
    (e) [Reserved]
    (f) Are part of the vehicle, such that they can only be removed by 
use of a tool, such as a screwdriver or wrench; and
    (g) Are rigidly attached to the vehicle such that they will not 
deform more than 5 mm when subjected to a 100 N force in any direction.
    S9.2 Location of the lower anchorages.
    S9.2.1 The anchorage bars are located at the vehicle seating 
position by using the CRF rearward extensions, with the CRF placed 
against or near the vehicle seat back. With the CRF attached to the 
anchorages and resting on the seat cushion, the bottom surface shall 
have attitude angles within the limits in the following table, angles 
measured relative to the vehicle horizontal, longitudinal and transverse 
reference planes.

                             Table to S9.2.1
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pitch........................................................    15[deg]
                                                                  <plus-
                                                               minus<ls-
                                                                t10[deg]
Roll.........................................................     0[deg]
                                                                  <plus-
                                                               minus<ls-
                                                                 t5[deg]
Yaw..........................................................     0[deg]
                                                                  <plus-
                                                               minus<ls-
                                                               t10[deg]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: An explanation of the above angles is given in Figure 1.

    S9.2.2 With adjustable seats adjusted as described in S9.2.3, each 
lower anchorage bar shall be located so that a vertical transverse plane 
tangent to the front surface of the bar is:
    (a) Not more than 70 mm behind the corresponding point Z of the CRF, 
measured parallel to the bottom surface of the CRF and in a vertical 
longitudinal plane, while the CRF is pressed against the seat back by 
the rearward application of a horizontal force of 100 N at point A on 
the CRF; and
    (b) Not less than 120 mm behind the vehicle seating reference point, 
measured horizontally and in a vertical longitudinal plane.
    S9.2.3 Adjustable seats are adjusted as follows:
    (a) Place adjustable seat backs in the manufacturer's nominal design 
riding position in the manner specified by the manufacturer; and
    (b) Place adjustable seats in the full rearward and full downward 
position.
    S9.3 Adequate fit of the lower anchorages. Each vehicle and each 
child restraint anchorage system in that vehicle shall be designed such 
that the CRF can be placed inside the vehicle and attached to the lower 
anchorages of each child restraint anchorage system, with adjustable 
seats adjusted as described in S9.3(a) and (b).
    (a) Place adjustable seat backs in the manufacturer's nominal design 
riding position in the manner specified by the manufacturer; and
    (b) Place adjustable seats in the full rearward and full downward 
position.
    (c) To facilitate installation of the CRF in a vehicle seat, the 
side, back and top frames of the CRF may be removed for installation in 
the vehicle, as indicated in Figure 1A of this standard. If necessary, 
the height of the CRF may be 560 mm.
    S9.4 Strength of the lower anchorages.
    S9.4.1 When tested in accordance with S11, the lower anchorages 
shall not allow point X on SFAD 2 to be displaced horizontally more than 
the distances specified below, after preloading the device--
    (a) 175 mm, when a force of 11,000 N is applied in a forward 
direction in a vertical longitudinal plane; and
    (b) 150 mm, for lower anchorages when a force of 5,000 N is applied 
in a lateral direction in a vertical longitudinal plane that is 75 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees to either side of a vertical 
longitudinal plane.
    S9.4.1.1 Forces described in S9.4.1(a), forward direction, shall be 
applied with an initial force application angle of 10 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees above the horizontal. Forces described in 
S9.4.1(b), lateral direction, shall be applied horizontally (0 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees).
    S9.4.1.2 The amount of displacement is measured relative to an 
undisturbed point on the vehicle body.
    S9.4.2 Provisions for simultaneous and sequential testing. (a) In 
the case of vehicle seat assemblies equipped with more than one child 
restraint anchorage system, the lower anchorages may, at the agency's 
option, be tested simultaneously. However, forces may not be applied 
simultaneously for any two adjacent seating positions whose

[[Page 1075]]

midpoints are less than 400 mm apart, as measured in accordance with 
S9.4.2(a)(1) and (2) and Figure 20.
    (1) The midpoint of the seating position lies in the vertical 
longitudinal plane that is equidistant from vertical longitudinal planes 
through the geometric center of each of the two lower anchorages at the 
seating position.
    (2) Measure the distance between the vertical longitudinal planes 
passing through the midpoints of the adjacent seating positions, as 
measured along a line perpendicular to the planes.
    (b) The lower anchorages of a particular child restraint anchorage 
system will not be tested if one or both of the anchorages have been 
previously tested under this standard.
    S9.5 Marking and conspicuity of the lower anchorages. Each vehicle 
shall comply with S9.5(a) or (b).
    (a) Above each bar installed pursuant to S4, the vehicle shall be 
permanently marked with a circle:
    (1) That is not less than 13 mm in diameter;
    (2) That is either solid or open, with or without words, symbols or 
pictograms, provided that if words, symbols or pictograms are used, 
their meaning is explained to the consumer in writing, such as in the 
vehicle's owners manual; and
    (3) That is located such that its center is on each seat back 
between 50 and 100 mm above or on the seat cushion 100 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>25 mm forward of the intersection of the vertical 
transverse and horizontal longitudinal planes intersecting at the 
horizontal centerline of each lower anchorage, as illustrated in Figure 
22. The center of the circle must be in the vertical longitudinal plane 
that passes through the center of the bar (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25 mm).
    (4) The circle may be on a tag.
    (b) The vehicle shall be configured such that the following is 
visible: Each of the bars installed pursuant to S4, or a permanently 
attached guide device for each bar. The bar or guide device must be 
visible without the compression of the seat cushion or seat back, when 
the bar or device is viewed, in a vertical longitudinal plane passing 
through the center of the bar or guide device, along a line making an 
upward 30 degree angle with a horizontal plane. Seat backs are in the 
nominal design riding position. The bars may be covered by a removable 
cap or cover, provided that the cap or cover is permanently marked with 
words, symbols or pictograms whose meaning is explained to the consumer 
in written form as part of the owner's manual.
    S10. Test conditions for testing the lower anchorages. The test 
conditions described in this paragraph apply to the test procedures in 
S11.
    (a) Adjust vehicle seats to their full rearward and full downward 
position and place the seat backs in their most upright position. When 
SFAD 2 is used in testing and cannot be attached to the lower anchorages 
with the seat back in this position, adjust the seat back as recommended 
by the manufacturer in its instructions for attaching child restraints. 
If no instructions are provided, adjust the seat back to the position 
closest to the upright position that enables SFAD 2 to attach to the 
lower anchorages.
    (b) Head restraints are adjusted in accordance with the 
manufacturer's instructions, provided pursuant to S12, as to how the 
head restraints should be adjusted when using the child restraint 
anchorage system. If instructions with regard to head restraint 
adjustment are not provided pursuant to S12, the head restraints are 
adjusted to any position.
    S11. Test procedure. Each vehicle shall meet the requirements of 
S9.4 when tested according to the following procedures. Where a range of 
values is specified, the vehicle shall be able to meet the requirements 
at all points within the range.
    (a) Forward force direction. Place SFAD 2 in the vehicle seating 
position and attach it to the two lower anchorages of the child 
restraint anchorage system. Do not attach the tether anchorage. A 
rearward force of 135 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>15 N is applied to the 
center of the lower front crossbar of SFAD 2 to press the device against 
the seat back as the fore-aft position of the rearward extensions of the 
SFAD is adjusted to remove any slack or tension. Apply a preload force 
of 500 N at point X of the test device. Increase the pull force as 
linearly as practicable to a full force application of 11,000 N in not 
less than

[[Page 1076]]

24 seconds and not more than 30 seconds, and maintain at an 11,000 N 
level for 1 second.
    (b) Lateral force direction. Place SFAD 2 in the vehicle seating 
position and attach it to the two lower anchorages of the child 
restraint anchorage system. Do not attach the tether anchorage. A 
rearward force of 135 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>15 N is applied to the 
center of the lower front crossbar of SFAD 2 to press the device against 
the seat back as the fore-aft position of the rearward extensions of the 
SFAD is adjusted to remove any slack or tension. Apply a preload force 
of 500 N at point X of the test device. Increase the pull force as 
linearly as practicable to a full force application of 5,000 N in not 
less than 24 seconds and not more than 30 seconds, and maintain at a 
5,000 N level for 1 second.
    S12. Written instructions. The vehicle must provide written 
instructions, in English, for using the tether anchorages and the child 
restraint anchorage system in the vehicle. If the vehicle has an owner's 
manual, the instructions must be in that manual. The instructions shall:
    (a) Indicate which seating positions in the vehicle are equipped 
with tether anchorages and child restraint anchorage systems;
    (b) In the case of vehicles required to be marked as specified in 
paragraphs S4.1, S9.5(a), or S15.4, explain the meaning of markings 
provided to locate the lower anchorages of child restraint anchorage 
systems; and
    (c) Include instructions that provide a step-by-step procedure, 
including diagrams, for properly attaching a child restraint system's 
tether strap to the tether anchorages.
    S13. Tether anchorage phase-in requirements.
    S13.1 Passenger cars manufactured on or after September 1, 1999 and 
before September 1, 2000 shall comply with S13.1.1 through S13.2. At 
anytime during the production year ending August 31, 2000, each 
manufacturer shall, upon request from the Office of Vehicle Safety 
Compliance, provide information identifying the passenger cars (by make, 
model and vehicle identification number) that have been certified as 
complying with the tether anchorage requirements of this standard. The 
manufacturer's designation of a passenger car as a certified vehicle is 
irrevocable.
    S13.1.1 Subject to S13.2, for passenger cars manufactured on or 
after September 1, 1999 and before September 1, 2000, the number of 
vehicles complying with S4.2 shall be not less than 80 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of passenger cars 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1996 and before September 1, 1999; 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production of passenger cars manufactured on 
or after September 1, 1999 and before September 1, 2000.
    S13.1.2 For the purpose of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer under S13.1.1, a vehicle produced by more than one 
manufacturer shall be attributed to a single manufacturer as provided in 
S13.1.2(a) through (c), subject to S13.2.
    (a) A vehicle which is imported shall be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer which markets the vehicle.
    (c) A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer must be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR part 585, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S13.1.2(a) or (b).
    S13.2 For the purposes of calculating average annual production of 
passenger cars for each manufacturer and the number of passenger cars 
manufactured by each manufacturer under S13.1, each passenger car that 
is excluded from the requirement to provide tether anchorages is not 
counted.
    S13.3 Until May 1, 2001, vehicles manufactured by a final-stage 
manufacturer or alterer need not be equipped with the tether anchorages 
required by S4.3 of this standard. Vehicles manufactured by a final-
stage manufacturer or alterer on or after May 1, 2001 must

[[Page 1077]]

be equipped with the tether anchorages specified in S4.3.
    S14. Lower anchorages phase-in requirements for vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2000 and before September 1, 2002.
    S14.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2000 and before 
September 1, 2002 shall comply with S14.1.1 through S14.1.2. At anytime 
during the production years ending August 31, 2001, and August 31, 2002, 
each manufacturer shall, upon request from the Office of Vehicle Safety 
Compliance, provide information identifying the vehicles (by make, model 
and vehicle identification number) that have been certified as complying 
with the child restraint anchorage requirements of this standard. The 
manufacturer's designation of a vehicle as a certified vehicle is 
irrevocable.
    S14.1.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2000 and 
before September 1, 2001. Subject to S14.4, for vehicles manufactured on 
or after September 1, 2000 and before September 1, 2001, the number of 
vehicles complying with S4.3 shall be not less than 20 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1997 and before September 1, 2000; 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2000 and 
before September 1, 2001.
    S14.1.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2001 and 
before September 1, 2002. Subject to S14.4, for vehicles manufactured on 
or after September 1, 2001 and before September 1, 2002, the number of 
vehicles complying with S4.3 shall be not less than 50 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1998 and before September 1, 2001; 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2001 and 
before September 1, 2002.
    S14.2 Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S14.2.1 For the purpose of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer under S14.1.1 through S14.1.2, a vehicle produced 
by more than one manufacturer shall be attributed to a single 
manufacturer as follows, subject to S14.2.2.
    (a) A vehicle which is imported shall be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer which markets the vehicle.
    S14.2.2 A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer must be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR part 585, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S14.2.1.
    S14.3 Alternative phase-in schedules. (a) Final-stage manufacturers 
and alterers. A final-stage manufacturer or alterer may, at its option, 
comply with the requirements set forth in S14.3(a)(1) and (2), instead 
of the requirements set forth in S14.1.1 through S14.1.2.
    (1) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2000 and before 
September 1, 2002 are not required to be equipped with the lower 
anchorages specified in this standard.
    (2) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2002 must be 
equipped with the lower anchorages specified in this standard.
    (b) Small volume manufacturers. Vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2000 and before September 1, 2002 that are manufactured by 
a manufacturer that produces fewer than 5,000 vehicles worldwide 
annually are not required to provide the lower anchorages specified in 
this standard.
    S14.4 For the purposes of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer under S14.1.1 and S14.1.2, each vehicle that is 
excluded from the requirement to provide child restraint anchorage 
systems is not counted.
    S15 Alternative to complying with the requirements of S9. As an 
alternative to complying with the requirements of S9, a vehicle 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1999 and before September

[[Page 1078]]

1, 2004 may, at the manufacturer's option (with said option irrevocably 
selected prior to, or at the time of, certification of the vehicle), 
meet the requirements in S15 of this standard. Vehicles manufactured on 
or after September 1, 2004 must meet the requirements of S9 of this 
standard.
    S15.1 Dimensions and installation requirements.
    S15.1.1 General. The vehicle anchorages are positioned near the seat 
bight. The location of the anchorages is defined with respect to the 
CRF. If the vehicle seat is adjustable, it is adjusted as recommended by 
the vehicle manufacturer for use with child restraint systems.
    S15.1.2 Anchorage dimensions and location.
    S15.1.2.1 The lower anchorages shall consist of two bars that--
    (a) Are 6 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>.1 mm in diameter;
    (b) Are straight, horizontal and transverse;
    (c) Are not less than 25 mm in length;
    (d)-(e) [Reserved]
    (f) Are permanently attached to the vehicle or vehicle seat such 
that they can only be removed by use of a tool, such as a screwdriver or 
wrench.
    S15.1.2.2 (a) The anchorage bars are located at the vehicle seating 
position with the aid of and with respect to the CRF rearward 
extensions, with the CRF placed against or near the vehicle seat back. 
With the CRF attached to the anchorages and resting on the seat cushion, 
the bottom surface shall have attitude angles within the limits in the 
following table, angles measured relative to the vehicle horizontal, 
longitudinal and transverse reference planes.

                          Table to S15.1.2.2(a)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pitch......................................................      15[deg]
                                                                  <plus-
                                                             minus<ls-th
                                                                 n0[deg]
Roll.......................................................       0[deg]
                                                                  <plus-
                                                             minus<ls-th
                                                                  n[deg]
Yaw........................................................       0[deg]
                                                                  <plus-
                                                             minus<ls-th
                                                                 n0[deg]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: An explanation of the above angles is given in Figure 1.

    (b) With adjustable seats adjusted as described in S15.1.2.2(c), 
each lower anchorage bar shall be located so that a vertical transverse 
plane intersecting the center of the bar is:
    (1) Not more than 70 mm behind point Z of the CRF, measured parallel 
to the bottom surface of the CRF and to the center of the bar, with the 
CRF rear surface against the seat back; and
    (2) Not less than 120 mm behind the vehicle seating reference point, 
measured horizontally and to the center of the bar. (Note: To facilitate 
installation of the CRF in a vehicle seat, the CRF may be constructed of 
smaller separable parts and assembled in the vehicle seat. 
Alternatively, vehicle components may be removed to allow access.)
    (c) Adjustable seats are adjusted as recommended by the vehicle 
manufacturer for use with child restraint systems.
    S15.2 Static Strength Requirements.
    S15.2.1 The strength of the anchorages shall be determined using the 
procedure of S15.3 to apply forces to the SFAD 2, installed in the 
vehicle seating position and engaged with the anchorages. The vehicle 
seat shall be installed in the vehicle, or in sufficient parts of the 
vehicle so as to be representative of the strength and rigidity of the 
vehicle structure. If the seat is adjustable, it shall be placed in the 
position recommended by the vehicle manufacturer for use with child 
restraint systems. If no adjusted position is recommended, the seat 
shall be placed in any position, at the agency's option.
    S15.2.2 Horizontal excursion of point X during application of the 8 
kN and 5 kN forces must be not more than 125 mm, after preloading the 
device. The amount of displacement is measured relative to an 
undisturbed point on the vehicle body.
    S15.3 Forces and directions.
    S15.3.1 A rearward force of 135 N <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>15 N shall 
be applied to the center of the lower front crossbar of SFAD 2 to press 
the device against the seat back as the fore-aft position of the 
rearward extensions of the SFAD is adjusted to remove any slack or 
tension. Forces shall be applied to SFAD 2 in forward and lateral 
directions according to the following table.

               Table to S15.3.1--Directions of Test Forces
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Forward.........................  0[deg] <plus-       8 kN <plus-
                                   minus<ls-thn-eq>5   minus<ls-thn-eq>0
                                   [deg].              .25 kN

[[Page 1079]]

 
Lateral.........................  75[deg] <plus-      5 kN <plus-
                                   minus<ls-thn-eq>5   minus<ls-thn-eq>0
                                   [deg] (to both      .25 kN
                                   sides of straight
                                   forward).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S15.3.2 Forces in the forward direction shall be applied with an 
initial force application angle of 10 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees 
above the horizontal. Lateral forces shall be applied horizontally 
(0[deg] <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5[deg]). A pre-load force of 500 N <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>25 N shall be applied at the prescribed loading point 
(point X) in Figure 17. The force shall be increased to 8 kN <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.25 kN for forward tests, or to 5 kN <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.25 kN for lateral tests. Full application of the force 
shall be achieved within a time period of 2 seconds or less. The force 
shall be maintained for a period of 0.25 seconds <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 seconds.
    S15.3.3 Provisions for simultaneous and sequential testing. (a) If 
anchorages for more than one child restraint anchorage system are 
installed in the vehicle seat assembly and not directly into the vehicle 
structure, the forces described in S15.3 may, at the agency's option, be 
applied simultaneously to SFADs engaged with the anchorages. However, 
that force may not be applied simultaneously to SFADs engaged at any two 
adjacent seating positions whose midpoints are less than 400 mm apart, 
as measured in accordance with S15.3.3(a)(1) and (2) and Figure 20.
    (1) The midpoint of the seating position lies in the vertical 
longitudinal plane that is equidistant from vertical longitudinal planes 
through the geometric center of each of the two lower anchorages at the 
seating position.
    (2) Measure the distance between the vertical longitudinal planes 
passing through the midpoints of the adjacent seating positions, as 
measured along a line perpendicular to the planes.
    (b) The lower anchorages of a particular child restraint anchorage 
system will not be tested if one or both of the anchorages have been 
previously tested under this standard.
    S15.4 Marking and conspicuity of the lower anchorages. At least one 
anchorage bar (when deployed for use), one guidance fixture, or one seat 
marking feature shall be readily visible to the person installing the 
CRF. If guidance fixtures are used to meet this requirement, the 
fixture(s) (although removable) must be installed. Storable anchorages 
shall be provided with a tell-tale or label that is visible when the 
anchorage is stored.
    S16. Phase-in of strength requirements for vehicles manufactured on 
or after September 1, 2004 and before September 1, 2005. At anytime 
during the production year ending August 31, 2005, each manufacturer 
shall, upon request from the Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance, 
provide information identifying the vehicles (by make, model and vehicle 
identification number) that have been certified as complying with S6.3.1 
or S6.3.4, and with S9.4 or S15.2 and S15.3. The manufacturer's 
designation of a vehicle as meeting the particular requirement is 
irrevocable.
    S16.1 Tether anchorage phase-in of strength requirements. For 
vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2004 and before September 
1, 2005, the number of vehicles complying with S6.3.1 shall be not less 
than 90 percent of:
    (a) the manufacturer's average annual production of vehicle 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2001 and before September 1, 2004; 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2004 and 
before September 1, 2005.
    S16.2 Lower anchorages phase-in of strength requirements.
    For vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2004 and before 
September 1, 2005, the number of vehicles complying with S9.4 shall be 
not less than 90 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicle 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2001 and before September 1, 2004; 
or
    (b) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2003 and 
before September 1, 2004.
    S16.3 Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S16.3.1 For the purpose of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer under S16.1 and S16.2, a vehicle produced by more 
than one manufacturer shall be attributed to a single manufacturer as 
follows, subject to S16.3.2.

[[Page 1080]]

    (a) A vehicle which is imported shall be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    S16.3.2 A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer must be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR part 585, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S16.3.1.
    S16.4 Alternative phase-in schedules.
    (a) Final-stage manufacturers and alterers. A final-stage 
manufacturer or alterer may, at its option, comply with the requirements 
set forth in S16.4(a)(1) and (2), instead of the requirements set forth 
in S16.1 through S16.2.
    (1) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2004 and before 
September 1, 2005 may meet the requirements of S6.3.4 instead of S6.3.1, 
and may meet the requirements of S15.2 and S15.3 instead of S9.4.
    (2) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 must meet 
the requirements of S6.3.4 and S9.4.
    (b) Small volume manufacturers. Vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2004 and before September 1, 2005 that are manufactured by 
a manufacturer that produces fewer than 5,000 vehicles worldwide 
annually may meet the requirements of S6.3.4 instead of S6.3.1, and may 
meet the requirements of S15.2 and S15.3 instead of S9.4. Vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 must meet the requirements of 
S6.3.4 and S9.4.

[[Page 1081]]

                        Figures to Sec. 571.225
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.014


[[Page 1082]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.015


[[Page 1083]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.016


[[Page 1084]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.017


[[Page 1085]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.018


[[Page 1086]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.019


[[Page 1087]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.020


[[Page 1088]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.021


[[Page 1089]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.022


[[Page 1090]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.023


[[Page 1091]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.024


[[Page 1092]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.025


[[Page 1093]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR05MR99.016


[[Page 1094]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR05MR99.017


[[Page 1095]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR05MR99.018


[[Page 1096]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.026


[[Page 1097]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.027


[[Page 1098]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27JN03.000


[[Page 1099]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.029


[[Page 1100]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU99.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11AU04.551


[[Page 1101]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11AU04.552

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR11AU04.553


[64 FR 10823, Mar. 5, 1999, as amended at 64 FR 47587, Aug. 31, 1999; 65 
FR 46640, July 31, 2000; 68 FR 24667, May 8, 2003; 68 FR 38226, June 27, 
2003; 69 FR 48823, Aug. 11, 2004; 69 FR 60565, Oct. 12, 2004; 69 FR 
70915, Dec. 8, 2004]

[[Page 1102]]


<R05>
Sec. 571.226  Standard No. 226; Ejection Mitigation.

    S1. Purpose and Scope. This standard establishes requirements for 
ejection mitigation systems to reduce the likelihood of complete and 
partial ejections of vehicle occupants through side windows during 
rollovers or side impact events.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, and to 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses with a gross vehicle 
weight rating of 4,536 kg or less, except walk-in vans, modified roof 
vehicles and convertibles. Also excluded from this standard are law 
enforcement vehicles, correctional institution vehicles, taxis and 
limousines, if they have a fixed security partition separating the 1st 
and 2nd or 2nd and 3rd rows and if they are produced by more than one 
manufacturer or are altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7).
    S3. Definitions.
    Ejection impactor means a device specified in S7.1 of this standard 
that is a component of the ejection mitigation test device and is the 
moving mass that strikes the ejection mitigation countermeasure.
    Ejection impactor targeting point means the intersection of the y-
axis of the ejection headform and the outer surface of the ejection 
headform.
    Ejection mitigation countermeasure means a device or devices, except 
seat belts, integrated into the vehicle that reduce the likelihood of 
occupant ejection through a side window opening, and that requires no 
action by the occupant for activation.
    Ejection propulsion mechanism means a device that is a component of 
the ejection mitigation test device consisting of a mechanism capable of 
propelling the ejection impactor and constraining it to move along its 
axis or shaft.
    Limited-line manufacturer means a manufacturer that sells three or 
fewer carlines, as that term is defined in 49 CFR 583.4, in the United 
States during a production year.
    Modified roof means the replacement roof on a motor vehicle whose 
original roof has been removed, in part or in total.
    Row means a set of one or more seats whose seat outlines do not 
overlap with the seat outline of any other seats, when all seats are 
adjusted to their rearmost normal riding or driving position, when 
viewed from the side.
    Seat outline means the outer limits of a seat projected laterally 
onto a vertical longitudinal vehicle plane.
    Side daylight opening means, other than a door opening, the locus of 
all points where a horizontal line, perpendicular to the vehicle 
vertical longitudinal plane, is tangent to the periphery of the opening. 
The periphery includes surfaces 100 millimeters inboard of the inside 
surface of the window glazing and 25 mm outboard of the outside surface 
of the side glazing. The periphery excludes the following: any flexible 
gasket material or weather stripping used to create a waterproof seal 
between the glazing or door and the vehicle interior; grab handles used 
to facilitate occupant egress and ingress; and any part of a seat.
    Small manufacturer means an original vehicle manufacturer that 
produces or assembles fewer than 5,000 vehicles annually for sale in the 
United States.
    Target means the x-z plane projection of the ejection headform face 
as shown in Figure 1.
    Walk-in van means a special cargo/mail delivery vehicle that only 
has a driver designated seating position. The vehicle has a sliding (or 
folding) side door and a roof clearance that enables a person of medium 
stature to enter the passenger compartment area in an up-right position.
    Zero displacement plane means, a vertical plane parallel to the 
vehicle longitudinal centerline and tangent to the most outboard surface 
of the ejection headform when the headform is aligned with an impact 
target location and just touching the inside surface of a window 
covering the side daylight opening.
    S4. Phase-in, performance and other requirements.
    S4.1 Phase-in requirements.
    S4.1.1 Except as provided in S4.1.3 of this standard, a percentage 
of each manufacturer's vehicle production, as specified in S8 of this 
standard, manufactured on or after September 1, 2013 to August 31, 2017, 
shall meet the requirements of S4.2. Vehicles that are

[[Page 1103]]

not subject to the phase-in may be certified as meeting the requirements 
specified in this standard.
    S4.1.2 Except as provided in S4.1.3 of this section, each vehicle 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2017 must meet the requirements of 
S4.2 without use of advanced credits.
    S4.1.3 Exceptions from the phase-in; special allowances.
    (a) Vehicles produced by a small manufacturer and by a limited line 
manufacturer are not subject to S4.1.1 of this standard, but are subject 
to S4.1.2.
    (b) Vehicles that are altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) 
before September 1, 2018, after having been previously certified in 
accordance with part 567 of this chapter, and vehicles manufactured in 
two or more stages before September 1, 2018, are not required to meet 
the requirements of S4.2. Vehicles that are altered on or after 
September 1, 2018, and vehicles that are manufactured in two or more 
stages on or after September 1, 2018, must meet the requirements of 
S4.2.
    S4.2 Performance and other requirements.
    S4.2.1 When the ejection propulsion mechanism propels the ejection 
impactor into the impact target locations of each side daylight opening 
of a vehicle according to the test procedures specified in S5 of this 
standard, the most outboard surface of the ejection headform must not 
displace more than 100 millimeters beyond the zero displacement plane.
    S4.2.1.1 No vehicle shall use movable glazing as the sole means of 
meeting the displacement limit of S4.2.1.
    S4.2.1.2 Vehicles with an ejection mitigation countermeasure that 
deploys in the event of a rollover must deploy the countermeasure for 
the side daylight opening being tested according to the procedure 
specified in S5 of this standard.
    S4.2.1.3 If a side daylight opening contains no target locations, 
the impact test of S4.2.1 is not performed on that opening.
    S4.2.2 Vehicles that have an ejection mitigation countermeasure that 
deploys in the event of a rollover must have a monitoring system with a 
readiness indicator. The indicator shall monitor its own readiness and 
must be clearly visible from the driver's designated seating position. 
The same readiness indicator required by S4.5.2 of FMVSS No. 208 may be 
used to meet the requirement. A list of the elements of the system being 
monitored by the indicator shall be included with the information 
furnished in accordance with S4.2.3.
    S4.2.3 Written information.
    (a) Vehicles with an ejection mitigation countermeasure that deploys 
in the event of a rollover must be described as such in the vehicle's 
owner manual or in other written information provided by the vehicle 
manufacturer to the consumer.
    (b) Vehicles that have an ejection mitigation countermeasure that 
deploys in the event of a rollover must include in written information a 
discussion of the readiness indicator required by S4.2.2, specifying a 
list of the elements of the system being monitored by the indicator, a 
discussion of the purpose and location of the telltale, and instructions 
to the consumer on the steps to take if the telltale is illuminated.
    S4.2.4 Technical Documentation. For vehicles that have an ejection 
mitigation countermeasure that deploys in the event of a rollover, the 
vehicle manufacturer must make available to the agency, upon request, 
the following information: A discussion of the sensor system used to 
deploy the countermeasure, including the pertinent inputs to the 
computer or calculations within the computer and how its algorithm uses 
that information to determine if the countermeasure should be deployed.
    S5. Test procedures.
    S5.1 Demonstrate compliance with S4.2 of this standard in accordance 
with the test procedures specified in this standard, under the 
conditions of S6, using the equipment described in S7. In the impact 
test described by these procedures, target locations are identified 
(S5.2) and the zero displacement plane location is determined (S5.3). 
The glazing is pre-broken, fully retracted or removed prior to the 
impact test (S5.4). The countermeasure is deployed, if applicable, and 
an ejection

[[Page 1104]]

impactor (see S7.1) strikes the countermeasure at the impact target 
locations, at the specified speeds and times (S5.5). The lateral 
displacement of the ejection impactor beyond the zero displacement plane 
is measured.
    S5.2 Determination of impact target locations.
    S5.2.1 Boundary of target location.
    S5.2.1.1 Initial determination of offset line. Determine the 
location of an offset-line within the side daylight opening by 
projecting each point of the side daylight opening laterally onto a 
vehicle vertical longitudinal plane. Move each point by 25<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 mm towards the center of the side daylight opening 
projection and perpendicular to a line tangent to the projection at that 
point, while maintaining the point on a vehicle vertical longitudinal 
plane.
    S5.2.1.2 Rearmost limit of offset line.
    (a) Seats fixed in a forward facing direction. Except as provided in 
S5.2.1.2(b), if an offset line extends rearward of a transverse vertical 
vehicle plane located behind the seating reference point at the distance 
specified in 5.2.1.2(a)(1) or (2), the transverse vertical vehicle plane 
defines the rearward edge of the offset line for the purposes of 
determining target locations.
    (1) For a vehicle with fewer than 3 rows--1,400 mm behind the 
rearmost SgRP.
    (2) For a vehicle with 3 or more rows--600 mm behind the 3rd row 
SgRP.
    (b) Seats not fixed in a forward facing direction. When the last row 
seat adjacent to the opening, in the case of a vehicle with fewer than 3 
rows, or the 3rd row seat adjacent to the opening, in the case of a 
vehicle with 3 or more rows, is not fixed in the forward facing 
direction, the offset line may extend farther rearward than specified in 
S5.2.1.2(a) under the following conditions. With the seat in any non-
forward facing orientation, the seat back set at an inclination position 
closest to the manufacturer's design seat back angle, and all other seat 
adjustments at any possible position of adjustment, determine the 
location of a vertical transverse vehicle plane located behind the 
portion of the seat rearmost in the vehicle, at the distance specified 
in 5.2.1.2(b)(1) and (2). The boundary of target locations extends to 
this vertical plane if it is farther rearward than the plane determined 
in S5.2.1.2(a).
    (1) For a vehicle with fewer than 3 rows--1,400 mm behind the 
portion of the seat rearmost in the vehicle.
    (2) For a vehicle with 3 or more rows--600 mm behind the portion of 
the seat rearmost in the vehicle, for a seat in the 3rd row.
    (c) Vehicles with partitions or bulkheads. If a vehicle has a fixed 
traverse partition or bulkhead through which there is no occupant access 
and behind which there are no designated seating positions, a vertical 
transverse vehicle plane 25 mm forward of the most forward portion of 
the partition or bulkhead defines the rearward edge of the offset line 
for the purposes of determining target locations when said plane is 
forward of the limiting plane defined in S5.2.1.2(a) or (b).
    S5.2.2 Preliminary target locations.
    (a) To identify the impact target locations, the following 
procedures are performed with the x and z axes of the target, shown in 
Figure 1 (provided for illustration purposes), aligned within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>1 degree of the vehicle longitudinal and vertical axes, 
respectively, and the target y axis pointing in the outboard direction.
    (b) Place targets at any location inside the offset-line where the 
target is tangent to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 mm of the offset-
line at just two or three points (see Figure 2) (figure provided for 
illustration purposes).
    S5.2.3 Determination of primary target locations. Divide the side 
daylight opening into four quadrants by passing a vertical line and a 
horizontal line, in a vehicle vertical longitudinal plane, through the 
geometric center of the side daylight opening.
    S5.2.3.1 Front windows. For any side daylight opening forward of the 
vehicle B-pillar, the primary quadrants are the forward-lower and 
rearward-upper.
    S5.2.3.2 Rear windows. For any side daylight opening rearward of the 
B-pillar, the primary quadrants are the forward-upper and rearward-
lower.
    S5.2.3.3 If a primary quadrant contains only one target center, that 
target is the primary target for that quadrant (see Figure 3) (figure 
provided for

[[Page 1105]]

illustration purposes). If there is more than one target center in a 
primary quadrant, the primary target for that quadrant is the lowest 
target in a lower quadrant and the highest target in an upper quadrant. 
If there is a primary quadrant that does not contain a target center, 
the target center closest to the primary quadrant outline is the primary 
target.
    S5.2.4 Determination of secondary target locations.
    S5.2.4.1 Front windows. Measure the horizontal distance between the 
centers of the primary targets. For a side daylight opening forward of 
the B-pillar, place one secondary target center rearward of the forward 
primary target by one-third of the horizontal distance between the 
primary target centers and tangent with upper portion of the offset-
line. Place another secondary target center rearward of the forward 
primary target by two-thirds of the horizontal distance between the 
primary target centers and tangent with the lower portion of the offset-
line (see figure 4) (figure provided for illustration purposes).
    S5.2.4.2 Rear windows. For side daylight openings rearward of the B-
pillar, place one secondary target center rearward of the forward 
primary target by one-third of the horizontal distance between the 
primary target centers and tangent with lower portion of the offset-
line. Place another secondary target center rearward of the forward 
primary target by two-thirds of the horizontal distance between the 
primary target centers and tangent with the upper portion of the offset-
line (see Figure 4) (figure provided for illustration purposes).
    S5.2.5 Target adjustment.
    S5.2.5.1 Target elimination and reconstitution.
    S5.2.5.1.1 Target elimination. Determine the horizontal and vertical 
distance between the centers of the targets. If the minimum distance 
between the z axes of the targets is less than 135 mm and the minimum 
distance between the x axes of the targets is less than 170 mm, 
eliminate the targets in the order of priority given in steps 1 through 
4 of Table 1 (see Figure 5) (figure provided for illustration purposes). 
In each case, both the z axes of the targets must be closer than 135 mm 
and x axes of the targets must be closer than 170 mm. If the minimum 
distance between the z axes of the targets is not less than 135 mm or 
the minimum distance between the y axes of the targets is not less than 
170 mm, do not eliminate the target. Continue checking all the targets 
listed in steps 1 through 4 of Table 1.

 Table 1--Priority List of Target Distance To Be Checked Against Limits
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               Eliminate this target if
                                               distances between z axes
                   Measure distance from z     of targets and x axes of
      Step        axis to z axis and x axis    targets are less than 135
                 to x axis for these targets        mm and 170 mm,
                                                     respectively
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1..............  Upper Secondary to Lower     Upper Secondary.
                  Secondary.
2..............  Upper Primary to Upper or    Upper or Remaining
                  Remaining Secondary.         Secondary.
3..............  Lower Primary to Lower or    Lower or Remaining
                  Remaining Secondary.         Secondary.
4..............  Upper Primary to Lower       Upper Primary.
                  Primary.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    S5.2.5.1.2 Target reconstitution. If after following the procedure 
given in S5.2.5.1.1, there are only two targets remaining, determine the 
absolute distance between the centers of these targets. If this distance 
is greater than or equal to 360 mm, place a target such that its center 
bisects a line connecting the centers of the remaining targets.
    S5.2.5.2 Target reorientation--90 degree rotation. If after 
following the procedure given in S5.2.5.1 there are less than four 
targets in a side daylight opening, repeat the procedure in 5.2 through 
5.2.5.1.2, with a modification to S5.2 as follows. Reorient the target 
by rotating it 90 degrees about the y axis of the target such that the 
target positive z axis is aligned within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 degree 
of the vehicle longitudinal axis, pointing in the direction of the 
vehicle positive x axis. If after performing the procedure in this 
section, the remaining targets exceed the number of targets

[[Page 1106]]

determined with the original orientation of the target, the reoriented 
targets represent the final target locations for the side daylight 
opening.
    S5.2.5.3 Target reorientation--incremental rotation. If after 
following the procedure given in S5.2.5.2 there are no targets in a side 
daylight opening, starting with the target in the position defined in 
S5.2.2.2(a), reorient the target by rotating it in 5 degree increments 
about the y axis of the target by rotating the target positive z axis 
toward the vehicle positive x axis. At each increment of rotation, 
attempt to fit the target within the offset line of the side daylight 
opening. At the first increment of rotation where the target will fit, 
place the target center as close as possible to the geometric center of 
the side daylight opening. If more than one position exists that is 
closest to the geometric center of the side daylight opening, select the 
lowest.
    S5.3 Determination of zero displacement plane. The glazing covering 
the target location of the side daylight opening being tested is intact 
and in place in the case of fixed glazing and intact and fully closed in 
the case of movable glazing. With the ejection impactor targeting point 
aligned within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 mm of the center of any target 
location specified in S5.2, and with the ejection impactor on the inside 
of the vehicle, slowly move the impactor towards the window until 
contact is made with the interior of the glazing with no more than 20 N 
of pressure being applied to the window. The location of the most 
outboard surface of the headform establishes the zero displacement plane 
for this target location.
    S5.4 Window position and condition.Subject to S5.5(b), prior to 
impact testing, the glazing covering the target location must be removed 
from the side daylight opening, fully retracted, or pre-broken according 
to the procedure in S5.4.1, at the vehicle manufacturer's option.
    S5.4.1 Window glazing pre-breaking procedure.
    S5.4.1.1 Breakage pattern. Locate the geometric center of the side 
daylight opening, established in S5.2.3 of this standard. Mark the 
outside surface of the window glazing in a horizontal and vertical grid 
of points separated by 75<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 mm with one point 
coincident within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 mm of the geometric center of 
the side daylight opening (see Figure 6) (figure provided for 
illustration purposes). Mark the inside surface of the window glazing in 
a horizontal and vertical grid of points separated by 75<plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>2 mm with the entire grid horizontally offset by 37.5 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 2 mm from the grid of points on the outside of 
the glazing.
    S5.4.1.2 Breakage method.
    (a) Start with the inside surface of the window and forward-most, 
lowest mark made as specified in S5.4.1.1 of this standard. Use a center 
punch in this procedure. The punch tip has a 5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 
mm diameter prior to coming to a point. The spring is adjusted to 
require 150 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>25 N of force to activate the punch. 
Only once at each mark location, apply pressure to activate the spring 
in the center punch in a direction which is perpendicular to the tangent 
of the window surface at the point of contact, within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 degrees. Apply the pressure only once at each mark 
location, even if the glazing does not break or no hole results.
    (b) Use a 100 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm x 100 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm piece of plywood with a minimum thickness of 18 mm 
as a reaction surface on the opposite side of the glazing to prevent to 
the extent possible the window surface from deforming by more than 10 mm 
when pressure is being applied to the hole-punch.
    (c) Continue the procedure with the center punch by moving rearward 
in the grid until the end of a row is reached. When the end of a row is 
reached, move to the forward-most mark on the next higher row and 
continue the procedure. Continue in this pattern until the procedure is 
conducted at each marked location on the inside surface of the glazing.
    (d) Repeat the process on the outside surface of the window.
    (e) If punching a hole causes the glazing to disintegrate, halt the 
breakage procedure and proceed with the headform impact test.
    S5.5 Impact speeds and time delays. The ejection impactor speeds 
specified below must be achieved after propulsion has ceased.
    (a) Vehicles with or without an ejection mitigation countermeasure 
that deploys in

[[Page 1107]]

a rollover. For a vehicle with an ejection mitigation countermeasure 
that deploys in a rollover, using the ejection propulsion mechanism, 
propel the ejection impactor such that it first strikes the 
countermeasure, while aligned with any target location specified in S5.2 
of this standard, 1.5 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 seconds after activation 
of the ejection mitigation countermeasure that deploys in the event of a 
rollover, and at a speed of 20 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 km/h. For a 
vehicle without an ejection mitigation countermeasure that deploys in a 
rollover, propel the ejection impactor at any time such that it first 
strikes the countermeasure, while aligned with any target location 
specified in S5.2 of this standard, at a speed of 20 <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 km/h.
    (b) Vehicles with an ejection mitigation countermeasure that deploys 
in a rollover. For a vehicle with an ejection mitigation countermeasure 
that deploys in a rollover, remove or fully retract any movable glazing 
from the side daylight opening. Using the ejection propulsion mechanism, 
propel the ejection impactor such that it first strikes the 
countermeasure, while aligned with any target location specified in S5.2 
of this standard, 6.0 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.1 seconds after activation 
of an ejection mitigation countermeasure that deploys in the event of a 
rollover, and at a speed of 16 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.5 km/h.
    (c) An ejection mitigation countermeasure that deploys in the event 
of a rollover is described as such in the vehicle's owner manual or in 
other written information provided by the vehicle manufacturer to the 
consumer.
    S5.6 Ejection impactor orientation.
    S5.6.1 If the targets for the side daylight opening being impacted 
were determined by the procedure specified in S5.2.2 through S5.2.5.1 
only, the ejection impactor orientation is as follows. At the time of 
launch of the ejection impactor the x, y and z axes of the ejection 
headform must be aligned within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 degree of the 
vehicle longitudinal, transverse and vertical axes, respectively.
    S5.6.2 If the targets for the side daylight opening being impacted 
were determined by the procedure specified in S5.2.5.2, the ejection 
impactor orientation is as follows. At the time of launch the ejection 
impactor is rotated by 90 degrees about the ejection headform y axis, 
from the orientation specified in S5.6.1, resulting in the headform 
positive z axis pointing in the direction of the vehicle positive x 
axis.
    S5.6.3 If the targets for the side daylight opening being impacted 
were determined by the procedure specified in S5.2.5.3, the ejection 
impactor orientation is as follows. At the time of launch the ejection 
impactor is rotated about the y axis of the ejection headform by 
rotating the headform positive z axis towards the vehicle positive x 
axis, in the increment determined to be necessary in S5.2.5.3 to fit the 
target within the side daylight opening.
    S5.6.4 After any test, extend the ejection impactor to the zero 
plane and determine that x, y and z axes of the ejection headform remain 
aligned within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1 degree of its orientation at 
launch as specified in S5.6.1--5.6.3.
    S6 General test conditions.
    S6.1 Vehicle test attitude. The vehicle is supported off its 
suspension at an attitude determined in accordance with S6.1(a) through 
(e).
    (a) The vehicle is loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight.
    (b) All tires are inflated to the manufacturer's specifications 
listed on the vehicle's tire placard.
    (c) Place vehicle on a level surface.
    (c) Pitch: Measure the sill angle of the driver door sill and mark 
where the angle is measured.
    (d) Roll: Mark a point on the vehicle body above the left and right 
front wheel wells. Determine the vertical height of these two points 
from the level surface.
    (e) Support the vehicle off its suspension such that the driver door 
sill angle is within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 1 degree of that measured at 
the marked area in S6.1(c) and the vertical height difference of the two 
points marked in S6.1(d) is within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 mm of the 
vertical height difference determined in S6.1(d).
    S6.2 Doors.
    (a) Except as provided in S6.2(b) or S6.2(c), doors, including any 
rear hatchback or tailgate, are fully closed and latched but not locked.
    (b) During testing, any side door on the opposite side of the 
longitudinal

[[Page 1108]]

centerline of the vehicle from the target to be impacted may be open or 
removed.
    (c) During testing, any rear hatchback or tailgate may be open or 
removed for testing any target.
    S6.3 Steering wheel, steering column, seats, grab handles, and 
exterior mirrors. During targeting and testing, the steering wheel, 
steering column, seats, grab handles and exterior mirrors may be removed 
from the vehicle or adjusted to facilitate testing and/or provide an 
unobstructed path for headform travel through and beyond the vehicle.
    S6.4 Other vehicle components and structures. During targeting and 
testing, interior vehicle components and vehicle structures other than 
specified in S6.2 and S6.3 may be removed or adjusted to the extent 
necessary to allow positioning of the ejection propulsion mechanism and 
provide an unobstructed path for the headform travel through and beyond 
the vehicle.
    S6.5 Temperature and humidity.
    (a) During testing, the ambient temperature is between 18 degrees C. 
and 29 degrees C., at any relative humidity between 10 percent and 70 
percent.
    (b) The headform specified in S7.1.1 of this standard is exposed to 
the conditions specified in S6.5(a) for a continuous period not less 
than one hour, prior to the test.
    S7. Ejection mitigation test device specifications. The ejection 
mitigation test device consists of an ejection impactor and ejection 
propulsion mechanism with the following specifications. The ability of a 
test device to meet these specifications may be determined outside of 
the vehicle.
    S7.1 Ejection impactor. The ejection impactor consists of an 
ejection headform attached to a shaft. The ejection impactor has a mass 
of 18 kg <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.05 kg. The shaft is parallel to the y 
axis of the headform.
    S7.1.1 Ejection headform dimensions. The ejection headform has the 
dimensions shown in Figure 1 and is depicted in the ``Parts List; 
Ejection Mitigation Headform Drawing Package,'' December 2010, and the 
``Parts List and Drawings; Ejection Mitigation Headform Drawing 
Package,'' December 2010 (incorporated by reference; see Sec. 571.5).
    S7.2 Static deflection. The ejection impactor targeting point must 
not deflect more than 20 mm in the x-z plane when a 981 N <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq> 5 N force is applied in a vehicle vertical longitudinal 
plane, through the y axis of the headform and no more than 5 mm rear of 
the posterior surface of the headform. The force is applied once in each 
of the following headform axes: +z, -z, +x, -x. The static deflection 
measurement is made with the ejection impactor extended 400 mm outboard 
of the theoretical point of impact with the countermeasure and attached 
to the ejection propulsion mechanism, including any support frame and 
anchors.
    S7.3 Frictional characteristics.
    (a) Measure the dynamic coefficient of friction of the ejection 
impactor and any associated bearings and bearing housing in a test ready 
orientation. Repeat the measurement in three more orientations with the 
ejection impactor and any associated bearings and bearing housing 
rotated 90, 180 and 270 degrees about the headform y axis. Perform the 
measurement five consecutive times at each orientation.
    (b) Measure the average force necessary to move the ejection 
impactor 200 mm rearward into the ejection propulsion mechanism at a 
rate of 50 (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>13) mm per second, starting at a point 
400 mm outboard of the theoretical point of impact with the 
countermeasure. Measure the force to an accuracy of <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 N. The measurement excludes the force measured over 
the first 25 mm of travel and is recorded at a minimum frequency of 100 
Hz. During the test a 100 kg <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 0.5 kg mass is 
attached to the impactor with its center of gravity passing through the 
axis of motion of the impactor and no more than 5 mm rear of the 
posterior surface of the headform.
    (c) Take the five force level averages made at each impactor 
orientation in S7.3(a) and average them. Take the maximum of the force 
average values and divide by 9.81 times the combined mass of the 
ejection impactor and mass added in S7.3(b). The resulting value must 
not exceed 0.25.
    S7.4 Targeting accuracy. Determine the distance ``D'' along the axis 
of travel of the ejection impactor from its launch point to the 
theoretical point of

[[Page 1109]]

impact with the countermeasure, when moving at the speed specified in 
S5.5. Determine that the ejection mitigation test device can deliver the 
ejection impactor targeting point to within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm 
of an axis normal to and passing through the target center, as the 
unobstructed impactor passes through a zone defined by vertical 
longitudinal planes 50 mm forward and rearward of ``D.''
    S8 Phase-in Schedule for Vehicle Certification.
    S8.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2013 and before 
September 1, 2016. At anytime during the production years ending August 
31, 2014, August 31, 2015, and August 31, 2016, each manufacturer shall, 
upon request from the Office of Vehicle Safety Compliance, provide 
information identifying the vehicles (by make, model and vehicle 
identification number) that have been certified as complying with this 
standard. The manufacturer's designation of a vehicle as a certified 
vehicle is irrevocable.
    S8.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2013 and before 
September 1, 2014. Subject to S8.9, for vehicles manufactured on or 
after September 1, 2013 and before September 1, 2014, the number of 
vehicles complying with S4.2 shall be not less than 25 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured in the three previous production years; or
    (b) The manufacturer's production in the current production year.
    S8.3 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2014 and before 
September 1, 2015. Subject to S8.9, for vehicles manufactured on or 
after September 1, 2014 and before September 1, 2015, the number of 
vehicles complying with S4.2 shall be not less than 50 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured in the three previous production years; or
    (b) The manufacturer's production in the current production year.
    S8.4 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2015 and before 
September 1, 2016. Subject to S8.9, for vehicles manufactured on or 
after September 1, 2015 and before September 1, 2016, the number of 
vehicles complying with S4.2 shall be not less than 75 percent of:
    (a) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured in the three previous production years; or
    (b) The manufacturer's production in the current production year.
    S8.5 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2016 and before 
September 1, 2017. Subject to S8.9, for vehicles manufactured on or 
after September 1, 2016 and before September 1, 2017, the number of 
vehicles complying with S4.2 shall be not less than 100 percent of the 
manufacturer's production in the current production year.
    8.6 Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer. For the purpose 
of calculating average annual production of vehicles for each 
manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured by each 
manufacturer under S8.1 through S8.4, a vehicle produced by more than 
one manufacturer shall be attributed to a single manufacturer as 
follows, subject to S8.7.
    (a) A vehicle that is imported shall be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    S8.7 A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer shall be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR part 585, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S8.5.
    S8.8 For the purposes of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer under S8, do not count any vehicle that is excluded 
by this standard from the requirements.
    S8.9 Calculation of complying vehicles.
    (a) For the purposes of calculating the vehicles complying with 
S8.2, a manufacturer may count a vehicle if it is manufactured on or 
after March 1, 2011 but before September 1, 2014.

[[Page 1110]]

    (b) For purposes of complying with S8.3, a manufacturer may count a 
vehicle if it--
    (1) Is manufactured on or after March 1, 2011 but before September 
1, 2015 and,
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S8.2.
    (c) For purposes of complying with S8.4, a manufacturer may count a 
vehicle if it--
    (1) Is manufactured on or after March 1, 2011 but before September 
1, 2016 and,
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S8.2 or S8.3.
    (d) For purposes of complying with S8.5, a manufacturer may count a 
vehicle if it--
    (1) Is manufactured on or after March 1, 2011 but before September 
1, 2017 and,
    (2) Is not counted toward compliance with S8.2, S8.3, or S8.4.
    (e) For the purposes of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer, each vehicle that is excluded from having to meet 
this standard is not counted.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19JA11.025


[[Page 1111]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19JA11.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19JA11.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19JA11.028


[[Page 1112]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19JA11.029


[[Page 1113]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19JA11.030


[76 FR 3296, Jan. 19, 2011; 76 FR 10524, Feb. 25, 2011]


<R05>
Sec. 571.301  Standard No. 301; Fuel system integrity.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for the integrity of 
motor vehicle fuel systems.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries occurring from fires that result from fuel spillage during and 
after motor vehicle crashes, and resulting from ingestion of fuels 
during siphoning.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, and to 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses that have a GVWR of 
4,536 kg or less and use fuel with a boiling point above 0 [deg]C, and 
to school buses that have a GVWR greater than 4,536 kg and use fuel with 
a boiling point above 0 [deg]C.
    S4. Definition. Fuel spillage means the fall, flow, or run of fuel 
from the vehicle but does not include wetness resulting from capillary 
action.
    S5. General requirements.
    S5.1 Passenger cars, and multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, 
and buses with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less. Each passenger car and 
each multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, and bus with a GVWR of 
10,000 pounds or less shall meet the requirements of S6.1 through S6.4. 
Each of these types of vehicles that is manufactured to use alcohol 
fuels shall also meet the requirements of S6.6.
    S5.2 [Reserved]
    S5.3 [Reserved]
    S5.4 Schoolbuses with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds. Each 
schoolbus with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds shall meet the 
requirements of S6.5. Each schoolbus with a GVWR greater than 10,000 
pounds that is manufactured to use alcohol fuels shall meet the 
requirements of S6.6.
    S5.5 Fuel spillage; Barrier crash. Fuel spillage in any fixed or 
moving barrier crash test shall not exceed 28 g from impact until motion 
of the vehicle has ceased, and shall not exceed a total of 142 g in the 
5-minute period following

[[Page 1114]]

cessation of motion. For the subsequent 25-minute period, fuel spillage 
during any 1 minute interval shall not exceed 28 g.
    S5.6 Fuel spillage; rollover. Fuel spillage in any rollover test, 
from the onset of rotational motion, shall not exceed a total of 142 g 
for the first 5 minutes of testing at each successive 90[deg] increment. 
For the remaining test period, at each increment of 90[deg] fuel 
spillage during any 1 minute interval shall not exceed 28 g.
    S5.7. Alcohol fuel vehicles. Each vehicle manufactured to operate on 
an alcohol fuel (e.g., methanol, ethanol) or a fuel blend containing at 
least 20 percent alcohol fuel shall meet the requirements of S6.6.
    S6. Test requirements. Each vehicle with a GVWR of 4,536 kg or less 
shall be capable of meeting the requirements of any applicable barrier 
crash test followed by a static rollover, without alteration of the 
vehicle during the test sequence. A particular vehicle need not meet 
further requirements after having been subjected to a single barrier 
crash test and a static rollover test. Where manufacturer options are 
specified in this standard, the manufacturer must select an option not 
later than the time it certifies the vehicle and may not thereafter 
select a different option for that vehicle. Each manufacturer must, upon 
request from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, provide 
information regarding which of the compliance options it has selected 
for a particular vehicle or make/model.
    S6.1 Frontal barrier crash. When the vehicle travelling 
longitudinally forward at any speed up to and including 48 km/h impacts 
a fixed collision barrier that is perpendicular to the line of travel of 
the vehicle, or at any angle up to 30[deg] in either direction from the 
perpendicular to the line of travel of the vehicle, with 50th-percentile 
test dummies as specified in part 572 of this chapter at each front 
outboard designated seating position and at any other position whose 
protection system is required to be tested by a dummy under the 
provisions of Standard No. 208, under the applicable conditions of S7., 
fuel spillage shall not exceed the limits of S5.5.
    S6.2 Rear moving barrier crash. (a) Vehicles manufactured before 
September 1, 2006. When the vehicle is impacted from the rear by the 
barrier specified in S7.3(a) of this standard moving at 48 km/h, with 
50th percentile test dummies as specified in part 572 of this chapter at 
each front outboard designated seating position, under the applicable 
conditions of S7, fuel spillage must not exceed the limits of S5.5.
    (b) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2006. When the 
vehicle is impacted from the rear by a moving deformable barrier 80 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1.0 km/h with a 70 percent overlap, with 50th 
percentile test dummies as specified in part 572 of this chapter at each 
front outboard designated seating position, under the applicable 
conditions of S7, fuel spillage must not exceed the limits of S5.5.
    (c) Small volume manufacturers. Notwithstanding S6.2(b) of this 
standard, vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2004 and before 
September 1, 2008 by a manufacturer that produces fewer than 5,000 
vehicles annually for sale in the United States may meet the 
requirements of S6.2(a). Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 
2008 by small volume manufacturers must meet the requirements of 
S6.2(b).
    S6.3 Side moving barrier crash. (a) Vehicles manufactured before 
September 1, 2004. When the vehicle is impacted laterally on either side 
by a barrier moving at 32 km/h with 50th percentile test dummies as 
specified in part 572 of this chapter at positions required for testing 
to Standard No. 208 (49 CFR 571.208), under the applicable conditions of 
S7, fuel spillage must not exceed the limits of S5.5.
    (b) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2004. When the 
vehicle is impacted laterally on either side by a moving deformable 
barrier at 53 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq> 1.0 km/h with the appropriate 49 
CFR part 572 test dummies specified in 571.214 at positions required for 
testing by S7.1.1, S7.2.1, or S7.2.2 of Standard 214, under the 
applicable conditions of S7 of this standard, fuel spillage shall not 
exceed the limits of S5.5 of this standard.
    (c)(1) Notwithstanding S6.3(b) of this standard, vehicles having a 
GVWR greater than 6,000 lb (2,722 kg) may meet S6.3(a) instead of 
S6.3(b) of this standard until September 1, 2005.

[[Page 1115]]

    (2) Notwithstanding S6.3(b) of this standard, vehicles having a GVWR 
greater than 6,000 lb (2,722 kg) manufactured on or after September 1, 
2005 must meet the requirements of S6.3(b) of this standard unless they 
are excluded from S6.3(b) under the phase-in specified in this 
paragraph. Excluded vehicles must meet the requirements of S6.3(a) of 
this standard. For vehicles having a GVWR greater than 6,000 lb (2,722 
kg) manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 and before September 1, 
2006, the number of vehicles complying with S6.3(b) shall be not less 
than 90 percent of:
    (i) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles with a 
GVWR greater than 6,000 lb (2,722 kg) manufactured on or after September 
1, 2002 and before September 1, 2005; or
    (ii) The manufacturer's production of vehicles with a GVWR greater 
than 6,000 lb (2,722 kg) on or after September 1, 2004 and before 
September 1, 2005.
    (iii) Vehicles that have a GVWR greater than 6,000 lb (2,722 kg) and 
that are manufactured on or after September 1, 2006 must meet the 
requirements of S6.3(b) of this standard.
    (3) Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer. For the purpose 
of calculating average annual production of vehicles for each 
manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured by each 
manufacturer under S6.3(c)(2)(i) and S6.3(c)(2)(ii) of this standard, a 
vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer shall be attributed to a 
single manufacturer as follows, subject to S6.3(c)(4).
    (i) A vehicle which is imported shall be attributed to the importer.
    (ii) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, shall be attributed 
to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    (4) A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer shall be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR 568.6, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S6.3(c)(3).
    (d) Notwithstanding S6.3(b) of this standard, vehicles with a GVWR 
of 6,000 lb (2,722 kg) or less that are manufactured in two or more 
stages or altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) after having been 
previously certified in accordance with part 567 of this chapter may 
meet S6.3(a) of this standard until September 1, 2005. Vehicles with a 
GVWR of 6,000 lb (2,722 kg) or less that are manufactured in two or more 
stages or altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) after having been 
previously certified in accordance with part 567 of this chapter and 
that are manufactured on or after September 1, 2005 must meet the 
requirements of S6.3(b)
    (e) Notwithstanding S6.3(b) and (c) of this standard, vehicles with 
a GVWR greater than 6,000 lb (2,722 kg) that are manufactured in two or 
more stages or altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) after having 
been previously certified in accordance with part 567 of this chapter 
may meet S6.3(a) of this standard until September 1, 2006. Vehicles with 
a GVWR greater than 6,000 lb (2,722 kg) that are manufactured in two or 
more stages or altered (within the meaning of 49 CFR 567.7) after having 
been previously certified in accordance with part 567 of this chapter 
and that are manufactured on or after September 1, 2006 must meet the 
requirements of S6.3(b).
    S6.4 Static rollover. When the vehicle is rotated on its 
longitudinal axis to each successive increment of 90[deg], following an 
impact crash of S6.1, S6.2, or S6.3, fuel spillage shall not exceed the 
limits of S5.6.
    S6.5 Moving contoured barrier crash. When the moving contoured 
barrier assembly traveling longitudinally forward at any speed up to and 
including 48 km/h impacts the test vehicle (school bus with a GVWR 
exceeding 4,536 kg) at any point and angle, under the applicable 
conditions of S7.1 and S7.5, fuel spillage shall not exceed the limits 
of S5.5.
    S6.6 Anti-siphoning test for alcohol fuel vehicles. Each vehicle 
shall have means that prevent any hose made of vinyl plastic or rubber, 
with a length of not less than 1200 millimeters (mm) and an outside 
diameter of not less than 5.2 mm, from contacting the level

[[Page 1116]]

surface of the liquid fuel in the vehicle's fuel tank or fuel system, 
when the hose is inserted into the filler neck attached to the fuel tank 
with the fuel tank filled to any level from 90 to 95 percent of 
capacity.
    S7. Test conditions. The requirements of S5.1 through S5.6 and S6.1 
through S6.5 shall be met under the following conditions. Where a range 
is specified, the vehicle must be capable of meeting the requirements at 
all points within the range.
    S7.1 General test conditions. The following conditions apply to all 
tests.
    S7.1.1 The fuel tank is filled to any level from 90 to 95 percent of 
capacity with Stoddard solvent, having the physical and chemical 
properties of type 1 solvent, Table I ASTM Standard D484-71, ``Standard 
Specifications for Hydrocarbon Dry Cleaning Solvents.''
    S7.1.2 The fuel system other than the fuel tank is filled with 
Stoddard solvent to its normal operating level.
    S7.1.3 In meeting the requirements of S6.1 through S6.3, if the 
vehicle has an electrically driven fuel pump that normally runs when the 
vehicle's electrical system is activated, it is operating at the time of 
the barrier crash.
    S7.1.4 The parking brake is disengaged and the transmission is in 
neutral, except that in meeting the requirements of S6.5 the parking 
brake is set.
    S7.1.5 Tires are inflated to manufacturer's specifications.
    S7.1.6 The vehicle, including test devices and instrumentation, is 
loaded as follows:
    (a) Except as specified in S7.1.1, a passenger car is loaded to its 
unloaded vehicle weight plus its rated cargo and luggage capacity 
weight, secured in the luggage area, plus the necessary test dummies as 
specified in S6., restrained only by means that are installed in the 
vehicle for protection at its seating position.
    (b) Except as specified in S7.1.1, a multipurpose passenger vehicle, 
truck, or bus with a GVWR of 4,536 kg or less is loaded to its unloaded 
vehicle weight, plus the necessary test dummies as specified in S6, plus 
136 kg or its rated cargo and luggage capacity weight, whichever is 
less, secured in the load carrying area and distributed as nearly as 
possible in proportion to its GAWR. For the purpose of this standard, 
unloaded vehicle weight does not include the weight of work-performing 
accessories. Each dummy is restrained only by means that are installed 
in the vehicle for protection at its seating position.
    (c) Except as specified in S7.1.1, a school bus with a GVWR greater 
than 4,536 kg is loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight, plus 54 kg of 
unsecured mass at each designated seating position.
    S7.2 Side moving barrier test conditions. (a) Vehicles manufactured 
before September 1, 2004. The side moving barrier crash test conditions 
are those specified in S8.2 of Standard No. 208 (49 CFR 571.208).
    (b) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2004. The side 
moving deformable barrier crash test conditions are those specified in 
S8 of Standard 214 (49 CFR 571.214).
    S7.3 Rear moving barrier test conditions. (a) Vehicles manufactured 
before September 1, 2006. The rear moving barrier test conditions are 
those specified in S8.2 of Standard No. 208 (49 CFR 571.208), except for 
the positioning of the barrier and the vehicle. The barrier and test 
vehicle are positioned so that at impact--
    (1) The vehicle is at rest in its normal attitude;
    (2) The barrier is traveling at 48 km/h with its face perpendicular 
to the longitudinal centerline of the vehicle; and
    (3) A vertical plane through the geometric center of the barrier 
impact surface and perpendicular to that surface coincides with the 
longitudinal centerline of the vehicle.
    (b) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2006. The rear 
moving deformable barrier is the same as that shown in Figure 2 of 
Standard No. 214 (49 CFR 571.214) and specified in 49 CFR part 587, 
except as otherwise specified in paragraph S7.3 (b). The barrier and 
test vehicle are positioned so that at impact--
    (1) The vehicle is stationary;
    (2) The deformable face of the barrier is mounted on the barrier 50 
mm (2 inches) lower than the height from the

[[Page 1117]]

ground specified in Figure 2 of Standard No. 214 (49 CFR 571.214) (All 
dimensions from the ground in Figure 2, Front View should be reduced by 
50 mm (2 inches.));
    (3) The barrier is traveling 80 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1.0 km/h; and
    (4) The barrier impacts the test vehicle with the longitudinal 
centerline of the vehicle parallel to the line of travel and 
perpendicular to the barrier face within a tolerance of <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>5 degrees. The test vehicle and barrier face are aligned 
so that the barrier strikes the rear of the vehicle with 70 percent 
overlap toward either side of the vehicle. So aligned, the barrier face 
fully engages one half of the rear of the vehicle and partially engages 
the other half. At impact, the vehicle's longitudinal centerline is 
located inboard either of the side edges of the barrier by a distance 
equal to 20 percent of the vehicle's width <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>50 mm 
(see Figure 3). The vehicle's width is the maximum dimension measured 
across the widest part of the vehicle, including bumpers and molding, 
but excluding such components as exterior mirrors, flexible mud flaps, 
marker lamps, and dual rear wheel configurations.
    S7.4 Static rollover test conditions. The vehicle is rotated about 
its longitudinal axis, with the axis kept horizontal, to each successive 
increment of 90[deg], 180[deg], and 270[deg] at a uniform rate, with 
90[deg] of rotation taking place in any time interval from 1 to 3 
minutes. After reaching each 90[deg] increment the vehicle is held in 
that position for 5 minutes.
    S7.5 Moving contoured barrier test conditions. The following 
conditions apply to the moving contoured barrier crash test.
    S7.5.1 The moving barrier, which is mounted on a carriage as 
specified in Figure 1, is of rigid construction, symmetrical about a 
vertical longitudinal plane. The contoured impact surface, which is 629 
mm high and 1,981 mm wide, conforms to the dimensions shown in Figure 2, 
and is attached to the carriage as shown in that figure. The ground 
clearance to the lower edge of the impact surface is 133 mm <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>13 mm. The wheelbase is 3,048 mm <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>50 mm.
    S7.5.2 The moving contoured barrier, including the impact surface, 
supporting structure, and carriage, has a mass of 1,814 kg <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>23 kg with the mass distributed so that 408 kg <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>11 kg is at each rear wheel and 499 kg <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>11 kg is at each front wheel. The center of gravity is 
located 1,372 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>38 mm rearward of the front wheel 
axis, in the vertical longitudinal plane of symmetry, 401 mm <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>13 mm above the ground.
    S7.5.3 The moving contoured barrier has a solid nonsteerable front 
axle and fixed rear axle attached directly to the frame rails with no 
spring or other type of suspension system on any wheel. (The moving 
barrier assembly is equipped with a braking device capable of stopping 
its motion.)
    S7.5.4 The concrete surface upon which the vehicle is tested is 
level, rigid, and of uniform construction, with a skid number of 75 when 
measured in accordance with American Society of Testing and Materials 
Method E: 274-65T at 64 km/h, omitting water delivery as specified in 
paragraph 7.1 of that method.
    S7.5.5 The barrier assembly is released from the guidance mechanism 
immediately prior to impact with the vehicle.
    S7.6 The moving barrier assemblies specified in S7.2, S7.3 and S7.5 
are equipped with P205/75R15 pneumatic tires inflated to 200 kPa <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>21 kPa.
    S8 Phase-In schedule.
    S8.1 Rear impact test upgrade. (a) Vehicles manufactured on or after 
September 1, 2006 and before September 1, 2007. For vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2006, and before September 1, 
2007, the number of vehicles complying with S6.2(b) of this standard 
must not be less than 40 percent of:
    (1) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2004, and before September 1, 
2007; or
    (2) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2006, and 
before September 1, 2007.
    (b) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2007 and before 
September 1, 2008. For vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 
2007 and before September 1, 2008, the number of vehicles complying with 
S6.2(b) of this standard must not be less than 70 percent of:

[[Page 1118]]

    (1) The manufacturer's average annual production of vehicles 
manufactured on or after September 1, 2005, and before September 1, 
2008; or
    (2) The manufacturer's production on or after September 1, 2007, and 
before September 1, 2008.
    (c) Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2008. For 
vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2008, the number of 
vehicles complying with S6.2(b) of this standard must be 100 percent of 
the manufacturer's production during that period.
    S8.2 Vehicles manufactured in two or more stages. A final stage 
manufacturer or alterer may, at its option, comply with the requirements 
set forth in S8.2.1 and S8.2.2.
    S8.2.1 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2006 and 
before September 1, 2009 are not required to comply with the 
requirements specified in S6.2(b) of this standard.
    S8.2.2 Vehicles manufactured on or after September 1, 2009 must 
comply with the requirements specified in S6.2(b) of this standard.
    S8.3 Vehicles produced by more than one manufacturer.
    S8.3.1 For the purpose of calculating average annual production of 
vehicles for each manufacturer and the number of vehicles manufactured 
by each manufacturer under S8.1, a vehicle produced by more than one 
manufacturer must be attributed to a single manufacturer as follows, 
subject to S8.3.2:
    (a) A vehicle that is imported must be attributed to the importer.
    (b) A vehicle manufactured in the United States by more than one 
manufacturer, one of which also markets the vehicle, must be attributed 
to the manufacturer that markets the vehicle.
    S8.3.2 A vehicle produced by more than one manufacturer must be 
attributed to any one of the vehicle's manufacturers specified by an 
express written contract, reported to the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration under 49 CFR part 586, between the manufacturer so 
specified and the manufacturer to which the vehicle would otherwise be 
attributed under S8.3.1.

[[Page 1119]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01AU91.148


[[Page 1120]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR29JY03.002


[[Page 1121]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01DE03.015


[40 FR 48353, Oct. 15, 1975]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
571.301 see the List of CFR Sections Affected which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.

[[Page 1122]]


<R05>
Sec. 571.302  Standard No. 302; Flammability of interior materials.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies burn resistance requirements for 
materials used in the occupant compartments of motor vehicles.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce the deaths 
and injuries to motor vehicle occupants caused by vehicle fires, 
especially those originating in the interior of the vehicle from sources 
such as matches or cigarettes.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks, and buses.
    S3A. Definitions. Occupant compartment air space means the space 
within the occupant compartment that normally contains refreshable air.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1 The portions described in S4.2 of the following components of 
vehicle occupant compartments shall meet the requirements of S4.3: Seat 
cushions, seat backs, seat belts, headlining, convertible tops, arm 
rests, all trim panels including door, front, rear, and side panels, 
compartment shelves, head restraints, floor coverings, sun visors, 
curtains, shades, wheel housing covers, engine compartment covers, 
mattress covers, and any other interior materials, including padding and 
crash-deployed elements, that are designed to absorb energy on contact 
by occupants in the event of a crash.
    S4.1.1 [Reserved]
    S4.2 Any portion of a single or composite material which is within 
13 mm of the occupant compartment air space shall meet the requirements 
of S4.3.
    S4.2.1 Any material that does not adhere to other material(s) at 
every point of contact shall meet the requirements of S4.3 when tested 
separately.
    S4.2.2 Any material that adheres to other materials at every point 
of contact shall meet the requirements of S4.3 when tested as a 
composite with the other material(s).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27MY98.011

    Material A has a non-adhering interface with material B and is 
tested separately. Part of material B is within 13 mm of the occupant 
compartment air space, and materials B and C adhere at every point of 
contact; therefore, B and C are tested as a composite. The cut is in 
material C as shown, to make a specimen 13 mm thick.
    S4.3(a) When tested in accordance with S5, material described in 
S4.1 and S4.2 shall not burn, nor transmit a flame front across its 
surface, at a rate of more than 102 mm per minute. The requirement 
concerning transmission

[[Page 1123]]

of a flame front shall not apply to a surface created by cutting a test 
specimen for purposes of testing pursuant to S5.
    (b) If a material stops burning before it has burned for 60 seconds 
from the start of timing, and has not burned more than 51 mm from the 
point where the timing was started, it shall be considered to meet the 
burn-rate requirement of S4.3(a).
    S5.1 Conditions.
    S5.1.1 The test is conducted in a metal cabinet for protecting the 
test specimens from drafts. The interior of the cabinet is 381 mm long, 
203 mm deep, and 356 mm high. It has a glass observation window in the 
front, a closable opening to permit insertion of the specimen holder, 
and a hole to accommodate tubing for a gas burner. For ventilation, it 
has a 13 mm clearance space around the top of the cabinet, ten holes in 
the base of the cabinet, each hole 19 mm in diameter and legs to elevate 
the bottom of the cabinet by 10 mm, all located as shown in Figure 1.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR24SE98.036

    S5.1.2 Prior to testing, each specimen is conditioned for 24 hours 
at a temperature of 21 [deg]C, and a relative humidity of 50 percent, 
and the test is conducted under those ambient conditions.
    S5.1.3 The test specimen is inserted between two matching U-shaped 
frames of metal stock 25 mm wide and 10 mm high. The interior dimensions 
of the U-shaped frames are 51 mm wide by 330 mm long. A specimen that 
softens and bends at the flaming end so as to cause

[[Page 1124]]

erratic burning is kept horizontal by supports consisting of thin, heat-
resistant wires, spanning the width of the U-shaped frame under the 
specimen at 25 mm intervals. A device that may be used for supporting 
this type of material is an additional U-shaped frame, wider than the U-
shaped frame containing the specimen, spanned by 10-mil wires of heat-
resistant composition at 25 mm intervals, inserted over the bottom U-
shaped frame.
    S5.1.4 A bunsen burner with a tube of 10 mm inside diameter is used. 
The gas adjusting valve is set to provide a flame, with the tube 
vertical, of 38 mm in height. The air inlet to the burner is closed.
    S5.1.5 The gas supplied to the burner has a flame temperature 
equivalent to that of natural gas.
    S5.2 Preparation of specimens.
    S5.2.1 Each specimen of material to be tested shall be a rectangle 
102 mm wide by 356 mm long, wherever possible. The thickness of the 
specimen is that of the single or composite material used in the 
vehicle, except that if the material's thickness exceeds 13 mm, the 
specimen is cut down to that thickness measured from the surface of the 
specimen closest to the occupant compartment air space. Where it is not 
possible to obtain a flat specimen because of surface curvature, the 
specimen is cut to not more than 13 mm in thickness at any point. The 
maximum available length or width of a specimen is used where either 
dimension is less than 356 mm or 102 mm, respectively, unless surrogate 
testing is required under S4.1.1.
    S5.2.2 The specimen is produced by cutting the material in the 
direction that provides the most adverse test results. The specimen is 
oriented so that the surface closest to the occupant compartment air 
space faces downward on the test frame.
    S5.2.3 Material with a napped or tufted surface is placed on a flat 
surface and combed twice against the nap with a comb having seven to 
eight smooth, rounded teeth per 25 mm.
    S5.3 Procedure.
    (a) Mount the specimen so that both sides and one end are held by 
the U-shaped frame, and one end is even with the open end of the frame. 
Where the maximum available width of a specimen is not more than 51 mm, 
so that the sides of the specimen cannot be held in the U-shaped frame, 
place the specimen in position on wire supports as described in S5.1.3, 
with one end held by the closed end of the U-shaped frame.
    (b) Place the mounted specimen in a horizontal position, in the 
center of the cabinet.
    (c) With the flame adjusted according to S5.1.4, position the bunsen 
burner and specimen so that the center of the burner tip is 19 mm below 
the center of the bottom edge of the open end of the specimen.
    (d) Expose the specimen to the flame for 15 seconds.
    (e) Begin timing (without reference to the period of application of 
the burner flame) when the flame from the burning specimen reaches a 
point 38 mm from the open end of the specimen.
    (f) Measure the time that it takes the flame to progress to a point 
38 mm from the clamped end of the specimen. If the flame does not reach 
the specified end point, time its progress to the point where flaming 
stops.
    (g) Calculate the burn rate from the formula:

B = 60 x (D/T)

Where:

B = Burn rate in millimeters per minute
D = Length the flame travels in millimeters, and
T = Time in seconds for the flame to travel D millimeters.

[36 FR 22902, Dec. 2, 1971, as amended at 40 FR 14319, Mar. 31, 1975; 40 
FR 42747, Sept. 16, 1975; 40 FR 56667, Dec. 4, 1975; 63 FR 28954, 28956, 
May 27, 1998; 63 FR 51003, Sept. 24, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 571.303  Standard No. 303; Fuel system integrity of compressed natural 

gas vehicles.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for the integrity of 
motor vehicle fuel systems using compressed natural gas (CNG), including 
the CNG fuel systems of bi-fuel, dedicated, and dual fuel CNG vehicles.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries occurring from fires that result from fuel leakage during and 
after motor vehicle crashes.

[[Page 1125]]

    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses that have a gross 
vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 10,000 pounds or less and use CNG as a 
motor fuel. This standard also applies to school buses regardless of 
weight that use CNG as a motor fuel.
    S4. Definitions.
    Bi-fuel CNG vehicle means a vehicle equipped with two independent 
fuel systems, one of which is designed to supply CNG and the second to 
supply a fuel other than CNG.
    CNG fuel container means a container designed to store CNG as motor 
fuel onboard a motor vehicle.
    CNG fuel system means all components used to store or supply CNG to 
a vehicle's engine.
    Dedicated CNG vehicle means a vehicle equipped with one fuel system 
and designed to operate on CNG.
    Dual-fuel CNG vehicle means a vehicle which is fueled by two fuels 
simultaneously, one of which is CNG and the second is a fuel other than 
CNG.
    High pressure portion of a fuel system means all the components from 
and including each CNG fuel container up to, but not including, the 
first pressure regulator.
    Service pressure means the internal pressure of a CNG fuel container 
when filled to design capacity with CNG at 20 [deg]Celsius (68 
[deg]Fahrenheit).
    S5. General requirements.
    S5.1 Vehicle requirements.
    S5.1.1 Vehicles with GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less. Each passenger 
car, multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, and bus with a GVWR of 
10,000 pounds or less that uses CNG as a motor fuel and that is 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1995 shall meet the requirements 
of S6, except S6.4.
    S5.1.2 Schoolbuses with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds. Each 
schoolbus with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds that uses CNG as a 
motor fuel and that is manufactured on or after September 1, 1995 shall 
meet the requirements of S6.4.
    S5.2 Fuel system pressure drop: barrier crash.
    (a) For all vehicles, the pressure drop in the high pressure portion 
of the fuel system, expressed in kiloPascals (kPa), in any fixed or 
moving barrier crash from vehicle impact through the 60 minute period 
following cessation of motion shall not exceed:
    (1) 1062 kPa (154 psi), or
    (2) 895 (T/V<INF>FS</INF>); whichever is higher

where T is the average temperature of the test gas in degrees Kelvin, 
stabilized to ambient temperature before testing, where average 
temperature (T) is calculated by measuring ambient temperature at the 
start of the test time and then every 15 minutes until the test time of 
60 minutes is completed; the sum of the ambient temperatures is then 
divided by five to yield the average temperature (T); and where 
V<INF>FS</INF> is the internal volume in liters of the fuel container 
and the fuel lines up to the first pressure regulator.
    (b) For bi-fuel or dual fuel CNG vehicles, the test requirement in 
S5.2(a) shall apply to the CNG fuel system, and the test requirement of 
Standard No. 301 shall apply to the other fuel system, if that standard 
is applicable.
    S5.3 Each CNG vehicle shall be permanently labeled, near the vehicle 
refueling connection, with the information specified in S5.3.1 and 
S5.3.2 of this section. The information shall be visible to a person 
standing next to the vehicle during refueling, in English, and in 
letters and numbers that are not less than 4.76 mm (3/16 inch) high.
    S5.3.1 The statement: ``Service pressure --------------------------
---- kPa (------------ psig).''
    S5.3.2 The statement ``See instructions on fuel container for 
inspection and service life.''
    S5.4 When a motor vehicle is delivered to the first purchaser for 
purposes other than resale, the manufacturer shall provide the purchaser 
with a written statement of the information in S5.3.1 and S5.3.2 in the 
owner's manual, or, if there is no owner's manual, on a one-page 
document. The information shall be in English and in not less than 10 
point type.
    S6. Test requirements: fuel system integrity. Each vehicle with a 
GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less shall meet the requirements of any 
applicable barrier crash test. A particular vehicle need not meet 
further requirements after having been subjected to a single barrier 
crash test.

[[Page 1126]]

    S6.1 Frontal barrier crash. When the vehicle traveling 
longitudinally forward at any speed up to and including 30 mph impacts a 
fixed collision barrier that is perpendicular to the line of travel of 
the vehicle, or at any angle up to 30 degrees in either direction from 
the perpendicular to the line of travel of the vehicle, with 50th 
percentile test dummies as specified in part 572 of this chapter at each 
front outboard designated seating position and at any other position 
whose protection system is required to be tested by a dummy under the 
provisions of Standard No. 208, under the applicable conditions of S7, 
the fuel pressure drop shall not exceed the limits of S5.2.
    S6.2 Rear moving barrier crash. When the vehicle is impacted from 
the rear by a barrier moving at any speed up to and including 30 mph, 
with test dummies as specified in part 572 of this chapter at each front 
outboard designated seating position, under the applicable conditions of 
S7, the fuel pressure drop shall not exceed the limits of S5.2.
    S6.3 Lateral moving barrier crash. When the vehicle is impacted 
laterally on either side by a barrier moving at any speed up to and 
including 20 mph with 50th percentile test dummies as specified in part 
572 of this chapter at positions required for testing to Standard No. 
208, under the applicable conditions of S7, the fuel pressure drop shall 
not exceed the limits of S5.2.
    S6.4 Moving contoured barrier crash. When the moving contoured 
barrier assembly traveling longitudinally forward at any speed up to and 
including 30 mph impacts the test vehicle (schoolbus with a GVWR 
exceeding 10,000 pounds) at any point and angle, under the applicable 
conditions of S7, the fuel pressure drop shall not exceed the limits of 
S5.2.
    S7. Test conditions. The requirements of S5 and S6 shall be met 
under the following conditions. Where a range of conditions is 
specified, the vehicle must be capable of meeting the requirements at 
all points within the range.
    S7.1 General test conditions. The following conditions apply to all 
tests.
    S7.1.1 Each fuel storage container is filled to 100 percent of 
service pressure with nitrogen, N<INF>2</INF>. The gas pressure shall 
stabilize to ambient temperature before testing may be conducted.
    S7.1.2 After each fuel storage container is filled as specified in 
S7.1.1, the fuel system other than each fuel storage container is filled 
with nitrogen, N<INF>2</INF>, to normal operating pressures. All manual 
shutoff valves are to be in the open position.
    S7.1.3 In meeting the requirements of S6.1 through S6.4, if the 
vehicle has an electrically driven fuel pump that normally runs when the 
vehicle's electrical system is activated, it is operating at the time of 
the barrier crash. If the vehicle has any high pressure electric shutoff 
valve that is normally open when the electrical system is activated, it 
is open at the time of the barrier crash. Furthermore, if any electric 
shutoff valve prevents sensing of system pressure by the pressure 
transducer when closed, it must be open for both the initial pressure 
measurement and the pressure measurement 60 minutes after the vehicle 
ceases motion from impact. Any valve shall be open for a period of one 
minute to equalize the system pressure.
    S7.1.4 The parking brake is disengaged and the transmission is in 
neutral, except that in meeting the requirements of S6.4, the parking 
brake is set.
    S7.1.5 Tires are inflated to manufacturer's specifications.
    S7.1.6 The vehicle, including test devices and instrumentation, is 
loaded as follows:
    (a) A passenger car, with its fuel system filled as specified in 
S7.1.1 and S7.1.2, is loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight plus its 
rated cargo and luggage capacity weight, secured in the luggage area, 
plus the necessary test dummies as specified in S6, restrained only by 
means that are installed in the vehicle for protection at its seating 
position.
    (b) A multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, or bus with a GVWR of 
10,000 pounds or less, whose fuel system is filled as specified in 
S7.1.1 and S7.1.2, is loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight, plus the 
necessary test dummies as specified in S6, plus 136.1 kilograms (kg.) 
(300 pounds (lb.)), or its rated cargo and luggage capacity weight,

[[Page 1127]]

whichever is less, secured to the vehicle and distributed so that the 
weight on each axle as measured at the tire-ground interface is in 
proportion to its GAWR. Each dummy shall be restrained only by means 
that are installed in the vehicle for protection at its seating 
position.
    (c) A schoolbus with a GVWR greater than 10,000 pounds, whose fuel 
system is filled as specified in S7.1.1 and S7.1.2, is loaded to its 
unloaded vehicle weight, plus 54.4 kg. (120 lb.) of unsecured weight at 
each designated seating position.
    S7.1.7 The ambient temperature is not to vary more than 5.6 [deg]C 
(10 [deg]F) during the course of the test.
    S7.1.8 The pressure drop measurement specified in S5.2 is to be made 
using a location on the high pressure side of the fuel system in 
accordance with the vehicle manufacturer's recommendation.
    S7.2 Lateral moving barrier crash test conditions. The lateral 
moving barrier crash test conditions are those specified in S8.2 of 
Standard No. 208, 49 CFR 571.208.
    S7.3 Rear moving barrier test conditions. The rear moving barrier 
test conditions are those specified in S8.2 of Standard No. 208, 49 CFR 
571.208, except for the positioning of the barrier and the vehicle. The 
barrier and test vehicle are positioned so that at impact--
    (a) The vehicle is at rest in its normal attitude;
    (b) The barrier is traveling at any speed up to and including 30 mph 
with its face perpendicular to the longitudinal centerline of the 
vehicle; and
    (c) A vertical plane through the geometric center of the barrier 
impact surface and perpendicular to that surface coincides with the 
longitudinal centerline of the vehicle.
    S7.4 Moving contoured barrier test conditions. The moving contoured 
barrier crash test conditions are those specified in S7.5 of Standard 
No. 301, 49 CFR 571.301.

[59 FR 19659, Apr. 25, 1994; as amended at 60 FR 2543, Jan. 10, 1995; 60 
FR 57948, Nov. 24, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 571.304  Standard No. 304; Compressed natural gas fuel container 

integrity.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for the integrity of 
compressed natural gas (CNG), motor vehicle fuel containers.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries occurring from fires that result from fuel leakage during and 
after motor vehicle crashes.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to each passenger car, 
multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, and bus that uses CNG as a motor 
fuel and to each container designed to store CNG as motor fuel on-board 
any motor vehicle.
    S4. Definitions.
    Brazing means a group of welding processes wherein coalescence is 
produced by heating to a suitable temperature above 800 [deg]F and by 
using a nonferrous filler metal, having a melting point below that to 
the base metals. The filler metal is distributed between the closely 
fitted surfaces of the joint by capillary attraction.
    Burst pressure means the highest internal pressure reached in a CNG 
fuel container during a burst test at a temperature of 21 [deg]C (70 
[deg]F).
    CNG fuel container means a container designed to store CNG as motor 
fuel on-board a motor vehicle.
    Fill pressure means the internal pressure of a CNG fuel container 
attained at the time of filling. Fill pressure varies according to the 
gas temperature in the container which is dependent on the charging 
parameters and the ambient conditions.
    Full wrapped means applying the reinforcement of a filament or resin 
system over the entire liner, including the domes.
    Hoop wrapped means winding of filament in a substantially 
circumferential pattern over the cylindrical portion of the liner so 
that the filament does not transmit any significant stresses in a 
direction parallel to the cylinder longitudinal axis.
    Hydrostatic pressure means the internal pressure to which a CNG fuel 
container is taken during testing set forth in S5.4.1.

[[Page 1128]]

    Liner means the inner gas tight container or gas cylinder to which 
the overwrap is applied.
    Service pressure means the internal settled pressure of a CNG fuel 
container at a uniform gas temperature of 21 [deg]C (70 [deg]F) and full 
gas content. It is the pressure for which the container has been 
constructed under normal conditions.
    S5 Container and material requirements.
    S5.1 Container designations. Container designations are as follows:
    S5.1.1 Type 1--Non-composite metallic container means a metal 
container.
    S5.1.2 Type 2--Composite metallic hoop wrapped container means a 
metal liner reinforced with resin impregnated continuous filament that 
is ``hoop wrapped.''
    S5.1.3 Type 3--Composite metallic full wrapped container means a 
metal liner reinforced with resin impregnated continuous filament that 
is ``full wrapped.''
    S5.1.4 Type 4--Composite non-metallic full wrapped container means 
resin impregnated continuous filament with a non-metallic liner ``full 
wrapped.''
    S6 General requirements.
    S6.1 Each passenger car, multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, and 
bus that uses CNG as a motor fuel shall be equipped with a CNG fuel 
container that meets the requirements of S7 through S7.4.
    S6.2 Each CNG fuel container manufactured on or after March 27, 1995 
shall meet the requirements of S7 through S7.4.
    S7 Test requirements. Each CNG fuel container shall meet the 
applicable requirements of S7 through S7.4.
    S7.1 Pressure cycling test at ambient temperature. Each CNG fuel 
container shall not leak when tested in accordance with S8.1.
    S7.2 Hydrostatic burst test.
    S7.2.1 Each Type 1 CNG fuel container shall not leak when subjected 
to burst pressure and tested in accordance with S8.2. Burst pressure 
shall not be less than 2.25 times the service pressure for non-welded 
containers and shall not be less than 3.5 times the service pressure for 
welded containers.
    S7.2.2 Each Type 2, Type 3, or Type 4 CNG fuel container shall not 
leak when subjected to burst pressure and tested in accordance with 
S8.2. Burst pressure shall be not less than 2.25 times the service 
pressure.
    S7.3 Bonfire test. Each CNG fuel container shall be equipped with a 
pressure relief device. Each CNG fuel container shall completely vent 
its contents through a pressure relief device or shall not burst while 
retaining its entire contents when tested in accordance with S8.3.
    S7.4 Labeling. Each CNG fuel container shall be permanently labeled 
with the information specified in paragraphs (a) through (h) of this 
section. Any label affixed to the container in compliance with this 
section shall remain in place and be legible for the manufacturer's 
recommended service life of the container. The information shall be in 
English and in letters and numbers that are at least 6.35 mm (\1/4\ 
inch) high.
    (a) The statement: ``If there is a question about the proper use, 
installation, or maintenance of this container, contact----------------
----,'' inserting the CNG fuel container manufacturer's name, address, 
and telephone number.
    (b) The statement: ``Manufactured in ------------,'' inserting the 
month and year of manufacture of the CNG fuel container.
    (c) The statement: ``Service pressure ------------ kPa, (----------
-- psig).''
    (d) The symbol DOT, constituting a certification by the CNG 
container manufacturer that the container complies with all requirements 
of this standard.
    (e) The container designation (e.g., Type 1, 2, 3, 4).
    (f) The statement: ``CNG Only.''
    (g) The statement: ``This container should be visually inspected 
after a motor vehicle accident or fire and at least every 36 months or 
36,000 miles, whichever comes first, for damage and deterioration.
    (h) The statement: ``Do Not Use After ------------'' inserting the 
month and year that mark the end of the manufacturer's recommended 
service life for the container.
    S8 Test conditions: fuel container integrity.

[[Page 1129]]

    S8.1 Pressure cycling test. The requirements of S7.1 shall be met 
under the conditions of S8.1.1 through S8.1.4.
    S8.1.1 Hydrostatically pressurize the CNG container to the service 
pressure, then to not more than 10 percent of the service pressure, for 
13,000 cycles.
    S8.1.2 After being pressurized as specified in S8.1.1, 
hydrostatically pressurize the CNG container to 125 percent of the 
service pressure, then to not more than 10 percent of the service 
pressure, for 5,000 cycles.
    S8.1.3 The cycling rate for S8.1.1 and S8.1.2 shall be any value up 
to and including 10 cycles per minute.
    S8.1.4 The cycling is conducted at ambient temperature.
    S8.2 Hydrostatic burst test. The requirements of S7.2 shall be met 
under the conditions of S8.2.1 through S8.2.2.
    S8.2.1 Hydrostatically pressurize the CNG fuel container, as 
follows: The pressure is increased up to the minimum prescribed burst 
pressure determined in S7.2.1 or S7.2.2, and held constant at the 
minimum burst pressure for 10 seconds.
    S8.2.2 The pressurization rate throughout the test shall be any 
value up to and including 1,379 kPa (200 psi) per second.
    S8.3 Bonfire test. The requirements of S7.3 shall be met under the 
conditions of S8.3.1 through S8.3.7.
    S8.3.1 Fill the CNG fuel container with compressed natural gas and 
test it at:
    (a) 100 percent of service pressure; and
    (b) 25 percent of service pressure.
    S8.3.2 Container positioning.
    (a) Position the CNG fuel container in accordance with paragraphs 
(b) and (c) of S8.3.2.
    (b) Position the CNG fuel container so that its longitudinal axis is 
horizontal and its bottom is 100 mm (4 inches) above the fire source.
    (c)(1) Position a CNG fuel container that is 1.65 meters (65 inches) 
in length or less and is fitted with one pressure relief device so that 
the center of the container is over the center of the fire source.
    (2) Position a CNG fuel container that is greater than 1.65 meters 
(65 inches) in length and is fitted with one pressure relief device at 
one end of the container so that the center of the fire source is 0.825 
meters (32.5 inches) from the other end of the container, measured 
horizontally along a line parallel to the longitudinal axis of the 
container.
    (3) Position a CNG fuel container that is fitted with pressure 
relief devices at more than one location along its length so that the 
portion of container over the center of the fire source is the portion 
midway between the two pressure relief devices that are separated by the 
greatest distance, measured horizontally along a line parallel to the 
longitudinal axis of the container.
    (4) Test a CNG fuel container that is greater than 1.65 meters (65 
inches) in length, is protected by thermal insulation, and does not have 
pressure relief devices, twice at 100 percent of service pressure. In 
one test, position the center of the container over the center of the 
fire source. In another test, position one end of the container so that 
the fire source is centered 0.825 meters (32.5 inches) from one end of 
the container, measured horizontally along a line parallel to the 
longitudinal axis of the container.
    S8.3.3 Number and placement of thermocouples. To monitor flame 
temperature, place three thermocouples so that they are suspended 25 mm 
(one inch) below the bottom of the CNG fuel container. Position 
thermocouples so that they are equally spaced over the length of the 
fire source or length of the container, whichever is shorter.
    S8.3.4 Shielding.
    (a) Use shielding to prevent the flame from directly contacting the 
CNG fuel container valves, fittings, or pressure relief devices.
    (b) To provide the shielding, use steel with 0.6 mm (.025 in) 
minimum nominal thickness.
    (c) Position the shielding so that it does not directly contact the 
CNG fuel container valves, fittings, or pressure relief devices.
    S8.3.5 Fire source. Use a uniform fire source that is 1.65 meters 
long (65 inches). Beginning five minutes after the fire is ignited, 
maintain an average flame temperature of not less than 430 degrees 
Celsius (800 degrees Fahrenheit) as determined by the average of

[[Page 1130]]

the two thermocouples recording the highest temperatures over a 60 
second interval:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30OC00.009

    If the pressure relief device releases before the end of the fifth 
minute after ignition, then the minimum temperature requirement does not 
apply.
    S8.3.6 Recording data. Record time, temperature, and pressure 
readings at 30 second intervals, beginning when the fire is ignited and 
continuing until the pressure release device releases.
    S8.3.7 Duration of exposure to fire source. The CNG fuel container 
is exposed to the fire source for 20 minutes after ignition or until the 
pressure release device releases, whichever period is shorter.
    S8.3.8 Number of tests per container. A single CNG fuel container is 
not subjected to more than one bonfire test.
    S8.3.9 Wind velocity. The average ambient wind velocity at the CNG 
fuel container during the period specified in S8.3.6 of this standard is 
not to exceed 2.24 meters/second (5 mph).
    S8.3.10 The average wind velocity at the container is any velocity 
up to and including 2.24 meters/second (5 mph).

[59 FR 49021, Sept. 26, 1994; 59 FR 66776, Dec. 28, 1994; 60 FR 37843, 
July 24, 1995; 60 FR 57948, Nov. 24, 1995; 61 FR 19204, May 1, 1996; 61 
FR 47089, Sept. 6, 1996; 63 FR 66765, Dec. 3, 1998; 65 FR 51772, Aug. 
25, 2000; 65 FR 64626, Oct. 30, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 571.305  Standard No. 305; Electric-powered vehicles: electrolyte 

spillage and electrical shock protection.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for limitation of 
electrolyte spillage, retention of electric energy storage/conversion 
devices, and protection from harmful electric shock during and after a 
crash.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to reduce deaths and 
injuries during and after a crash that occurs because of electrolyte 
spillage from electric energy storage devices, intrusion of electric 
energy storage/conversion devices into the occupant compartment, and 
electrical shock.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars, and to 
multipurpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses with a GVWR of 4,536 
kg or less, that use electrical propulsion components with working 
voltages more than 60 volts direct current (VDC) or 30 volts alternating 
current (VAC), and whose speed attainable over a distance of 1.6 km on a 
paved level surface is more than 40 km/h.
    S4. Definitions.
    Automatic disconnect means a device that when triggered, 
conductively separates a high voltage source from the electric power 
train or the rest of the electric power train.
    Electric energy storage device means a high voltage source that 
stores energy for vehicle propulsion. This includes, but is not limited 
to, a high voltage battery or battery pack, rechargeable energy storage 
device, and capacitor module.
    Electric energy storage/conversion device means a high voltage 
source that stores or converts energy for vehicle propulsion. This 
includes, but is not limited to, a high voltage battery or battery pack, 
fuel cell stack, rechargeable energy storage device, and capacitor 
module.
    Electric energy storage/conversion system means an assembly of 
electrical components that stores or converts electrical energy for 
vehicle propulsion. This includes, but is not limited to, high voltage 
batteries or battery packs, fuel cell stacks, rechargeable energy 
storage systems, capacitor modules, inverters, interconnects, and 
venting systems.

[[Page 1131]]

    Electric power train means an assembly of electrically connected 
components which includes, but is not limited to, electric energy 
storage/conversion systems and propulsion systems.
    Electrical chassis means conductive parts of the vehicle whose 
electrical potential is taken as reference and which are: (1) 
conductively linked together, and (2) not high voltage sources during 
normal vehicle operation.
    Electrical isolation of a high voltage source in the vehicle means 
the electrical resistance between the high voltage source and any of the 
vehicle's electrical chassis divided by the working voltage of the high 
voltage source.
    High voltage source means any electric component contained in the 
electric power train or conductively connected to the electric power 
train that has a working voltage greater than 30 VAC or 60 VDC.
    Propulsion system means an assembly of electric or electro-
mechanical components or circuits that propel the vehicle using the 
energy that is supplied by a high voltage source. This includes, but is 
not limited to, electric motors, inverters/converters, electronic 
controllers, and associated wire harnesses and connectors, and coupling 
systems for charging rechargeable energy storage systems.
    S5. General requirements. Each vehicle to which this standard 
applies, must meet the requirements in S5.1, S5.2, and S5.3 when tested 
according to S6 under the conditions of S7.
    S5.1 Electrolyte spillage from propulsion batteries. Not more than 
5.0 liters of electrolyte from propulsion batteries shall spill outside 
the passenger compartment, and no visible trace of electrolyte shall 
spill into the passenger compartment. Spillage is measured from the time 
the vehicle ceases motion after a barrier impact test until 30 minutes 
thereafter, and throughout any static rollover after a barrier impact 
test.
    S5.2 Electric energy storage/conversion device retention. During and 
after each test specified in S6 of this standard:
    (a) Electric energy storage/conversion devices shall remain attached 
to the vehicle by at least one component anchorage, bracket, or any 
structure that transfers loads from the device to the vehicle structure, 
and
    (b) Electric energy storage/conversion devices located outside the 
occupant compartment shall not enter the occupant compartment.
    S5.3 Electrical safety. After each test specified in S6 of this 
standard, each high voltage source in a vehicle must meet the electrical 
isolation requirements of subparagraph (a) or the voltage level 
requirements of subparagraph (b).
    (a) The electrical isolation of the high voltage source, determined 
in accordance with the procedure specified in S7.6, must be greater than 
or equal to one of the following:
    (1) 500 ohms/volt for an AC high voltage source; or
    (2) 500 ohms/volt for a DC high voltage source without electrical 
isolation monitoring during vehicle operation; or
    (3) 100 ohms/volt for a DC high voltage source with electrical 
isolation monitoring, in accordance with the requirements of S5.4, 
during vehicle operation.
    (b) The voltages V1, V2, and Vb of the high voltage source, measured 
according to the procedure specified in S7.7, must be less than or equal 
to 30 VAC for AC components or 60 VDC for DC components.
    S5.4 Electrical isolation monitoring. Each DC high voltage source 
with electrical isolation monitoring during vehicle operation pursuant 
to S5.3(a)(2) shall be monitored by an electrical isolation monitoring 
system that displays a warning for loss of isolation when tested 
according to S8. The system must monitor its own readiness and the 
warning display must be visible to the driver seated in the driver's 
designated seating position.
    S6. Test requirements. Each vehicle to which this standard applies, 
under the conditions of S7, must be capable of meeting the requirements 
of any applicable single barrier crash/static rollover test sequence, 
without alteration of the vehicle during the test sequence. A particular 
vehicle need not meet further test requirements after having been 
subjected to a single barrier crash/static rollover test sequence.

[[Page 1132]]

    S6.1 Frontal barrier crash. The vehicle must meet the requirements 
of S5.1, S5.2 and S5.3 when it is traveling longitudinally forward at 
any speed, up to and including 48 km/h, and impacts a fixed collision 
barrier that is perpendicular to the line of travel of the vehicle, or 
at any angle up to 30 degrees in either direction from the perpendicular 
to the line of travel of the vehicle.
    S6.2 Rear moving barrier impact. The vehicle must meet the 
requirements of S5.1, S5.2, and S5.3 when it is impacted from the rear 
by a barrier that conforms to S7.3(b) of 571.301 of this chapter and 
that is moving at any speed up to and including 80 km/h (50 mph) with 
dummies in accordance with S6.2 of 571.301 of this chapter.
    S6.3 Side moving deformable barrier impact. The vehicle must meet 
the requirements of S5.1, S5.2 and S5.3 when it is impacted from the 
side by a barrier that conforms to part 587 of this chapter that is 
moving at any speed up to and including 54 km/h, with the appropriate 49 
CFR part 572 test dummies specified in 571.214 of this chapter.
    S6.4 Post-impact test static rollover. The vehicle must meet the 
requirements of S5.1, S5.2, and S5.3, after being rotated on its 
longitudinal axis to each successive increment of 90 degrees after each 
impact test specified in S6.1, S6.2, and S6.3.
    S7. Test conditions. When the vehicle is tested according to S6, the 
requirements of S5.1 through S5.3 must be met under the conditions 
specified in S7.1 through S7.7. All measurements for calculating 
voltage(s) and electrical isolation are made after a minimum of 5 
seconds after the vehicle comes to rest in tests specified in S6. Where 
a range is specified, the vehicle must be capable of meeting the 
requirements at all points within the range.
    S7.1 Electric energy storage device state-of-charge. The electric 
energy storage device shall be at the state-of-charge specified in 
either subparagraph (a), (b), or (c):
    (a) At the maximum state-of-charge in accordance with the vehicle 
manufacturer's recommended charging procedures, as stated in the vehicle 
owner's manual or on a label that is permanently affixed to the vehicle; 
or
    (b) If the manufacturer has made no recommendation for charging 
procedures in the owner's manual or on a label permanently affixed to 
the vehicle, at a state-of-charge of not less than 95 percent of the 
maximum capacity of the electric energy storage device; or
    (c) If the electric energy storage device(s) is/are rechargeable 
only by an energy source on the vehicle, at any state-of-charge within 
the normal operating voltage defined by the vehicle manufacturer.
    S7.2 Vehicle conditions. The switch or device that provides power 
from the electric energy storage/conversion system to the propulsion 
system is in the activated position or the ready-to-drive position.
    S7.2.1 The parking brake is disengaged and the transmission, if any, 
is in the neutral position. In a test conducted under S6.3, the parking 
brake is set.
    S7.2.2 Tires are inflated to the manufacturer's specifications.
    S7.2.3 The vehicle, including test devices and instrumentation, is 
loaded as follows:
    (a) A passenger car is loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight plus 
its rated cargo and luggage capacity weight, secured in the luggage 
area, plus the necessary test dummies as specified in S6, restrained 
only by means that are installed in the vehicle for protection at its 
seating position.
    (b) A multipurpose passenger vehicle, truck, or bus with a GVWR of 
4536 kg or less is loaded to its unloaded vehicle weight plus the 
necessary dummies, as specified in S6, plus 136 kg or its rated cargo 
and luggage capacity weight, whichever is less. Each dummy is restrained 
only by means that are installed in the vehicle for protection at its 
seating position.
    S7.3 Static rollover test conditions. In addition to the conditions 
of S7.1 and S7.2, the conditions of S7.4 of Sec. 571.301 of this chapter 
apply to the conduct of static rollover tests specified in S6.4.
    S7.4 Rear moving barrier impact test conditions. In addition to the 
conditions of S7.1 and S7.2, the conditions of S7.3(b) and S7.6 of 
571.301 of this chapter apply to the conducting of the rear

[[Page 1133]]

moving deformable barrier impact test specified in S6.2.
    S7.5 Side moving deformable barrier impact test conditions. In 
addition to the conditions of S7.1 and S7.2, the conditions of S8.9, 
S8.10, and S8.11 of 571.214 of this chapter apply to the conduct of the 
side moving deformable barrier impact test specified in S6.3.
    S7.6 Electrical isolation test procedure. In addition to the 
conditions of S7.1 and S7.2, the conditions in S7.6.1 through S7.6.7 
apply to the measuring of electrical isolation specified in S5.3(a).
    S7.6.1 Prior to any barrier impact test, the energy storage/
conversion system is connected to the vehicle's propulsion system, and 
the vehicle ignition is in the ``on'' (propulsion system energized) 
position. Bypass any devices or systems that do not allow the propulsion 
system to be energized at the time of impact when the vehicle ignition 
is on and the vehicle is in neutral. For a high voltage source that has 
an automatic disconnect that is physically contained within itself, the 
electrical isolation measurement after the test is made from the side of 
the automatic disconnect connected to the electric power train or to the 
rest of the electric power train if the high voltage source is a 
component contained in the power train. For a high voltage source that 
has an automatic disconnect that is not physically contained within 
itself, the electrical isolation measurement after the test is made from 
both the high voltage source side of the automatic disconnect and from 
the side of the automatic disconnect connected to the electric power 
train or to the rest of the electric power train if the high voltage 
source is a component contained in the power train.
    S7.6.2 The voltmeter used in this test has an internal resistance of 
at least 10 M[Omega].
    S7.6.3 The voltage(s) is/are measured as shown in Figure 1 and the 
high voltage source voltage(s) (Vb) is/are recorded. Before any vehicle 
impact test, Vb is equal to or greater than the nominal operating 
voltage as specified by the vehicle manufacturer.
    S7.6.4 The voltage(s) is/are measured as shown in Figure 2, and the 
voltage(s) (V1) between the negative side of the high voltage source and 
the electrical chassis.
    S7.6.5 The voltage(s) is/are measured as shown in Figure 3, and the 
voltage(s) (V2) between the positive side of the high voltage source and 
the electrical chassis.
    S7.6.6 If V1 is greater than or equal to V2, insert a known 
resistance (Ro) between the negative side of the high voltage source and 
the electrical chassis. With the Ro installed, measure the voltage 
(V1[min]) as shown in Figure 4 between the negative side of the high 
voltage source and the electrical chassis. Calculate the electrical 
isolation resistance (Ri) according to the formula shown. Divide Ri (in 
ohms) by the working voltage of the high voltage source (in volts) to 
obtain the electrical isolation (in ohms/volt).
    S7.6.7 If V2 is greater than V1, insert a known resistance (Ro) 
between the positive side of the high voltage source and the electrical 
chassis. With the Ro installed, measure the voltage (V2[min]) as shown 
in Figure 5 between the positive side of the high voltage source and the 
electrical chassis. Calculate the electrical isolation resistance (Ri) 
according to the formula shown. Divide Ri (in ohms) by the working 
voltage of the high voltage source (in volts) to obtain the electrical 
isolation (in ohms/volt).
    S7.7 Voltage measurement. For the purpose of determining the voltage 
level of the high voltage source specified in S5.3(b), voltage is 
measured as shown in Figure 1. Voltage Vb is measured across the two 
terminals of the voltage source. Voltages V1 and V2 are measured between 
the source and the electrical chassis. For a high voltage source that 
has an automatic disconnect that is physically contained within itself, 
the electrical isolation measurement after the test is made from the 
side of the automatic disconnect connected to the electric power train 
or to the rest of the electric power train if the high voltage source is 
a component contained in the power train. For a high voltage source that 
has an automatic disconnect that is not physically contained within 
itself, the electrical isolation measurement after the test is made from 
both

[[Page 1134]]

the high voltage source side of the automatic disconnect and from the 
side of the automatic disconnect connected to the electric power train 
or to the rest of the electric power train if the high voltage source is 
a component contained in the power train.
    S8. Test procedure for on-board electrical isolation monitoring 
system. Prior to any impact test, the requirements of S5.4 for the on-
board electrical isolation monitoring system shall be tested using the 
following procedure.
    (1) The electric energy storage device is at the state-of-charge 
specified in S7.1.
    (2) The switch or device that provides power from the high voltage 
system to the propulsion motor(s) is in the activated position or the 
ready-to-drive position.
    (3) Determine the isolation resistance, Ri, of the high voltage 
source with the electrical isolation monitoring system using the 
procedure outlined in S7.6.2 through S7.6.7.
    (4) Insert a resistor with resistance Ro equal to or greater than 1/
(1/(95 times the working voltage of the high voltage source)-1/Ri) and 
less than 1/(1/(100 times the working voltage of the high voltage 
source)-1/Ri) between the positive terminal of the high voltage source 
and the electrical chassis.
    (5) The electrical isolation monitoring system indicator shall 
display a warning visible to the driver seated in the driver's 
designated seating position.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR29JY11.008


[[Page 1135]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR29JY11.009


[[Page 1136]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR29JY11.010


[[Page 1137]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR29JY11.011


[[Page 1138]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR29JY11.012


[65 FR 57988, Sept. 27, 2000, as amended at 66 FR 60160, Dec. 3, 2001; 
69 FR 51399, Aug. 19, 2004; 72 FR 51972, Sept. 11, 2007; 75 FR 12141, 
Mar. 15, 2010; 75 FR 33527, June 14, 2010; 76 FR 45448, July 29, 2011]


<R05>
Sec. 571.401  Standard No. 401; Interior trunk release.

    S1. Purpose and scope. This standard establishes the requirement for 
providing a trunk release mechanism that makes it possible for a person 
trapped inside the trunk compartment of a passenger car to escape from 
the compartment.
    S2. Application. This standard applies to passenger cars that have a 
trunk compartment. This standard does not apply to passenger cars with a 
back door.
    S3. Definitions.
    Back door means a door or door system on the back end of a passenger 
car through which cargo can be loaded or unloaded. The term includes the 
hinged back door on a hatchback or a station wagon.
    Trunk compartment. (a) Means a space that:
    (1) Is intended to be used for carrying luggage or cargo,
    (2) Is wholly separated from the occupant compartment of a passenger 
car by a permanently attached partition or by a fixed or fold-down seat 
back and/or partition,
    (3) Has a trunk lid, and
    (4) Is large enough so that the three-year-old child dummy described 
in Subpart C of Part 572 can be placed inside the trunk compartment, and 
the trunk lid can be closed and latched with all removable equipment 
furnished by the passenger car manufacturer stowed in accordance with 
label(s) on the passenger car or information in the passenger car 
owner's manual, or, if no information is provided, as located when the 
passenger car is delivered. (Note: For purposes of this standard, the 
Part 572 Subpart C test dummy need not be equipped with the 
accelerometers specified in Sec. 572.21.)

[[Page 1139]]

    (b) Does not include a sub-compartment within the trunk compartment.
    Trunk lid means a moveable body panel that is not designed or 
intended as a passenger car entry point for passengers and that provides 
access from outside a passenger car to a trunk compartment. The term 
does not include a back door or the lid of a storage compartment located 
inside the passenger compartment of a passenger car.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1 Each passenger car with a trunk compartment must have an 
automatic or manual release mechanism inside the trunk compartment that 
unlatches the trunk lid. Each trunk release shall conform, at the 
manufacturer's option, to either S4.2(a) and S4.3, or S4.2(b) and S4.3. 
The manufacturer shall select the option by the time it certifies the 
vehicle and may not thereafter select a different option for the 
vehicle.
    S4.2(a) Each manual release mechanism installed pursuant to S4.1 of 
this standard must include a feature, like lighting or phosphorescence, 
that allows the release mechanism to be easily seen inside the closed 
trunk compartment.
    (b) Each automatic release mechanism installed pursuant to S4.1 of 
this section must unlatch the trunk lid within 5 minutes of when the 
trunk lid is closed with a person inside the trunk compartment.
    S4.3(a) Except as provided in paragraph S4.3(b), actuation of the 
release mechanism required by S4.1 of this standard must completely 
release the trunk lid from all latching positions of the trunk lid 
latch.
    (b)(1) For passenger cars with a front trunk compartment that has a 
front opening trunk lid required to have a secondary latching position 
or latch system, actuation of the release mechanism required by 
paragraph S4.1 of this standard must result in the following:
    (i) When the passenger car is stationary, the release mechanism must 
release the trunk lid from all latching positions or latch systems;
    (ii) When the passenger car is moving forward at a speed less than 5 
km/h, the release mechanism must release the trunk lid from the primary 
latching position or latch system, and may release the trunk lid from 
all latching positions or latch systems;
    (iii) When the passenger car is moving forward at a speed of 5 km/h 
or greater, the release mechanism must release the trunk lid from the 
primary latching position or latch system, but must not release the 
trunk lid from the secondary latching position or latch system.
    (2) The passenger cars described in paragraph S4.3(b)(1) are 
excluded from the requirements of this standard until September 1, 2002.

[66 FR 43121, Aug. 17, 2001, as amended at 67 FR 19523, Apr. 22, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 571.403  Standard No. 403; Platform lift systems for motor vehicles.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for platform lifts 
used to assist persons with limited mobility in entering or leaving a 
vehicle.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to prevent injuries and 
fatalities to passengers and bystanders during the operation of platform 
lifts installed in motor vehicles.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to platform lifts 
manufactured on and after April 1, 2005, that are designed to carry 
passengers into and out of motor vehicles.
    S4. Definitions.
    Bridging device means that portion of a platform lift that provides 
a transitional surface between the platform surface and the surface of 
the vehicle floor within the platform threshold area.
    Cycle means deploying a platform lift from a stowed position, 
lowering the lift to the ground level loading position, raising the lift 
to the vehicle floor loading position, and stowing the lift. The term 
includes operation of any wheelchair retention device, bridging device, 
and inner roll stop.
    Deploy means with respect to a platform, its movement from a stowed 
position to an extended position or, one of the two loading positions. 
With respect to a wheelchair retention device or inner roll stop, the 
term means the movement of the device or stop to a fully functional 
position intended to prevent a passenger from disembarking the platform 
or being pinched between the platform and vehicle.

[[Page 1140]]

    Floor reference plane means the plane perpendicular to the 
longitudinal vehicle reference plane for platform lifts that deploy from 
the side of the vehicle or perpendicular to the transverse vehicle 
reference plane for platform lifts that deploy from the rear of the 
vehicle, and tangent to the outermost edge of the vehicle floor surface 
adjacent to the lift platform. (See figure 1.)
    Gap means a discontinuity in a plane surface, or between two 
adjacent surfaces.
    Inner roll-stop means a device that is located at the edge of the 
platform that a passenger or mobility aid must traverse when entering 
and exiting the platform from the vehicle floor loading position and 
that is designed to retain mobility aids on the platform surface during 
the range of passenger operation.
    Lift reference plane means the plane that is defined by two 
orthogonal axes passing through the geometric center of the platform 
surface of a platform lift. One axis is perpendicular to the platform 
reference plane and the other is parallel to the direction of wheelchair 
travel during loading of the lift. (See figure 1.)
    Loading position means, with respect to a platform lift, a position 
at which a passenger can either embark or disembark the lift. The two 
loading positions are at vehicle floor and ground level.
    Longitudinal vehicle reference plane means the plane that is 
perpendicular to the floor reference plane and contains the longitudinal 
axis of the vehicle when the vehicle body is level and moves along with 
the vehicle body in response to the loading of the vehicle suspension. 
(See figure 1.)
    Outer barrier is a particular wheelchair retention device that is 
located on the edge of the platform, is traversed during ground level 
loading and unloading, and is designed to retain wheelchairs on the 
platform surface during the range of passenger operation.
    Platform means that portion of a platform lift on which the mobility 
aid or passenger rests while being raised or lowered.
    Platform lift means a level change device, including any integration 
of existing vehicle components, and excluding a ramp, used to assist 
persons with limited mobility in entering or leaving a vehicle.
    Platform reference plane means a plane tangent to the platform 
surface at its geometric center. (See figure 1.)
    Platform surface means the passenger-carrying surface of the lift 
platform.
    Platform threshold area means the rectangular area of the vehicle 
floor defined by moving a line that lies on the portion of the edge of 
the vehicle floor directly adjacent to the platform, through a distance 
of 457 mm (18 inches) across the vehicle floor in a direction 
perpendicular to the edge. Any portion of a bridging device that lies on 
this area must be considered part of that area.
    Private use lift means a platform lift certified to the requirements 
for private use lifts and requirements in this standard for all lifts.
    Public use lift means a platform lift certified to the requirements 
for public use lifts and requirements in this standard for all lifts.
    Range of passenger operation means the portion of the lift cycle 
during which the platform is at or between the vehicle floor and ground 
level loading positions excluding any stow and deploy operations.
    Standard test load means a static load or mass centered on the test 
pallet such that the total combined mass for public-use lifts shall be 
272 kg (600 lb), and the total combined mass for private-use lifts shall 
be the lift manufacturer's stated rated load or 181 kg (400 lb), 
whichever is greater.
    Stow means with respect to a platform, its movement from a position 
within the range of passenger operation to the position maintained 
during normal vehicle travel; and, with respect to a wheelchair 
retention device, bridging device, or inner-roll stop, its movement from 
a fully functional position to a position maintained during normal 
vehicle travel.
    Test pallet means a platform on which required test loads are placed 
for handling and moving.
    Transverse vehicle reference plane means the plane that is 
perpendicular to the floor reference plane and contains the transverse 
axis of the vehicle

[[Page 1141]]

when the vehicle body is level and that moves along with the vehicle 
body in response to the loading of the vehicle suspension. (See figure 
1.)
    Wheelchair retention device means a device designed to prevent 
wheelchairs from leaving the edge of the platform used for ground level 
loading and unloading during the range of passenger operation.
    S5. Incorporation by reference.
    S5.1 The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Recommended Practice 
J578, revised June 1995, ``Color Specification'' (SAE J578, rev. June 
95) is hereby incorporated into S6.1.4 by reference.
    S5.2 The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Recommended Practice 
J211/1, revised March 1995 ``Instrumentation for Impact Test--Part 1--
Electronic Instrumentation'' (SAE J211/1, rev. Mar 95) is hereby 
incorporated into S6.2.3 by reference.
    S5.3 The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) 
Recommended Practice B456-95 ``Standard Specification for 
Electrodeposited Coatings of Copper Plus Nickel Plus Chromium and Nickel 
Plus Chromium'' (ASTM B456-95) is hereby incorporated into S6.3.1 by 
reference.
    S5.4 The Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Technology Society 
of North America (ANSI/RESNA) Standard WC/Vol.1-1998 Section 13, 
``Determination of Coefficient of Friction of Test Surfaces'' (ANSI/
RESNA WC/Vol.1--1998, sec. 13) is hereby incorporated into S7.2.2 by 
reference.
    S5.5 The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) 
Recommended Practice B117-97 ``Standard Practice for Operating Salt 
Spray (Fog) Apparatus'' (ASTM B117-97) is hereby incorporated into 
S7.3.2 by reference.
    S5.6 The Director of the Federal Register approved the materials 
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR 
part 51 (See Sec. 571.5 of this part). Copies of the materials may be 
inspected at NHTSA's Technical Reference Library, 400 Seventh Street 
SW., Room 5109, Washington, DC or at the National Archives and Records 
Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this 
material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/
federal--register/code--of--federal--regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    S5.6.1 The SAE materials referred to in S5.1 and S5.2 are available 
from the Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc., 400 Commonwealth Drive, 
Warrendale, PA. 15096.
    S5.6.2 The ASTM materials referred to in S5.3 and S5.5 are available 
from ASTM International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, PO Box C700, West 
Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959.
    S5.6.3 The ANSI/RESNA materials referred to in S5.4 are available 
from RESNA, 1700 North Moore St., Suite 1540, Arlington, VA 22209-1903.
    S6. Requirements.
    (a) Each platform lift must comply with the requirements for private 
use lifts or public use lifts and with the requirements for all lifts.
    (b) Each public use lift must
    (1) Comply with the requirements for public use lifts and with the 
requirements for all lifts.
    (2) Bear a label with the words ``DOT--Public Use Lift'' as 
certification of compliance with the requirements specified in paragraph 
S6(b)(1).
    (c) Each private use lift must
    (1) Comply with the requirements for private use lifts and with the 
requirements for all lifts.
    (2) Bear a label with the words ``DOT--Private Use Lift'' as 
certification of compliance with the requirements specified in S6(c)(1).
    (d) Platform lifts suitable for installation on buses, school buses, 
and MPVs other than motor homes with a GVWR greater than 4,536 kg 
(10,000 lb.), except motor homes, must be certified by the manufacturer 
as meeting the requirements for public use lifts. For platform lifts 
suitable for installation on all other vehicles, the manufacturer may 
select the option of certifying compliance with either the public use 
lift requirements or the private use lift requirements of this standard 
at the time it certifies the vehicle and may not thereafter select a 
different option for the vehicle.
    (e) For all lifts, where a range of values is specified, the 
equipment must meet the requirements at all points within the range.

[[Page 1142]]

    (f) The test procedures in S7 are used to determine compliance with 
all requirements, except S6.6, S6.7.5, S6.12 and S6.13.
    S6.1 Threshold warning signal.
    S6.1.1 Except when the platform lift is operated manually in backup 
mode as required by S6.9, the lift must meet the requirements of S6.1.2 
and S6.1.3. The lift is tested in accordance with S7.4 to determine 
compliance with this section.
    S6.1.2. Private-use lifts: Except for platform lifts where platform 
loading takes place wholly over the vehicle floor, a visual or audible 
warning must activate if the platform is more than 25 mm (1 inch) below 
the platform threshold area and portions of a passenger's body or 
mobility aid is on the platform threshold area defined in S4 when tested 
in accordance with S7.4.
    S6.1.3 Public-use lifts: A visual and audible warning must activate 
if the platform is more than 25 mm (1 inch) below the platform threshold 
area and portions of a passenger's body or mobility aid is on the 
platform threshold area defined in S4 when tested in accordance with 
S7.4.
    S6.1.4 The visual warning required by S6.1.2 and S6.1.3 must be a 
flashing red beacon as defined in SAE J578, June 95, must have a minimum 
intensity of 20 candela, a frequency from 1 to 2 Hz, and must be 
installed such that it does not require more than <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>15 degrees side-to-side head rotation as viewed by a 
passenger backing onto the platform from the interior of the vehicle. If 
a lift has only a visual alarm and the lift manufacturer specifies that 
the passenger must load onto the platform in a forward direction from 
the vehicle floor, the visual alarm must be located such that it does 
not require more than <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>15 degrees side-to-side head 
rotation as viewed by a passenger traversing forward onto the platform.
    S6.1.5 The audible warning required by S6.1.2 and S6.1.3 must be a 
minimum of 85 dBA between 500 and 3000 Hz.
    S6.1.6 The intensity of the visual or audible warnings required by 
S6.1.2 and S6.1.3 is measured at the location 914 mm (3 ft) above the 
center of the platform threshold area. (See figure 2.)
    S6.2 Platform lift operational requirements.
    S6.2.1 General. Throughout the range of passenger operation and 
during the lift operations specified in S7.9.3 through S7.9.8, the 
platform lift must meet the requirements of S6.2.2 through S6.2.4. These 
requirements must be satisfied both with and without a standard load on 
the lift platform, except for S6.2.2.2, which must be satisfied without 
any load.
    S6.2.2 Maximum platform velocity.
    S6.2.2.1 Throughout the range of passenger operation specified in 
S7.9.4 through S7.9.7, both the vertical and horizontal velocity of the 
platform must be less than or equal to 152 mm (6 inches) per second when 
measured at the geometric center of the platform when the platform is 
unloaded and at the geometric center of the top, horizontal surface of 
the standard load specified in S7.1.1 when the platform is loaded.
    S6.2.2.2 Except for platform lifts that manually stow (fold) and 
deploy (unfold), during the stow and deploy operations specified in 
S7.9.3 through S7.9.8, both the vertical and horizontal velocity of any 
portion of the platform must be less than or equal to 305 mm (12 inches) 
per second.
    S6.2.3 Maximum platform acceleration. Throughout the range of 
passenger operation specified in S7.9.4 through S7.9.7, both the 
horizontal and vertical acceleration of the platform must be less than 
or equal to 0.3 g after the accelerometer output is filtered with a 
channel frequency class (CFC) 3 filter. The filter must meet the 
requirements of SAE Recommended Practice J211/1, rev. Mar 95, with 
F<INF>H</INF> = 3 Hz and F<INF>N</INF> = 5 Hz. The accelerometer is 
located at the geometric center of the platform and is mounted directly 
on the platform when it is unloaded and on the geometric center of the 
top, horizontal surface of the standard load specified in S7.1.1 when 
the platform is loaded.
    S6.2.4 Maximum noise level of public use lifts. Except as provided 
in S6.1.5, throughout the range of passenger operation specified in 
S7.9.4 through S7.9.7, the noise level of a public use lift may not 
exceed 80 dBa as measured at any lift operator's position designated by 
the platform lift manufacturer for the intended vehicle and in the area 
on the lift defined in S6.4.2.1.

[[Page 1143]]

Lift operator position measurements are taken at the vertical centerline 
of the control panel 30.5 cm (12 in) out from the face of the control 
panel. In the case of a lift with a pendant control (i.e., a control 
tethered to the vehicle by connective wiring), measurement is taken at 
the vertical centerline of the control panel 30.5 cm (12 in) out from 
the face of the control panel while the control panel is in its stowed 
or stored position. For the lift operator positions outside of the 
vehicle, measurements are taken at the intersection of a horizontal 
plane 157 cm (62 in) above the ground and the vertical centerline of the 
face of the control panel after it has been extended 30.5 cm (12 in) out 
from the face of the control panel.
    S6.3 Environmental resistance.
    S6.3.1 Internally mounted platform lifts. On platform lifts and 
their components internal to the occupant compartment of the vehicle or 
internal to other compartments that provide protection from the elements 
when stowed, attachment hardware must be free of ferrous corrosion on 
significant surfaces except for permissible ferrous corrosion, as 
defined in FMVSS No. 209, at peripheral surface edges or edges of holes 
on under-floor reinforcing plates and washers after being subjected to 
the conditions specified in S7.3. Alternatively, such hardware must be 
made from corrosion-resistant steel containing at least 11.5 percent 
chromium per FMVSS 571.209, S5.2(a) or must be protected against 
corrosion by an electrodeposited coating of nickel, or copper and nickel 
with at least a service condition number of SC2, and other attachment 
hardware must be protected by an electrodeposited coating of nickel, or 
copper and nickel with a service condition number of SC1, in accordance 
with ASTM B456-95, but such hardware may not be racked for 
electroplating in locations subjected to maximum stress. The 
manufacturer shall select the option by the time it certifies the lift 
and may not thereafter select a different option for the lift. The lift 
must be accompanied by all attachment hardware necessary for its 
installation on a vehicle.
    S6.3.2 Externally mounted platform lifts. On platform lifts and 
their components external to the occupant compartment of the vehicle and 
external to other compartments that provide protection from the elements 
when stowed, the lift and its components must be free of ferrous 
corrosion on significant surfaces except for permissible ferrous 
corrosion, as defined in FMVSS No. 209, at peripheral surface edges and 
edges of holes and continue to function properly after being subjected 
to the conditions specified in S7.3. Alternatively, such lifts and all 
associated hardware and components must be completely made from 
corrosion-resistant steel containing at least 11.5 percent chromium per 
FMVSS 571.209, S5.2(a). The manufacturer shall select the option by the 
time it certifies the lift and may not thereafter select a different 
option for the lift. The lift must be accompanied by all attachment 
hardware necessary for its installation on a vehicle.
    S6.4 Platform requirements.
    S6.4.1 General. Throughout the range of passenger operations and 
during the platform lift operations specified in S7.9.4 through S7.9.7, 
the platform lift must meet the requirements of S6.4.2 through S6.4.12. 
The requirements of S6.4.2 through S6.4.6, S6.4.7.4, S6.4.9.4, S6.4.9.5, 
S6.4.9.6, and S6.4.9.8 must be satisfied both with and without a 
standard load on the lift platform
    S6.4.2 Unobstructed platform operating volume.
    S6.4.2.1 Public use lifts. For public use lifts, the minimum 
platform operating volume is the sum of an upper part and a lower part 
(see Figure 3). The lower part is a rectangular solid whose base is 725 
mm (28.5 in) wide by the length of the platform surface, whose height is 
50 mm (2 in), and which is resting on the platform surface with each 
side of the base parallel with the nearest side of the platform surface. 
The width is perpendicular to the lift reference plane and the length is 
parallel to the lift reference plane (See Figure 1). The upper part is a 
rectangular solid whose base is 760 mm (30 in) by 1,220 mm (48 in) long, 
whose height is 711 mm (28 in), and whose base is tangent to the top 
surface of the lower rectangular solid (see Figure 3). The centroids of 
both the upper and lower

[[Page 1144]]

parts coincide with the vertical centroidal axis of the platform 
reference plane (see Figure 1).
    S6.4.2.2 Private use lifts. For private use lifts, the platform 
operating volume is as specified by the lift manufacturer and identified 
in the lift insert to the vehicle owner's manual.
    S6.4.3 Platform surface protrusions.
    S6.4.3.1 Public use lifts. For public use lifts, except as required 
for deployment of the wheelchair retention device and inner roll stop, 
throughout the range of passenger operation, the platform surface may 
not have protrusions which rise more than 6.5 mm (0.25 in) above the 
platform surface, measured perpendicular to the platform surface by a 
device with its base centered between 50-100 mm (2-4 in) from the 
protrusion. Any cross-sectional dimension of the base of the protrusion 
measurement device must be greater than or equal to 25mm (1 in) and less 
than or equal to 50 mm (2 in).
    S6.4.3.2 Private use lifts. For private use lifts, except as 
required for deployment of the wheelchair retention device and inner 
roll stop, the platform surface may not have protrusions which rise more 
than 13 mm (0.5 in) above the platform surface, measured perpendicular 
to the platform surface by a device with its base centered between 50-
100 mm (2-4 in) from the protrusion. All portions of the sides of a 
protrusion that are between 6.5 mm (0.25 in) and 13 mm (0.5 in) above 
the platform must have a slope not greater than 1:2, measured with 
respect to the platform surface at the location of the protrusion. Any 
cross-sectional dimension of the base of the protrusion measurement 
device must be greater than or equal to 25mm (1 in) and less than or 
equal to 50 mm (2 in).
    S6.4.4 Gaps, transitions and openings.
    S6.4.4.1 When the platform lift is at the ground level loading 
position, any vertical surface transition measured perpendicular to the 
ground over which a passenger may traverse to enter or exit the 
platform, may not be greater than 6.5 mm (0.25 in). When the lift is at 
the vehicle level loading position, any vertical surface transition 
measured perpendicular to the platform threshold area over which a 
passenger may traverse to enter or exit the platform, may not be greater 
than 6.5 mm (0.25 in).
    S6.4.4.2 When the platform lift is at the ground or vehicle level 
loading position, the slope of any surface over which a passenger may 
traverse to enter or exit the platform must have a rise to run not 
greater than 1:2 on the portion of the rise between 6.5 mm (0.25 in) and 
13 mm (0.5 in), and 1:8 on the portion of the rise between 13 mm (0.5 
in) and 75 mm (3 in). The rise of any sloped surface may not be greater 
than 75 mm (3 inches). When the lift is at the ground level loading 
position, measurements are made perpendicular to the ground. When the 
lift is at the vehicle level loading position, measurements are made 
perpendicular to the platform threshold area.
    S6.4.4.3 When the inner roll stop or any outer barrier is deployed, 
any gap between the inner roll stop and lift platform and any gap 
between the outer barrier and lift platform must prevent passage of the 
clearance test block specified in S7.1.3 when its long axis is held 
perpendicular to the platform reference plane.
    S6.4.4.4 When the platform is at the vehicle floor or ground level 
loading position, any horizontal gap over which a passenger may traverse 
to enter or exit the platform must prevent passage of a 13 mm (0.5 inch) 
diameter sphere.
    S6.4.4.5 Any opening in that portion of the platform surface that 
coincides with the unobstructed platform operating volume described in 
S6.4.2 must prevent passage of a 19 mm (0.75 inch) diameter sphere.
    S6.4.4.6 Any gap between the platform sides and edge guards which 
move with the platform must prevent passage of a 13 mm (0.5 inch) 
diameter sphere. Where structures fixed to the vehicle are used as edge 
guards, the horizontal gap between the platform side and vehicle 
structure must prevent passage of a 6.5 mm (0.25 inch) diameter sphere.
    S6.4.5 Platform deflection. The angle of the deployed platform, when 
stationary, and loaded with a standard load, must not exceed 4.8 degrees 
with respect to the vehicle floor and must not exceed 3 degrees with 
respect to the platform's unloaded position. The angles are measured 
between a vertical

[[Page 1145]]

axis from the vehicle floor and an axis normal to the platform center as 
shown in Figure 1.
    S6.4.6 Edge guards.
    S6.4.6.1 The platform lift must have edge guards that extend 
continuously along each side of the lift platform to within 75 mm (3 
inches) of the edges of the platform that are traversed while entering 
and exiting the platform at both the ground and vehicle floor level 
loading positions. The edge guards must be parallel to the direction of 
wheelchair movement during loading and unloading. Alternatively, when 
tested in accordance with S7.7.4, all portions of the wheels of the 
wheelchair test device must remain above the platform surface and after 
the control is released to Neutral, at the end of each attempt to steer 
the test device off the platform, all wheels of the wheelchair test 
device must be in contact with the platform surface. The manufacturer 
shall select the option by the time it certifies the lift and may not 
thereafter select a different option for the lift.
    S6.4.6.2 Edge guards that move with the platform must have vertical 
sides facing the platform surface and a minimum height of 38 mm (1.5 
inches), measured vertically from the platform surface.
    S6.4.6.3 Except whenever any part of the platform surface is below a 
horizontal plane 75 mm (3 inches) above the ground, edge guards must be 
deployed throughout the range of passenger operation.
    S6.4.7 Wheelchair retention.
    S6.4.7.1 Impact I. Except for platform lifts designed so that 
platform loading takes place wholly over the vehicle floor, the lift 
must have a means of retaining the test device specified in S7.1.2. 
After impact, the test device must remain upright with all of its wheels 
on the platform surface throughout its range of passenger operation, 
except as provided in S6.4.7.4. The lift is tested in accordance with 
S7.7 to determine compliance with this section.
    S6.4.7.2 Impact II. For platform lifts designed so that platform 
loading takes place wholly over the vehicle floor, the lift must have a 
means of retaining the test device specified in S7.1.2. After impact, 
the test device must remain upright with all of its wheels on the 
platform surface, throughout the range of passenger operation, except as 
provided in S6.4.7.4. The lift is tested in accordance with S7.7 to 
determine compliance with this section.
    S6.4.7.3 Overload. The deployed wheelchair retention device(s) must 
be capable of sustaining 7,117 N (1,600 lb force) when tested in 
accordance with S7.13. No separation, fracture, or breakage of the 
wheelchair retention device may occur as a result of conducting the test 
in S7.13.
    S6.4.7.4 Deployment. Except whenever any part of the platform 
surface is below a horizontal plane 75 mm (3 in) above the ground, the 
wheelchair retention device(s) must be deployed throughout the range of 
passenger operation.
    S6.4.8 Inner roll stop.
    S6.4.8.1 Public use lifts. Public use lifts must have an inner roll 
stop that meets the requirements of S6.4.8.3.
    S6.4.8.2 Private use lifts. Private use lifts must:
    (a) Have an inner roll stop that meets the requirements of S6.4.8.3; 
or
    (b) Have operating instructions near the lift controls and in the 
vehicle owner's manual, as specified in S6.7.8 and S6.12.4.3, that 
contain a warning that wheelchairs should back onto the platform when 
entering from the ground.
    S6.4.8.3 Requirements. When tested in accordance with S7.8, platform 
lifts must have an inner roll stop that provides a means that prevents:
    (a) The front wheels of the test device specified in S7.1.2 from 
passing over the edge of the platform where the roll stop is located, 
when the lift is at the ground level loading position; and
    (b) Any portion of the test device specified in S7.1.2 from being 
contacted simultaneously with a portion of the lift platform and any 
other structure, throughout the lift's range of passenger operation.
    S6.4.9 Handrails.
    S6.4.9.1 Public use lifts: Public use lifts must have a handrail 
located on each side of the lift that meets the requirements of S6.4.9.3 
through S6.4.9.9.

[[Page 1146]]

    S6.4.9.2 Private use lifts: Private use lifts are not required to be 
equipped with handrails. Private use lifts that are equipped with 
handrails must meet the requirement of S6.4.9.3 through S6.4.9.9.
    S6.4.9.3 The graspable portion of each handrail may not be less than 
760 mm (30 inches) and more than 965 mm (38 inches) above the platform 
surface, measured vertically.
    S6.4.9.4 The cross section of the graspable portion of each handrail 
may not be less than 31.5 mm (1.25 inches) and more than 38 mm (1.5 
inches) in diameter or width, and may not have less than a 3.2 mm (0.125 
inch) radii on any corner.
    S6.4.9.5 The vertical projection of the graspable portion of each 
handrail must intersect two planes that are perpendicular to the 
platform reference plane and to the direction of travel of a wheelchair 
on the lift when entering or exiting the platform, and are 203 mm (8 
inches) apart.
    S6.4.9.6 The handrails must move such that the position of the 
handrails relative to the platform surface does not change.
    S6.4.9.7 When tested in accordance with S7.12.1, each handrail must 
withstand 445 N (100 pounds force) applied at any point and in any 
direction on the handrail without more than 25 mm (1 inch) of 
displacement relative to the platform surface. After removal of the 
load, the handrail must exhibit no permanent deformation.
    S6.4.9.8 When tested in accordance with S7.12.1, there must be at 
least 38 mm (1.5 inches) of clearance between each handrail and any 
portion of the vehicle, throughout the range of passenger operation.
    S6.4.9.9 When tested in accordance with S7.12.2, each handrail must 
withstand 1,112 N (250 lb/f) applied at any point and in any direction 
on the handrail without sustaining any failure, such as cracking, 
separation, fracture, or more than 100 mm (4 inches) of displacement of 
any point on the handrails relative to the platform surface.
    S6.4.10 Platform markings on public use lifts. Throughout the range 
of passenger operation, all edges of the platform surface, the visible 
edge of the vehicle floor or bridging device adjacent to the platform 
lift, and any designated standing area on a public use lift must be 
outlined. The outlines must be at least 25 mm (1 in) wide and of a color 
that contrasts with its background by 60 percent, determined according 
to the following equation:

Contrast = 100 x [(L1-L2)/L1]

Where:

L1 = luminance of the lighter color or shade, and
L2 = luminance of the darker color or shade.
L1 and L2 are measured perpendicular to the platform surface with 
illumination provided by a diffuse light and a resulting luminance of 
the platform surface of 323 lm/m\2\ (30 lumen/sqft).

    S6.4.11 Platform slip resistance. When tested in accordance with 
S7.2, the coefficient of friction, in any direction, of any part of a 
wet platform surface may not be less than 0.65.
    S6.5 Structural integrity.
    S6.5.1 Fatigue endurance.
    S6.5.1.1 Public use lifts. Except for lifts that manually stow 
(fold) and deploy (unfold), public use lifts must remain operable when 
operated through a total of 15,600 cycles: 7,800 unloaded Raise/Lower 
and Stow/Deploy operations and 7,800 loaded Raise/Lower operations as 
specified in S7.10. Public use lifts that manually stow (fold) and 
deploy (unfold) must remain operable when operated through a total of 
15,600 cycles: 7,800 unloaded Raise/Lower operations and 7,800 loaded 
Raise/Lower operations. No separation, fracture, or breakage of any 
vehicle or lift component may occur as a result of conducting the 
fatigue test in S7.10.
    S6.5.1.2 Private use lifts. Except for lifts that manually stow 
(fold) and deploy (unfold), private use lifts must remain operable when 
operated through a total of 4,400 cycles: 2,200 unloaded Raise/Lower and 
Stow/Deploy operations and 2,200 loaded Raise/Lower operations as 
specified in S7.10. Private use lifts that manually stow (fold) and 
deploy (unfold) must remain operable when operated through a total of 
4,400 cycles: 2,200 unloaded Raise/Lower operations and 2,200 loaded 
Raise/Lower operations. No separation, fracture, or breakage of any 
vehicle or lift component may occur as a result of conducting the 
fatigue test in S7.10.

[[Page 1147]]

    S6.5.2 Proof load. The platform lift must be capable of holding 
three times the standard load, as specified in S7.11, without 
separation, fracture, or breakage of any vehicle or lift component. 
After the test, the lift must pass Static Load Test I as specified in 
S7.9.
    S6.5.3 Ultimate load. The platform lift must be capable of holding 
four times the standard load, as specified in S7.14, without separation, 
fracture, or breakage of the platform, supporting structure, or lifting 
mechanism.
    S6.6 Platform free fall limits. In the event of any single-point 
failure of systems for raising, lowering or supporting the platform, any 
portion of the platform, loaded as specified in S7.1.1, may not fall 
vertically faster than 305 mm (12 in) per second or change angular 
orientation more than 2 degrees from the orientation prior to the 
failure. This requirement applies whenever the lift is under primary 
power source operation or manual backup operation.
    S6.7 Control panel switches.
    S6.7.1 The platform lift must meet the requirements of S6.7.2 
through S6.7.8 and, when operated by means of the control panel switches 
specified in S6.7.2, must perform the lift operations specified in S7.9.
    S6.7.2 The platform lift system must have control panel switches 
that perform not less than the following functions: (platform lifts that 
manually stow (fold) and deploy (unfold) are exempt from S6.7.2.2 and 
S6.7.2.5).
    S6.7.2.1 Enables and disables the lift control panel switches. This 
function must be identified as ``POWER'' if located on the control. The 
POWER function must have two states: ``ON'' and ``OFF''. The ``ON'' 
state must allow platform lift operation. When the POWER function is in 
the ``ON'' state, an indicator light on the controls must illuminate. 
The ``OFF'' state must prevent lift operation and must turn off the 
indicator light. Verification with this requirement is made throughout 
the lift operations specified in S7.9.3 through S7.9.8.
    S6.7.2.2 Moves the lift from a stowed position to an extended 
position or, to one of the two loading positions. This function must be 
identified as ``DEPLOY'' or ``UNFOLD'' on the control.
    S6.7.2.3 Lowers the lift platform. This function must be identified 
as ``Down'' or ``Lower'' on the control.
    S6.7.2.4 Raises the lift platform. This function must be identified 
as ``Up'' or ``Raise'' on the control.
    S6.7.2.5 Moves the lift from a position within the range of 
passenger operation to a stowed position. This function must be 
identified as ``Stow'' or ``Fold'' on the control.
    S6.7.3 Except for the Power function described in S6.7.2.1, the 
functions specified in S6.7.2 must activate in a momentary fashion, by 
one switch or by a combination of switches. Verification with this 
requirement is made throughout the lift operations specified in S7.9.3 
through S7.9.8.
    S6.7.4 Except for the POWER function described in S6.7.2.1, the 
control panel switches specified in S6.7.2 must prevent the simultaneous 
performance of more than one function. Verification with this 
requirement is made throughout the lift operations specified in S7.9.3 
through S7.9.8.
    S6.7.5 Any single-point failure in the control panel switches may 
not prevent the operation of any of the interlocks as specified in 
S6.10.
    S6.7.6 Identification of operating functions.
    S6.7.6.1 Each operating function of each platform lift control must 
be identified with characters that are at least 2.5 mm (0.1 in) in 
height.
    S6.7.6.2 Public use lifts: Public use lifts must have characters 
that are illuminated in accordance with S5.3 of Standard No. 101, when 
the vehicle's headlights are illuminated.
    S6.7.7 Control location for public use lifts: In public use lifts, 
except for the backup operation specified in S6.9, all control panel 
switches must be positioned together and in a location such that the 
lift operator has a direct, unobstructed view of the platform lift 
passenger and the passenger's mobility aid, if applicable. Verification 
with this requirement is made throughout the lift operations specified 
in S7.9.3 through S7.9.8. Additional controls may be positioned in other 
locations.
    S6.7.8 Operating instructions: Simple instructions regarding the 
platform lift operating procedures, including backup operations as 
specified by S6.9, must:

[[Page 1148]]

    S6.7.8.1 Be located near the controls.
    S6.7.8.2 Have characters with a minimum height of 2.5 mm (0.1 in) 
and written in English.
    S6.7.8.3 Public use lifts: Include the statement ``DOT--Public Use 
Lift''.
    S6.7.8.4 Private use lifts: Include the statement ``DOT--Private Use 
Lift'', the manufacturer's rated load for the lift, and, if applicable, 
instructions indicating that the wheelchair occupant must back onto the 
lift when loading from the ground.
    S6.8 Jacking prevention.
    S6.8.1 Except when the platform lift is operated in backup mode as 
required by S6.9, throughout the lift operations specified in S7.9.4 and 
S7.9.7, the lift system must meet the requirements of S6.8.2, both with 
and without a standard load on the lift.
    S6.8.2 The control system or platform lift design must prevent the 
raising of any portion of the vehicle by the lift system when lowering 
the lift is attempted while the lift is at the ground level loading 
position.
    S6.9 Backup operation.
    S6.9.1 The platform lift must be equipped with a manual backup 
operating mode that can, in the event there is a loss of the primary 
power source for lift operation or a lift malfunction, deploy the lift, 
lower the loaded platform to the ground level loading position, raise 
the unloaded platform to the vehicle floor loading position, and stow 
the lift. During backup operation of the lift, the wheelchair retention 
device and inner roll stop must be manually deployable and stowable. The 
operating instructions near the lift controls and in the vehicle owner's 
manual insert, as specified in S6.7.8 and S6.12.2, must contain 
information on manual backup operation which must include manual 
operation of the wheelchair retention device and inner roll stop during 
backup operation of the lift.
    S6.10 Interlocks.
    S6.10.1 Except when the platform lift is operated in backup mode as 
required by S6.9, the requirements of S6.10.2 must be met, both with and 
without a standard load on the lift.
    S6.10.2 The platform lift system must have interlocks or operate in 
such a manner when installed according to the installation instructions, 
as to prevent:
    S6.10.2.1 Forward or rearward mobility of the vehicle unless the 
platform lift is stowed. The design of this system must be such that it 
discourages accidental release and does not affect vehicle movement when 
the lift is stowed until the vehicle is stopped and the lift deployed. 
Verification with this requirement is made throughout the lift 
operations specified in S7.9.2 and S7.9.3.
    S6.10.2.2 Operation of the platform lift from the stowed position 
until forward and rearward mobility of the vehicle is inhibited, by 
means of placing the transmission in park or placing the transmission in 
neutral and actuating the parking brake or the vehicle service brakes by 
means other than the operator depressing the vehicle's service brake 
pedal. Verification with this requirement is made throughout the lift 
operations specified in S7.9.2 and S7.9.3.
    S6.10.2.3 Stowing of the platform lift when occupied by portions of 
a passenger's body, and/or a mobility aid. Platform lifts designed to be 
occupied while stowed and platform lifts that manually stow (fold) are 
excluded from this requirement. Verification with this requirement is 
made using the test device specified in S7.1.4. Move the deployed 
platform lift to a position within the range of passenger operation 
where it will stow if the control specified in S6.7.2.5 is actuated. 
Place the test device specified in S7.1.4 on its narrowest side on any 
portion of the platform surface that coincides with the unobstructed 
platform operating volume described in S6.4.2. Using the operator 
control specified in S7.7.2.5, attempt to stow the lift. The interlock 
must prevent the lift from stowing.
    S6.10.2.4 Movement of the platform up or down unless the inner roll 
stop required to comply with S6.4.8 is deployed. When the platform 
reaches a level where the inner roll stop is designed to deploy, the 
platform must stop unless the inner roll stop has deployed. Verification 
with this requirement is made by performing the test procedure specified 
in S7.6.
    S6.10.2.5 Movement of the platform up or down, throughout the range 
of passenger operation, when the platform

[[Page 1149]]

surface is above a horizontal plane 75 mm (3 in) above the ground level 
loading position, unless the wheelchair retention device required to 
comply with S6.4.7 is deployed throughout the range of passenger 
operations. Verification of compliance is made using the test procedure 
specified in S 7.5.
    S6.10.2.6 In the case of a platform lift that is equipped with an 
outer barrier, deployment of the outer barrier, when it is occupied by 
portions of a passenger's body or mobility aid throughout the lift 
operations. Verification of compliance is made using the test procedure 
specified in S 7.5.
    S6.10.2.7 Deployment of any inner roll stop required to comply with 
S6.4.8, when the inner roll stop is occupied by portions of a 
passenger's body or mobility aid throughout the lift operations. 
Verification of compliance with this requirement uses the test procedure 
specified in S7.6.
    S6.11 Operations counter. The platform lift must have an operation 
or cycle counter that records each complete Up/Down (Raise/Lower) 
operation throughout the range of passenger operation. Determination of 
compliance with this requirement is made during the lift operations 
specified in S7.9.4 and S7.9.5.
    S6.12 Vehicle owner's manual insert. The lift manufacturer must 
provide with the lift, inserts for the vehicle owner's manual that 
provide specific information about the platform lift. The vehicle 
owner's manual insert must be written in English and must include:
    S6.12.1 A maintenance schedule that includes maintenance 
requirements that have, at a minimum, some dependency on the number of 
cycles on the operations counter specified in S6.11.
    S6.12.2 Instructions regarding the platform lift operating 
procedures, including backup operations, as specified by S6.9.
    S6.12.3 Public use lifts: In addition to meeting the requirements of 
S6.12.1 and S6.12.2, the owner's manual insert for public use lifts must 
also include:
    S6.12.3.1 The statement ``DOT--Public Use Lift'' on the front cover 
of the vehicle owner's manual insert; and
    S6.12.3.2 The statement ``DOT--Public Use Lift'' verifies that this 
platform lift meets the ``public use lift '' requirements of FMVSS No. 
403. This lift may be installed on all vehicles appropriate for the size 
and weight of the lift, but must be installed on buses, school buses, 
and multi-purpose passenger vehicles other than motor homes with a gross 
vehicle weight rating (GVWR) that exceeds 4,536 kg (10,000 lb).''
    S6.12.4 Private use lifts: In addition to meeting the requirements 
of S6.12.1 and S6.12.2, the owner's manual insert for private use lifts 
must also include:
    S6.12.4.1 The dimensions that constitute the unobstructed platform 
operating volume;
    S6.12.4.2 The manufacturer's rated load for the lift;
    S6.12.4.3 Information on whether a wheelchair user must back onto 
the platform from the ground level loading position due to the absence 
of an inner roll stop;
    S6.12.4.4 The statement ``DOT-Private Use Lift'' on the front cover 
of the vehicle owner's manual insert; and
    S6.12.4.5 The statement ``DOT-Private Use Lift verifies that this 
platform lift meets only the ``private use lift'' requirements of FMVSS 
No. 403. This lift may be installed on all vehicles appropriate for the 
size and weight of the lift, except for buses, school buses, and multi-
purpose passenger vehicles other than motor homes with a gross vehicle 
weight rating (GVWR) that exceeds (4,536 kg) 10,000 lb.''
    S6.13 Installation instructions. The manufacturer of a platform lift 
must include installation instructions with each lift. Information must 
be included in the installation instructions that identifies:
    S6.13.1 The vehicles on which the lift is designed to be installed. 
Vehicles may be identified by listing the make, model, and year of the 
vehicles for which the lift is suitable, or by specifying the design 
elements that would make a vehicle an appropriate host for the 
particular lift, and for which the platform lift manufacturer has 
certified compliance.
    S6.13.2 Procedures for operational checks that the vehicle 
manufacturer must perform to verify that the lift is

[[Page 1150]]

fully operational. Such checks include, but are not limited to, platform 
lighting, the threshold-warning signal, and interlocks, including those 
that interface with vehicle systems.
    S6.13.3 Any informational material or labels that must be placed on 
or in the vehicle in order to comply with the requirements of this 
standard. Labels must be of a permanent nature that can withstand the 
elements of the outside environment.
    S6.13.4 Public use lifts: In addition to meeting the requirements of 
S6.13.1 through S6.13.3, the installation instructions for public use 
lifts must also include, on the front cover of the instructions, the 
statement ``DOT-Public Use Lift''.
    S6.13.4.1 Installation instructions for public use lifts must 
contain the statement ``Public use vehicle manufacturers are responsible 
for complying with the lift lighting requirements in Federal Motor 
Vehicle Safety Standard No. 404, Platform Lift Installations in Motor 
Vehicles (49 CFR 571.404).''
    S6.13.5 Private use lifts: In addition to meeting the requirements 
of S6.13.1 through S6.13.3, the installation instructions for private 
use lifts must also include, on the front cover of the instructions, the 
manufacturer's rated load for the lift and the statement ``DOT-Private 
Use Lift''.
    S7. Test conditions and procedures. Each platform lift must be 
capable of meeting all of the tests specified in this standard, both 
separately, and in the sequence specified in this section. The tests 
specified in S7.4, S7.7.4 and S7.8 through S7.11 are performed on a 
single lift and vehicle combination. The tests specified in S7.2, S7.3, 
S7.5, S7.6, S7.7.1 and S7.12 through S7.14 may be performed with the 
lift installed on a test jig rather than on a vehicle. Tests of 
requirements in S6.1 through S6.11 may be performed on a single lift and 
vehicle combination, except for the requirements of S6.5.3. Attachment 
hardware may be replaced if damaged by removal and reinstallation of the 
lift between a test jig and vehicle.
    S7.1 Test devices.
    S7.1.1 Test pallet and load. The surface of the test pallet that 
rests on the platform used for the tests specified in S7.9 through S7.11 
and S7.14 has sides that measure between 660 mm (26 in) and 686 mm (27 
in). For the tests specified in S7.9 and S7.10, the test pallet is made 
of a rectangular steel plate of uniform thickness and the load that 
rests on the test pallet is made of rectangular steel plate(s) of 
uniform thickness and sides that measure between 533 mm (21 in) and 686 
mm (27 in). The standard test load that rests on the pallet is defined 
in S4.
    S7.1.2 Wheelchair test device. The test device is an unloaded power 
wheelchair whose size is appropriate for a 95th percentile male and that 
has the dimensions, configuration and components described in S7.1.2.1 
through S7.1.2.11. If the dimension in S7.1.2.9 is measured for a 
particular wheelchair by determining its tipping angle, the batteries 
are prevented from moving from their original position.
    S7.1.2.1 a cross-braced steel frame;
    S7.1.2.2 a sling seat integrated in the frame;
    S7.1.2.3 a belt drive;
    S7.1.2.4 detachable footrests, with the lowest point of the footrest 
adjustable in a range not less than 25 mm (1 in) to 123 mm (5 in) from 
the ground;
    S7.1.2.5 Two pneumatic rear tires with a diameter not less than 495 
mm (19.5 in) and not more than 521 mm (20.5 in) inflated to the 
wheelchair manufacturer's recommended pressure or if no recommendation 
exists, to the maximum pressure that appears on the sidewall of the 
tire;
    S7.1.2.6 Two pneumatic front tires with a diameter not less than 190 
mm (7.5 in) and not more than 216 mm (8.5 in) inflated to the wheelchair 
manufacturer's recommended pressure or if no recommendation exists, to 
the maximum pressure that appears on the sidewall of the tire;
    S7.1.2.7 a distance between front and rear axles not less than 457 
mm (18 in) and not more than 533 mm (21 in);
    S7.1.2.8 a horizontal distance between rear axle and center of 
gravity not less than 114 mm (4.5 in) and not more than 152 mm (6.0 in);
    S7.1.2.9 a vertical distance between ground and center of gravity 
not less than 260 mm (10.25 in) and not more than 298 mm (11.75 in);

[[Page 1151]]

    S7.1.2.10 a mass of not less than 72.5 kg (160 lb) and not more than 
86.0 kg (190 lb).
    S7.1.2.11 Batteries with a charge not less than 75 percent of their 
rated nominal capacity (for tests that require use of the wheelchair's 
propulsion system).
    S7.1.3 Clearance test block for gaps, transitions, and openings. The 
clearance test block is made of a rigid material and is 16x16x100 mm 
(0.625x0.625x4.0 in) with all corners having a 1.6 mm (0.0625 inch) 
radius.
    S7.1.4 Test Device for detecting platform occupancy. Occupancy of 
the platform is detected using a 152x152x305 mm (6x6x12 inches) rigid 
box having a total weight of 22.7 kg (50 lb).
    S7.2 Slip resistance test.
    S7.2.1 To determine compliance with S6.4.12, clean any 450mm x 100mm 
(17.5 in x 3.94 in) section of the platform with household glass cleaner 
(ammonia hydroxide solution). Wet the cleaned section of the platform by 
evenly spraying 3 ml (0.10 oz) of distilled water per 100 cm\2\ (15.5 
in\2\) of surface area. Begin the test specified in S7.2.2 within 30 
seconds of completion of the wetting process.
    S7.2.2 Use the test procedure defined in ANSI/RESNA WC/Vol. 1-1998, 
sec.13, except for clauses 5.3, Force Gage and 6, Test Procedure, on the 
wet section of platform. In lieu of clauses 5.3 and 6, implement the 
requirements of S7.2.2.1 and S7.2.2.2.
    S7.2.2.1 Force gage. The pulling force is measured, at a frequency 
of at least 10 Hz, by a force gauge that has been calibrated to an 
accuracy of <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 percent of the reading in the range 
of 25N to 100N.
    S7.2.2.2 Test procedure. Before the test, prepare the surface of the 
test rubber by lightly abrading with waterproof silicon carbide paper, 
grade P120, weight D (120 wet and dry). Then wipe the surface clean with 
a dry cloth or brush. No solvents or other cleaning materials are used. 
To determine the coefficient of friction for the wet platform section 
pull the test block, with the test rubber attached, by machine at a rate 
of 20 <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2mm/s. The machine and test block are 
rigidly linked by a device that exhibits a stiffness greater than or 
equal to 1x10\5\ N/m. Pull the test block for a minimum of 13 seconds. 
Record the pulling force over the final 10 seconds of the test at a 
minimum frequency of 10 Hz. Repeat the test at least 5 times on any one 
area of the platform surface, in a single direction. Calculate the 
average pulling force for each trial, F<INF>1</INF> through 
F<INF>n</INF>, where n is the number of trials. Measure the weight of 
the test block with the force gauge and call it F<INF>b</INF>. Calculate 
the coefficient of friction, [mu]<INF>p</INF>, from the following 
equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27DE02.000

    S7.3 Environmental resistance test.
    S7.3.1 Perform the procedures specified in S7.3.2 through S7.3.5 to 
determine compliance with S6.3.
    S7.3.2 Attachment hardware, as specified in S6.3.1, and externally 
mounted platform lifts or components, as specified in S6.3.2, are tested 
in accordance with ASTM B117-97. Any surface coating or material not 
intended for permanent retention on the metal parts during service life 
are removed prior to testing. Except as specified in S7.3.3, the period 
of the test is 50 hours, consisting of two periods of 24 hours exposure 
to salt spray followed by one hour drying.
    S7.3.3 For attachment hardware located within the occupant 
compartment of the motor vehicle or internal to other compartments that 
provide protection from the elements and not at or near the floor of the 
compartment, the period of the test is 25 hours, consisting of one 
period of 24 hours exposure to salt spray followed by one hour drying.
    S7.3.4 For performance of this test, externally mounted platform 
lifts or components may be installed on test jigs rather than on the 
vehicle. The lift is in a stowed position. The configuration of the test 
setup is such that areas of the lift that would be exposed to the 
outside environment during actual use are not protected from the salt 
spray by the test jig.
    S7.3.5 At the end of the test, any surface exposed to the salt spray 
is washed thoroughly with water to remove the salt. After drying for at 
least 24 hours under laboratory conditions,

[[Page 1152]]

the platform lift and components are examined for ferrous corrosion on 
significant surfaces, i.e., all surfaces that can be contacted by a 
sphere 2 cm (0.79 in) in diameter.
    S7.4 Threshold warning signal test.
    S7.4.1 Determine compliance with S6.1.2 and S6.1.3 using the test 
procedure specified in S7.4.2.
    S7.4.2 Maneuver the lift platform to the vehicle floor level loading 
position. Using the wheelchair test device specified in S7.1.2, place 
one front wheel of the unloaded wheelchair test device on any portion of 
the threshold area defined in S4. Move the platform down until the alarm 
is actuated. Remove the test wheelchair wheel from the threshold area to 
deactivate the alarm. Measure the vertical distance between the platform 
and the threshold area and determine whether that distance is greater 
than 25 mm (1 in).
    S7.5 Test to determine occupancy of outer barrier and interlock 
function.
    S7.5.1 Determine compliance with S6.10.2.5 and S6.10.2.6 using the 
test procedure in S7.5.2 and S7.5.3.
    S7.5.2 Maneuver the platform to the ground level loading position. 
Locate the wheelchair test device specified in S7.1.2 on the platform. 
Using the lift control, move the lift up until the outer barrier starts 
to deploy. Stop the platform and measure the distance between the ground 
and the upper platform surface and determine whether the distance is 
greater than 75 mm (3 in).
    S7.5.3 Place one front wheel of the wheelchair test device on any 
portion of the outer barrier. If the platform is too small to maneuver 
one front wheel on the outer barrier, two front wheels may be placed on 
the barrier. Using the lift control, attempt to move the platform up. If 
further upward movement occurs, move the platform up until it stops and 
determine whether the outer barrier has deployed and caused upward 
movement of the wheelchair wheel(s) of more than 13 mm (0.5 in).
    S7.6 Test to determine occupancy of inner roll stop and interlock 
function.
    S7.6.1 Determine compliance with S6.10.2.4 and S6.10.2.7 using the 
test procedure in S7.6.2 and S7.6.3.
    S7.6.2 Maneuver the platform to the vehicle floor level loading 
position, and position the wheelchair test device specified in S7.1.2 on 
the platform with the rear wheels facing away from the vehicle. Using 
the lift control, move the platform down until the inner roll stop 
starts to deploy. Stop the lift and note that location.
    S7.6.3 Reposition the platform at the vehicle floor level loading 
position. Place one front wheel of the wheelchair test device on the 
inner roll stop, or along the innermost edge of the platform if the 
inner roll stop is not accessible. If the platform is too small to 
maneuver one front wheel on the inner roll stop, two front wheels may be 
placed on the inner roll stop. Using the lift control, move the platform 
down until the inner roll stop starts to deploy. Determine whether the 
platform has stopped and whether the inner roll stop has deployed, 
causing upward movement of the wheelchair wheel(s) of more than 13 mm 
(0.5 in).
    S7.7 Wheelchair retention device impact test and edge guard test.
    S7.7.1 Determine compliance with S6.4.7.1 and S6.4.7.2 using the 
test device specified in S7.1.2, under the procedures specified in 
S7.7.2 and S7.7.3.
    S7.7.2 Conduct the test in accordance with the procedures in 
S7.7.2.1 through S7.7.2.5 to determine compliance with S6.4.7.1. In the 
case of private use lifts, perform both S7.7.2.5(a) and (b), unless the 
operating directions specify a required direction of wheelchair movement 
onto the platform. When a direction is indicated in the operating 
instructions, perform the procedure specified in S7.7.2.5(a) or (b) with 
the test device oriented as required by the operating instructions.
    S7.7.2.1 Place the lift platform at the vehicle floor loading 
position.
    S7.7.2.2 If the wheelchair retention device is an outer barrier, the 
footrests are adjusted such that at their lowest point they have a 
height 25 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 mm (1 in <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.08 
in) less than the outer barrier. If the wheelchair retention device is 
not an outer barrier, the footrests are adjusted such that at their 
lowest point they have a height 50 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 mm (2 in 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.08 in) above the platform.
    S7.7.2.3 Position the test device with its plane of symmetry 
coincident with the lift reference plane and at a distance from the 
platform sufficient

[[Page 1153]]

to achieve the impact velocities required by S7.7.2.5.
    S7.7.2.4 Accelerate the test device onto the platform under its own 
power such that the test device impacts the wheelchair retention device 
at each speed, direction, and load condition combination specified in 
S7.7.2.5. Maintain power to the drive motors until all wheelchair motion 
has ceased except rotation of the drive wheels. Cut power to the drive 
motors. Note the position of the wheelchair after its motion has ceased 
following each impact to determine compliance with S6.4.7. If necessary, 
after each impact, adjust or replace the footrests to restore them to 
their original condition.
    S7.7.2.5 The test device is operated at the following speeds, in the 
following directions--
    (a) At a speed of not less than 2.0 m/s (4.4 mph) and not more than 
2.1 m/s (4.7 mph), forward, with a load of 0 kg (0 lbs).
    (b) At a speed of not less than 1.75 m/s (3.9 mph) and not more than 
1.85 m/s (4.1 mph), rearward, with a load of 0 kg (0 lbs).
    S7.7.3 Rotary platform lifts: For rotary platform lifts, conduct the 
test under the procedures in S7.7.3.3 through S7.7.3.7 to determine 
compliance with S6.4.7.2.
    S7.7.3.1 Public use lifts: For public use lifts, perform the test in 
both possible test device orientations.
    S7.7.3.2 Private use lifts: For private use lifts, perform the test 
in both possible test device orientations unless a required direction of 
wheelchair movement onto the platform is indicated in the operating 
instructions. If a required direction is indicated in the operating 
instructions, perform the test with the test device oriented as required 
by the operating instructions.
    S7.7.3.3 Adjust the footrests of the test device to the shortest 
length. Place the test device on the platform with its plane of symmetry 
coincident with the lift reference plane.
    S7.7.3.4 Position the platform surface 90 mm <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (3.5 inches <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 inches) 
above the ground level position.
    S7.7.3.5 Slowly move the test device in the forward direction until 
it contacts a wheelchair retention device. Activate the controller of 
the test device such that, if the test device were unloaded and 
unrestrained on a flat, level surface, it would achieve a maximum 
forward velocity of not less than 2.0 m/s (4.4 mph) and not more than 
2.1 m/s (4.7 mph).
    S7.7.3.6 Realign the test device on the platform so that its plane 
of symmetry is coincident with the lift reference plane. Slowly move the 
test device in the rearward direction until it contacts a wheelchair 
retention device. Activate the controller of the test device such that, 
if the test device were unloaded and unrestrained on a flat, level 
surface, it would achieve a maximum rearward velocity of not less than 
1.75 m/s (3.9 mph) and not more than 1.85 m/s (4.1 mph).
    S7.7.3.7 During the impacts specified in S7.7.3.5 and S7.7.3.6, 
maintain power to the drive motors until all test device motion has 
ceased except rotation of the drive wheels. Note the position of the 
test device after its motion has ceased following each impact to 
determine compliance with S6.4.7.2.
    S7.7.4 Edge Guard Test. Determine compliance with S6.4.6 using the 
test device specified in S7.1.2 by performing the test procedure 
specified in S7.7.4.1 through S7.7.4.6. During the edge guard tests, 
remove the footrests from the wheelchair test device.
    S7.7.4.1 Position the platform surface 90 mm <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (3.5 in <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in) above the 
ground level loading position.
    S7.7.4.2 Place the test device on the platform surface with its 
plane of symmetry coincident with the lift reference plane within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in), its forward 
direction of travel inboard toward the vehicle, and its position on the 
platform as far rearward as the wheelchair retention device or outer 
barrier will allow it to be placed.
    S7.7.4.3 Adjust the control of the test device to a setting that 
provides maximum acceleration and steer the test device from side-to-
side and corner-to-corner of the lift platform, attempting to steer the 
test device off the platform. After each attempt, when the wheelchair 
test device stalls due to contact with a barrier, release the control to 
Neutral and realign the test device to the starting position. Repeat 
this sequence at any level that is greater than 90 mm <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (3.5 in <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4

[[Page 1154]]

in) above the ground level loading position and less than 38 mm <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (1.5 in <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in) below the 
vehicle floor level loading position. Repeat this sequence at 38 mm 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (1.5 in <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in) below 
the vehicle floor level loading position.
    S7.7.4.4 Next position the platform surface 38 mm <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (1.5 in <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in) below the 
vehicle floor level loading position.
    S7.7.4.5 Reposition the test device on the platform surface with its 
plane of symmetry coincident with the lift reference plane within <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in), its forward 
direction of travel outboard away from the vehicle, and its position on 
the platform as far rearward as the wheelchair inner roll-stop or 
vehicle body will allow it to be placed.
    S7.7.4.6 Adjust the control of the test device to a setting that 
provides maximum acceleration and steer the test device from side-to-
side and corner-to-corner of the lift platform, attempting to steer the 
test device off the platform. After each attempt, when the wheelchair 
test device stalls due to contact with a barrier, release the control to 
Neutral and realign the test device to the starting position. Repeat 
this sequence at any level that is greater than 90 mm <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (3.5 in <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in) above the 
ground level loading position and less than 38 mm <plus-
minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (1.5 in <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in) below the 
vehicle floor level loading position. Repeat this sequence at 38 mm 
<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 mm (1.5 in <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in) below 
the vehicle floor level loading position.
    S7.8 Inner roll stop test. Determine compliance with S6.4.8 using 
the test device specified in S7.1.2 in accordance with the procedures 
specified in S7.8.1 through S7.8.6.
    S7.8.1 Place the platform at the ground level loading position, such 
that the platform is level.
    S7.8.2 Adjust the footrests of the test device to the shortest 
length. Position the test device on the ground at a distance from the 
platform sufficient to achieve the impact velocity required by S7.8.3. 
The plane of symmetry of the test device is coincident with the lift 
reference plane and the forward direction of travel is onto the 
platform.
    S7.8.3 Accelerate the test device onto the platform such that it 
impacts the inner roll stop at a speed of not less than 1.5 m/s (3.4 
mph) and not more than 1.6 m/s (3.6 mph). Determine compliance with 
S6.4.8.3(a).
    S7.8.4 If necessary, adjust or replace the footrests to restore them 
to the condition they were in prior to the impact. Reposition the test 
device on the platform with its plane of symmetry coincident with the 
lift reference plane. Slowly move the test device in the forward 
direction until it contacts the inner roll stop.
    S7.8.5 Apply a static load to the inner roll stop by activating the 
controller of the test device such that, with the test device were 
unrestrained on a flat and level surface, it achieves a maximum forward 
velocity of not less than 2.0 m/s and not more than 2.1 m/s.
    S7.8.6 Maintain control activation and raise the platform to the 
vehicle loading position. Determine compliance with S6.4.8.3(b).
    S7.9 Static load test I--working load.
    S7.9.1 By use of the lift controls specified in S6.7.2, perform the 
operations specified in S7.9.2 through S7.9.8 in the order they are 
specified.
    S7.9.2 Place the platform in the stowed position.
    S7.9.3 Deploy the platform to the vehicle floor loading position. 
Center a standard load, including the test pallet, on the platform 
surface.
    S7.9.4 Lower the lift platform from the vehicle floor loading 
position to the ground level loading position, stopping once between the 
two positions. Remove the test pallet from the lift platform.
    S7.9.5 Raise the lift platform from the ground level loading 
position to the vehicle floor level loading position, stopping once 
between the two positions.
    S7.9.6 Lower the lift platform from the vehicle floor level loading 
position to the ground level loading position, stopping once between the 
two positions.
    S7.9.7 Center the loaded test pallet on the platform surface. Raise 
the lift platform from the ground level loading position to the vehicle 
floor loading position, stopping once between the two positions.
    S7.9.8 Remove the pallet from the lift platform. Stow the lift.

[[Page 1155]]

    S7.9.9 Turn power off to the lift and repeat S7.9.3 through S7.9.5 
and stow the lift using the backup operating mode as specified by S6.9 
in accordance with the manufacturer's backup operating instructions.
    S7.10 Fatigue endurance test.
    S7.10.1 Perform the test procedure specified in S7.10.2 through 
S7.10.6 and determine compliance with S6.5.1.
    S7.10.2 Put the unloaded lift platform at the ground level loading 
position. Center a standard load, including the test pallet, on the 
platform surface.
    S7.10.3 Each sequence of lift operations specified in S7.10.5.1, 
S7.10.5.2, S7.10.6.1 and S7.10.6.2 are done in blocks of 10 cycles with 
a 1 minute maximum rest period between each cycle in any block. The 
minimum rest period between each block of 10 cycles is such that the 
temperature of the lift components is maintained below the values 
specified by the manufacturer or that degrade the lift function.
    S7.10.4 During the test sequence specified in S7.10.2 through 
S7.10.6, perform any lift maintenance as specified in the vehicle 
owner's manual.
    S7.10.5 Public use lifts: Using the lift controls specified in 
S6.7.2, perform the operations specified in S7.10.5.1 through S7.10.5.3 
in the order they are given. Public use lifts that manually stow (fold) 
and deploy (unfold) are not required to perform the stow and deploy 
portions of the tests.
    S7.10.5.1 Raise and lower the platform through the range of 
passenger operation 3,900 times.
    S7.10.5.2 Remove the test pallet from the platform. Raise the 
platform to the vehicle floor loading position, stow the lift, deploy 
the lift and lower the platform to the ground level loading position 
3,900 times.
    S7.10.5.3 Perform the test sequence specified in S7.10.5.1 and 
S7.10.5.2 two times.
    S7.10.6 Private use lifts: Using the lift controls specified in 
S6.7.2, perform the operation specified in S7.10.6.1 through S7.10.6.3 
in the order they are given. Private use lifts that manually stow (fold) 
and deploy (unfold) are not required to perform the stow and deploy 
portions of the tests.
    S7.10.6.1 Raise and lower the platform through the range of 
passenger operation 1,100 times.
    S7.10.6.2 Remove the test pallet from the platform. Raise the 
platform to the vehicle floor loading position, stow the lift, deploy 
the lift and lower the platform to the ground level loading position 
1,100 times.
    S7.10.6.3 Perform the test sequence specified in S7.10.6.1 and 
S7.10.6.2 two times.
    S7.11 Static load test II--proof load.
    S7.11.1 Perform the test procedures specified in S7.11.2 through 
S7.11.5 and determine compliance with S6.5.2.
    S7.11.2 Place the platform at the vehicle floor level loading 
position, center three times the standard load, including the test 
pallet, on the platform surface. Fully place the pallet on the platform 
within 1 minute of beginning to place it.
    S7.11.3 Two minutes after fully placing the loaded test pallet on 
the platform surface, remove the loaded test pallet and examine the 
platform lift and vehicle for separation, fracture or breakage.
    S7.11.4 After completing the static load test specified in S7.11.2 
through S7.11.4, repeat Static Load Test I specified in S7.9.
    S7.12 Handrail test.
    S7.12.1 To determine compliance with S6.4.9.7, apply 4.4 N (1 lbf) 
through an area of 1290 mm\2\ (2 in\2\) in any direction at any point on 
the handrail in order to remove any looseness or slack from the handrail 
structure. Use this position of the handrail relative to the platform as 
the reference point for the measurement of handrail displacement. Apply 
445 N (100 lbf) through an area of 1290 mm\2\ (2 in\2\) in a direction 
and location opposite to that of the 4.4 N (1 lbf). Attain the force 
within 1 minute after beginning to apply it. Five seconds after 
attaining the force, measure the amount of displacement of the handrail 
relative to the reference point, and measure the distance between the 
outside of the handrail and the nearest portion of the vehicle. Release 
the 445 N (100 lbf) and reapply the 4.4 N (1 lbf) in the direction and 
location that it was first applied. Five seconds after attaining the 
force, measure the position

[[Page 1156]]

of the handrail with respect to the reference point to determine if 
there is any permanent deformation of the handrail relative to the 
platform.
    S7.12.2 To determine compliance with S6.4.9.8, apply 4.4 N (1 lbf) 
through an area of 1,290 mm\2\ (2 in\2\) in any direction at any point 
on the handrail in order to remove any looseness or slack from the 
handrail structure. Use this position of the handrail relative to the 
platform as the reference point for the measurement of handrail 
displacement. Apply 1,112 N (250 lbf) through an area of 1,290 mm\2\ (2 
in\2\) in a direction and location opposite to that of the 1 4.4 N (1 
lbf). Attain the force within 1 minute after beginning to apply it. Five 
seconds after attaining the force, measure the amount of displacement of 
the handrail relative to the reference point. Maintain the force for two 
minutes. Release the force and inspect the handrail for cracking, 
separations or fractures.
    S7.13 Wheelchair retention device overload test.
    S7.13.1 Perform the test procedures as specified in S7.13.2 through 
S7.13.5 to determine compliance with S6.4.7.3.
    S7.13.2 Position the platform surface 90 mm <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 
mm (3.5 in <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>0.4 in) above the ground level loading 
position. Apply 7,117 N (1,600 lbf) to the wheelchair retention device 
in a direction parallel to both the platform lift and platform reference 
planes. Attain the force within 1 minute after beginning to apply it.
    S7.13.3 For a wheelchair retention device that is in the form of an 
outer barrier, apply the force through a rectangular area with a height 
of 25 mm (1 in) and a width spanning the entire barrier. Distribute the 
force evenly about an axis 64 mm (2.5 in) above the platform reference 
plane. If the bottom edge of the outer barrier falls 50 mm (2 in) or 
more above the platform reference plane, distribute the force about an 
axis 13 mm (0.5 in) above the bottom edge of the barrier.
    S7.13.4 For a wheelchair retention device other than an outer 
barrier, place the test device specified in S7.1.2 on the lift platform 
with its plane of symmetry coincident with the lift reference plane and 
directed such that forward motion is impeded by the wheelchair retention 
device. Move the test device forward until it contacts the wheelchair 
retention device. Remove the test device from the platform. Apply the 
force specified in S7.13.2 distributed evenly at all areas of the 
wheelchair retention device that made contact with the test device when 
it was moved forward. Attain the force within 1 minute after beginning 
to apply it.
    S7.13.5 After maintaining the force for two minutes, remove it and 
examine the wheelchair retention device for separation, fracture or 
breakage.
    S7.14 Static load test III--ultimate load.
    S7.14.1 Perform the test procedures as specified in S7.14.2 through 
S7.14.4 to determine compliance with S6.5.3.
    S7.14.2 Reinforce the vehicle structure where the lift is attached 
such that it is rigid and will not deform, break or separate during 
application of the load specified in S7.14.3 or remove the platform lift 
from the vehicle and install it on a test jig that is rigid and will not 
deform, break or separate during application of the load specified in 
S7.14.3.
    S7.14.3 When the platform is at the vehicle floor loading position, 
center four times the standard load, including the test pallet, on the 
platform surface. Fully place the pallet on the platform within 1 minute 
of beginning to place it.
    S7.14.4 Two minutes after fully placing the loaded test pallet on 
the platform surface, remove the loaded test pallet and examine the 
platform lift for separation, fracture or breakage.

[[Page 1157]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27DE02.001


[[Page 1158]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27DE02.002


[[Page 1159]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27DE02.003


[67 FR 79439, Dec. 27, 2002, as amended at 69 FR 58852, Oct. 1, 2004; 69 
FR 76870, Dec. 23, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 571.404  Standard No. 404; Platform lift installations in motor vehicles.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for vehicles 
equipped with platform lifts used to assist persons with limited 
mobility in entering or leaving a vehicle.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to prevent injuries and 
fatalities to passengers and bystanders during the operation of platform 
lifts installed in motor vehicles.
    S3. Application. This standard applies to motor vehicles 
manufactured on and after July 1, 2005, that are equipped with a 
platform lift to carry passengers into and out of the vehicle.
    S4. Requirements.
    S4.1 Installation requirements.
    S4.1.1 Lift-equipped buses, school buses, and MPVs other than motor 
homes with a GVWR greater than 4,536 kg (10,000 lb) must be equipped 
with a public use lift certified as meeting Federal Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standard No. 403, Lift Systems for Motor Vehicles (49 CFR 571.403).
    S4.1.2 Lift-equipped motor vehicles, other than ones subject to 
paragraph S4.1.1, must be equipped with a platform lift certified as 
meeting either the public use lift or private use lift requirements of 
Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 403, Lift Systems for Motor 
Vehicles (49 CFR 571.403).
    S4.1.3 Platform lifts must be installed in the vehicle in accordance 
with the installation instructions or procedures provided pursuant to 
S6.13 of Standard 403. The vehicle must be of a type identified in the 
installation instructions as appropriate for the platform lift as 
certified by the platform lift manufacturer.
    S4.1.4 The platform lift, as installed, must continue to comply with 
all the applicable requirements of Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 
No. 403,

[[Page 1160]]

Lift Systems for Motor Vehicles (49 CFR 571.403).
    S4.1.5 Platform lighting on public use lifts. Public use lifts must 
have a light or a set of lights that provide at least 54 lm/m\2\ (5 lm/
sqft) of luminance on all portions of the surface of the platform, 
throughout the range of passenger operation. The luminance on all 
portions of the surface of the passenger-unloading ramp at ground level 
must be at least 11 lm/m\2\ (1 lm/sqft).
    S4.2 Vehicle owner's manual insert requirements. If the vehicle is 
equipped with an owner's manual, the owner's manual must contain the 
inserts provided by the lift manufacturer pursuant to S6.12 of 49 CFR 
571.403.
    S4.3 Control panel switches.
    S4.3.1 Instructions regarding the platform lift operating 
procedures, including backup operations, as specified by S6.7.8 of 49 
CFR 571.403, must be permanently affixed to a location adjacent to the 
controls.
    S4.3.2 Public use lift: In addition to meeting the requirements of 
S4.3.1, for vehicles equipped with public use lifts, as defined in 49 
CFR 571.403, any and all controls provided for the lift by the platform 
lift manufacturer other than those provided for back-up operation of the 
platform lift specified in S5.9 of 49 CFR 571.403, must be located 
together and in a position such that the control operator has a direct, 
unobstructed view of the platform lift passenger and/or their mobility 
aid throughout the lift's range of passenger operation. Additional power 
controls and controls for back-up operation of the lift may be located 
in other positions.

[67 FR 79451, Dec. 27, 2002, as amended at 69 FR 58855, Oct. 1, 2004; 69 
FR 76870, Dec. 23, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 571.500  Standard No. 500; Low-speed vehicles.

    S1. Scope. This standard specifies requirements for low-speed 
vehicles.
    S2. Purpose. The purpose of this standard is to ensure that low-
speed vehicles operated on the public streets, roads, and highways are 
equipped with the minimum motor vehicle equipment appropriate for motor 
vehicle safety.
    S3. Applicability. This standard applies to low-speed vehicles.
    S4. [Reserved.]
    S5. Requirements.
    (a) When tested in accordance with test conditions in S6 and test 
procedures in S7, the maximum speed attainable in 1.6 km (1 mile) by 
each low-speed vehicle shall not more than 40 kilometers per hour (25 
miles per hour).
    (b) Each low-speed vehicle shall be equipped with:
    (1) Headlamps,
    (2) Front and rear turn signal lamps,
    (3) Taillamps,
    (4) Stop lamps,
    (5) Reflex reflectors: one red on each side as far to the rear as 
practicable, and one red on the rear,
    (6) An exterior mirror mounted on the driver's side of the vehicle 
and either an exterior mirror mounted on the passenger's side of the 
vehicle or an interior mirror,
    (7) A parking brake,
    (8) A windshield that conforms to the Federal motor vehicle safety 
standard on glazing materials (49 CFR 571.205).
    (9) A VIN that conforms to the requirements of part 565 Vehicle 
Identification Number of this chapter, and
    (10) A Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly conforming to Sec. 
571.209 of this part, Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 209, 
Seat belt assemblies, installed at each designated seating position.
    S6. General test conditions. Each vehicle must meet the performance 
limit specified in S5(a) under the following test conditions.
    S6.1. Ambient conditions.
    S6.1.1. Ambient temperature. The ambient temperature is any 
temperature between 0 [deg]C (32 [deg]F) and 40 [deg]C (104 [deg]F).
    S6.1.2. Wind speed. The wind speed is not greater than 5 m/s (11.2 
mph).
    S6.2. Road test surface.
    S6.2.1. Pavement friction. Unless otherwise specified, the road test 
surface produces a peak friction coefficient (PFC) of 0.9 when measured 
using a standard reference test tire that meets the specifications of 
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) E1136, ``Standard 
Specification for A Radial Standard Reference Test Tire,'' in accordance 
with ASTM Method E 1337-90, ``Standard Test Method for Determining 
Longitudinal Peak Braking Coefficient of Paved Surfaces Using a Standard 
Reference Test Tire,'' at a

[[Page 1161]]

speed of 64.4 km/h (40.0 mph), without water delivery (incorporated by 
reference; see 49 CFR 571.5).
    S6.2.2. Gradient. The test surface has not more than a 1 percent 
gradient in the direction of testing and not more than a 2 percent 
gradient perpendicular to the direction of testing.
    S6.2.3. Lane width. The lane width is not less than 3.5 m (11.5 ft).
    S6.3. Vehicle conditions.
    S6.3.1. The test weight for maximum speed is unloaded vehicle weight 
plus a mass of 78 kg (170 pounds), including driver and instrumentation.
    S6.3.2. No adjustment, repair or replacement of any component is 
allowed after the start of the first performance test.
    S6.3.3. Tire inflation pressure. Cold inflation pressure is not more 
than the maximum permissible pressure molded on the tire sidewall.
    S6.3.4. Break-in. The vehicle completes the manufacturer's 
recommended break-in agenda as a minimum condition prior to beginning 
the performance tests.
    S6.3.5. Vehicle openings. All vehicle openings (doors, windows, 
hood, trunk, convertible top, cargo doors, etc.) are closed except as 
required for instrumentation purposes.
    S6.3.6. Battery powered vehicles. Prior to beginning the performance 
tests, propulsion batteries are at the state of charge recommended by 
the manufacturer or, if the manufacturer has made no recommendation, at 
a state of charge of not less than 95 percent. No further charging of 
any propulsion battery is permissible.
    S7. Test procedure. Each vehicle must meet the performance limit 
specified in S5(a) under the following test procedure. The maximum speed 
performance is determined by measuring the maximum attainable vehicle 
speed at any point in a distance of 1.6 km (1.0 mile) from a standing 
start and repeated in the opposite direction within 30 minutes.

[63 FR 33216, June 17, 1998, as amended at 68 FR 43972, July 25, 2003]


[[Page 1163]]


<R02>
                              FINDING AIDS


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts and 
an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in 
the CFR Index and Finding Aids volume to the Code of Federal Regulations 
which is published separately and revised annually.

  Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
  Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
  List of CFR Sections Affected

[[Page 1165]]


<R03>
                    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters


<R04>

                     (Revised as of October 1, 2011)

                      Title 1--General Provisions

         I  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register 
                (Parts 1--49)
        II  Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50--299)
       III  Administrative Conference of the United States (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400--500)

                    Title 2--Grants and Agreements

            Subtitle A--Office of Management and Budget Guidance 
                for Grants and Agreements
         I  Office of Management and Budget Governmentwide 
                Guidance for Grants and Agreements (Parts 100--
                199)
        II  Office of Management and Budget Circulars and Guidance 
                (200--299)
            Subtitle B--Federal Agency Regulations for Grants and 
                Agreements
       III  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300-- 
                399)
        IV  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Agency for International Development (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Department of Defense (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
     XVIII  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1880--1899)
        XX  United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 
                2000--2099)
      XXII  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2200--2299)
     XXIII  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
      XXIV  Housing and Urban Development (Parts 2400--2499)
       XXV  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
      XXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                2600--2699)
     XXVII  Small Business Administration (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)

[[Page 1166]]

       XXX  Department of Homeland Security (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Institute of Museum and Library Services (Parts 3100--
                3199)
     XXXII  National Endowment for the Arts (Parts 3200--3299)
    XXXIII  National Endowment for the Humanities (Parts 3300--
                3399)
      XXXV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 3500--
                3599)
    XXXVII  Peace Corps (Parts 3700--3799)
     LVIII  Election Assistance Commission (Parts 5800--5899)

                        Title 3--The President

         I  Executive Office of the President (Parts 100--199)

                           Title 4--Accounts

         I  Government Accountability Office (Parts 1--99)
        II  Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board (Parts 
                200--299)

                   Title 5--Administrative Personnel

         I  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1--1199)
        II  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300--1399)
         V  The International Organizations Employees Loyalty 
                Board (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      VIII  Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800--1899)
        IX  Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900--1999)
        XI  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Parts 2100--2199)
       XIV  Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of 
                the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal 
                Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400--2499)
        XV  Office of Administration, Executive Office of the 
                President (Parts 2500--2599)
       XVI  Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600--2699)
       XXI  Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100--3199)
      XXII  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 3200--
                3299)
     XXIII  Department of Energy (Parts 3300--3399)
      XXIV  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Parts 3400--
                3499)
       XXV  Department of the Interior (Parts 3500--3599)
      XXVI  Department of Defense (Parts 3600-- 3699)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Parts 3800--3899)
      XXIX  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900--3999)
       XXX  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4099)
      XXXI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100--4199)
    XXXIII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Parts 4300--
                4399)

[[Page 1167]]

     XXXIV  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 4400--4499)
      XXXV  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 4500--4599)
        XL  Interstate Commerce Commission (Parts 5000--5099)
       XLI  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 5100--
                5199)
      XLII  Department of Labor (Parts 5200--5299)
     XLIII  National Science Foundation (Parts 5300--5399)
       XLV  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 5500--
                5599)
      XLVI  Postal Rate Commission (Parts 5600--5699)
     XLVII  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 5700--5799)
    XLVIII  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 5800--5899)
      XLIX  Federal Labor Relations Authority (Parts 5900--5999)
         L  Department of Transportation (Parts 6000--6099)
       LII  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 6200--
                6299)
      LIII  Department of Education (Parts 6300--6399)
       LIV  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 6400--6499)
        LV  National Endowment for the Arts (Parts 6500--6599)
       LVI  National Endowment for the Humanities (Parts 6600--
                6699)
      LVII  General Services Administration (Parts 6700--6799)
     LVIII  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
                (Parts 6800--6899)
       LIX  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                6900--6999)
        LX  United States Postal Service (Parts 7000--7099)
       LXI  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 7100--7199)
      LXII  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 7200--
                7299)
     LXIII  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 7300--7399)
      LXIV  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 7400--7499)
       LXV  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                7500--7599)
      LXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                7600--7699)
     LXVII  Institute of Museum and Library Services (Parts 7700--
                7799)
    LXVIII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 7800--7899)
      LXIX  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 7900--7999)
       LXX  Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the 
                District of Columbia (Parts 8000--8099)
      LXXI  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 8100--8199)
    LXXIII  Department of Agriculture (Parts 8300--8399)
     LXXIV  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 8400--8499)
     LXXVI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                8600--8699)
    LXXVII  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 8700--8799)
      LXXX  Federal Housing Finance Agency (Parts 8700--8799)
    LXXXII  Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction 
                (Parts 9200--9299)

[[Page 1168]]

     XCVII  Department of Homeland Security Human Resources 
                Management System (Department of Homeland 
                Security--Office of Personnel Management) (Parts 
                9700--9799)
      XCIX  Department of Defense Human Resources Management and 
                Labor Relations Systems (Department of Defense--
                Office of Personnel Management) (Parts 9900--9999)

                      Title 6--Domestic Security

         I  Department of Homeland Security, Office of the 
                Secretary (Parts 0--99)

                         Title 7--Agriculture

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Agriculture 
                (Parts 0--26)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of 
                Agriculture
         I  Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, 
                Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 27--209)
        II  Food and Nutrition Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 210--299)
       III  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         V  Agricultural Research Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                700--799)
      VIII  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Federal Grain Inspection Service), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 900--999)
         X  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1000--1199)
        XI  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1200--1299)
       XIV  Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1700--1799)

[[Page 1169]]

     XVIII  Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative 
                Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service 
                Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800--
                2099)
        XX  Local Television Loan Guarantee Board (Parts 2200--
                2299)
      XXVI  Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 2600--2699)
     XXVII  Office of Information Resources Management, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2800--2899)
      XXIX  Office of Energy Policy and New Uses, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 2900--2999)
       XXX  Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Office of Environmental Quality, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3100--3199)
     XXXII  Office of Procurement and Property Management, 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 3200--3299)
    XXXIII  Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3300--3399)
     XXXIV  National Institute of Food and Agriculture (Parts 
                3400--3499)
      XXXV  Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3500--3599)
     XXXVI  National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 3600--3699)
    XXXVII  Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3700--3799)
   XXXVIII  World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3800--3899)
       XLI  [Reserved]
      XLII  Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200--
                4299)
         L  Rural Business-Cooperative Service, Rurual Housing 
                Service, and Rural Utilities Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 5000--5099)

                    Title 8--Aliens and Nationality

         I  Department of Homeland Security (Immigration and 
                Naturalization) (Parts 1--499)
         V  Executive Office for Immigration Review, Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1000--1399)

                 Title 9--Animals and Animal Products

         I  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1--199)
        II  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Packers and Stockyards Programs), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--299)

[[Page 1170]]

       III  Food Safety and Inspection Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 300--599)

                           Title 10--Energy

         I  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Department of Energy (Parts 200--699)
       III  Department of Energy (Parts 700--999)
         X  Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 
                1000--1099)
      XIII  Nuclear Waste Technical Review Board (Parts 1303--
                1399)
      XVII  Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700--
                1799)
     XVIII  Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste 
                Commission (Parts 1800--1899)

                      Title 11--Federal Elections

         I  Federal Election Commission (Parts 1--9099)
        II  Election Assistance Commission (Parts 9400--9499)

                      Title 12--Banks and Banking

         I  Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  Federal Reserve System (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  Office of Thrift Supervision, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900--999)
         X  Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection (Parts 1000--
                1099)
        XI  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  Federal Housing Finance Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Financial Stability Oversight Council (Parts 1300--
                1399)
       XIV  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400--
                1499)
        XV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1500--1599)
      XVII  Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                1700--1799)
     XVIII  Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, 
                Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800--1899)

               Title 13--Business Credit and Assistance

         I  Small Business Administration (Parts 1--199)

[[Page 1171]]

       III  Economic Development Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board (Parts 400--499)
         V  Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board (Parts 
                500--599)

                    Title 14--Aeronautics and Space

         I  Federal Aviation Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--199)
        II  Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation 
                (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200--399)
       III  Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 400--499)
         V  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
        VI  Air Transportation System Stabilization (Parts 1300--
                1399)

                 Title 15--Commerce and Foreign Trade

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 
                0--29)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Commerce and 
                Foreign Trade
         I  Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                30--199)
        II  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 400--499)
       VII  Bureau of Industry and Security, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Technology Administration, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
      XIII  East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400--
                1499)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade 
                Agreements
        XX  Office of the United States Trade Representative 
                (Parts 2000--2099)
            Subtitle D--Regulations Relating to Telecommunications 
                and Information
     XXIII  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                2300--2399)

[[Page 1172]]

                    Title 16--Commercial Practices

         I  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0--999)
        II  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000--1799)

             Title 17--Commodity and Securities Exchanges

         I  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1--199)
        II  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 400--499)

          Title 18--Conservation of Power and Water Resources

         I  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of 
                Energy (Parts 1--399)
       III  Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Water Resources Council (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800--899)
      XIII  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300--1399)

                       Title 19--Customs Duties

         I  U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Department of 
                Homeland Security; Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--199)
        II  United States International Trade Commission (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Department 
                of Homeland Security (Parts 400--599)

                     Title 20--Employees' Benefits

         I  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200--399)
       III  Social Security Administration (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Employees Compensation Appeals Board, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 500--599)
         V  Employment and Training Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 600--699)
        VI  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 
                800--899)
      VIII  Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 
                900--999)
        IX  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training Service, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1000--1099)

[[Page 1173]]

                       Title 21--Food and Drugs

         I  Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1--1299)
        II  Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 1300--1399)
       III  Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400--
                1499)

                      Title 22--Foreign Relations

         I  Department of State (Parts 1--199)
        II  Agency for International Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Peace Corps (Parts 300--399)
        IV  International Joint Commission, United States and 
                Canada (Parts 400--499)
         V  Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Parts 700--
                799)
        IX  Foreign Service Grievance Board (Parts 900--999)
         X  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  International Boundary and Water Commission, United 
                States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 
                1100--1199)
       XII  United States International Development Cooperation 
                Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Millenium Challenge Corporation (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor 
                Relations Authority; General Counsel of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign 
                Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  African Development Foundation (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700--1799)

                          Title 23--Highways

         I  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--999)
        II  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and 
                Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 1300--1399)

                Title 24--Housing and Urban Development

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban 
                Development
         I  Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                100--199)

[[Page 1174]]

        II  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal 
                HousingCommissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Government National Mortgage Association, Department 
                of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Housing and Office of Multifamily Housing 
                Assistance Restructuring, Department of Housing 
                and Urban Development (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 600--699) [Reserved]
       VII  Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and 
                Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700--
                799)
      VIII  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance 
                Programs, Section 202 Direct Loan Program, Section 
                202 Supportive Housing for the Elderly Program and 
                Section 811 Supportive Housing for Persons With 
                Disabilities Program) (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian 
                Housing, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 900--1699)
         X  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Interstate Land Sales 
                Registration Program) (Parts 1700--1799)
       XII  Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 2000--2099)
        XV  Emergency Mortgage Insurance and Loan Programs, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2700--2799)
        XX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 3200--3899)
      XXIV  Board of Directors of the HOPE for Homeowners Program 
                (Parts 4000--4099)
       XXV  Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100--
                4199)

                           Title 25--Indians

         I  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--299)
        II  Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 300--399)
       III  National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500--599)
        IV  Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 
                700--799)
         V  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, 
                and Indian Health Service, Department of Health 
                and Human Services (Part 900)

[[Page 1175]]

        VI  Office of the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 1000--1199)
       VII  Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 1200--1299)

                      Title 26--Internal Revenue

         I  Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 1--899)

           Title 27--Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms

         I  Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau, Department 
                of the Treasury (Parts 1--399)
        II  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, 
                Department of Justice (Parts 400--699)

                   Title 28--Judicial Administration

         I  Department of Justice (Parts 0--299)
       III  Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice 
                (Parts 300--399)
         V  Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500--
                599)
        VI  Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the 
                District of Columbia (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact Council 
                (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Department of Justice and Department of State (Parts 
                1100--1199)

                            Title 29--Labor

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 
                0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor
         I  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 400--499)
         V  Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 
                500--899)
        IX  Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission 
                (Parts 900--999)
         X  National Mediation Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       XII  Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 
                1400--1499)
       XIV  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600--
                1699)

[[Page 1176]]

      XVII  Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2499)
       XXV  Employee Benefits Security Administration, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 2500--2599)
     XXVII  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2700--2799)
        XL  Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4999)

                      Title 30--Mineral Resources

         I  Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation, and 
                Enforcement, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                200--299)
        IV  Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                400--499)
       VII  Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 700--999)
       XII  Office of Natural Resources Revenue, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 1200--1299)

                 Title 31--Money and Finance: Treasury

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--50)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
         I  Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                51--199)
        II  Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of International Investment, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Claims Collection Standards (Department of the 
                Treasury--Department of Justice) (Parts 900--999)
         X  Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, Departmnent of 
                the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)

                      Title 32--National Defense

            Subtitle A--Department of Defense
         I  Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1--399)
         V  Department of the Army (Parts 400--699)
        VI  Department of the Navy (Parts 700--799)

[[Page 1177]]

       VII  Department of the Air Force (Parts 800--1099)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to National 
                Defense
       XII  Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XVI  Selective Service System (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  Office of the Director of National Intelligence (Parts 
                1700--1799)
     XVIII  National Counterintelligence Center (Parts 1800--1899)
       XIX  Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Information Security Oversight Office, National 
                Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000--
                2099)
       XXI  National Security Council (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXIV  Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400--
                2499)
     XXVII  Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 
                2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of the Vice President of the United States 
                (Parts 2800--2899)

               Title 33--Navigation and Navigable Waters

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                1--199)
        II  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                          Title 34--Education

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Education (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Offices of the 
                Department of Education
         I  Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, 
                Department of Education (Parts 200--299)
       III  Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
                Services, Department of Education (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Vocational and Adult Education, Department 
                of Education (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages 
                Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of 
                Education (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Educational Research and Improvmeent, 
                Department of Education [Reserved]
        XI  National Institute for Literacy (Parts 1100--1199)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Education
       XII  National Council on Disability (Parts 1200--1299)

[[Page 1178]]

                          Title 35 [Reserved]

             Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property

         I  National Park Service, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--
                299)
       III  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400--499)
         V  Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500--599)
        VI  [Reserved]
       VII  Library of Congress (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800--
                899)
        IX  Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Presidio Trust (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance 
                Board (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
        XV  Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust (Parts 1500--
                1599)
       XVI  Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National 
                Environmental Policy Foundation (Parts 1600--1699)

             Title 37--Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights

         I  United States Patent and Trademark Office, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 1--199)
        II  Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200--299)
       III  Copyright Royalty Board, Library of Congress (Parts 
                301--399)
        IV  Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Under Secretary for Technology, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 500--599)

           Title 38--Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief

         I  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0--99)
        II  Armed Forces Retirement Home

                       Title 39--Postal Service

         I  United States Postal Service (Parts 1--999)
       III  Postal Regulatory Commission (Parts 3000--3099)

                  Title 40--Protection of Environment

         I  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1--1099)
        IV  Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1400--1499)
         V  Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500--1599)

[[Page 1179]]

        VI  Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
       VII  Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
                Defense; Uniform National Discharge Standards for 
                Vessels of the Armed Forces (Parts 1700--1799)

          Title 41--Public Contracts and Property Management

            Subtitle B--Other Provisions Relating to Public 
                Contracts
        50  Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1--50-
                999)
        51  Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or 
                Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1--51-99)
        60  Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal 
                Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 
                60-1--60-999)
        61  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training Service, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 61-1--61-999)
   62--100  [Reserved]
            Subtitle C--Federal Property Management Regulations 
                System
       101  Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1--
                101-99)
       102  Federal Management Regulation (Parts 102-1--102-299)
  103--104  [Reserved]
       105  General Services Administration (Parts 105-1--105-999)
       109  Department of Energy Property Management Regulations 
                (Parts 109-1--109-99)
       114  Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1--114-99)
       115  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1--115-99)
       128  Department of Justice (Parts 128-1--128-99)
  129--200  [Reserved]
            Subtitle D--Other Provisions Relating to Property 
                Management [Reserved]
            Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management 
                Regulations System [Reserved]
            Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System
       300  General (Parts 300-1--300-99)
       301  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1--
                301-99)
       302  Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1--302-99)
       303  Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of 
                Certain Employees (Part 303-1--303-99)
       304  Payment of Travel Expenses from a Non-Federal Source 
                (Parts 304-1--304-99)

                        Title 42--Public Health

         I  Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 1--199)
        IV  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Department 
                of Health and Human Services (Parts 400--499)

[[Page 1180]]

         V  Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1000--1999)

                   Title 43--Public Lands: Interior

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Lands
         I  Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 200--499)
        II  Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1000--9999)
       III  Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation 
                Commission (Parts 10000--10099)

             Title 44--Emergency Management and Assistance

         I  Federal Emergency Management Agency, Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 0--399)
        IV  Department of Commerce and Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                       Title 45--Public Welfare

            Subtitle A--Department of Health and Human Services 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Welfare
        II  Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), 
                Administration for Children and Families, 
                Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support 
                Enforcement Program), Administration for Children 
                and Families, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United 
                States, Department of Justice (Parts 500--599)
        VI  National Science Foundation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800--899) 
                [Reserved]
         X  Office of Community Services, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                1200--1299)
      XIII  Office of Human Development Services, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1300--1399)

[[Page 1181]]

       XVI  Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  National Commission on Libraries and Information 
                Science (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800--
                1899)
       XXI  Commission on Fine Arts (Parts 2100--2199)
     XXIII  Arctic Research Commission (Part 2301)
      XXIV  James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 
                2400--2499)
       XXV  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2500--2599)

                          Title 46--Shipping

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                1--199)
        II  Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 200--399)
       III  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage), Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500--599)

                      Title 47--Telecommunication

         I  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Office of Science and Technology Policy and National 
                Security Council (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce, and 
                National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

           Title 48--Federal Acquisition Regulations System

         1  Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1--99)
         2  Defense Acquisition Regulations System, Department of 
                Defense (Parts 200--299)
         3  Health and Human Services (Parts 300--399)
         4  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         5  General Services Administration (Parts 500--599)
         6  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
         7  Agency for International Development (Parts 700--799)
         8  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
         9  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        10  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)
        12  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
        13  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
        14  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)

[[Page 1182]]

        15  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
        16  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                1600--1699)
        17  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700--1799)
        18  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1800--1899)
        19  Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 1900--1999)
        20  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000--2099)
        21  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation (Parts 2100--2199)
        23  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
        24  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2400--2499)
        25  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
        28  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
        29  Department of Labor (Parts 2900--2999)
        30  Department of Homeland Security, Homeland Security 
                Acquisition Regulation (HSAR) (Parts 3000--3099)
        34  Department of Education Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                3400--3499)
        51  Department of the Army Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5100--5199)
        52  Department of the Navy Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5200--5299)
        53  Department of the Air Force Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation Supplement [Reserved]
        54  Defense Logistics Agency, Department of Defense (Parts 
                5400--5499)
        57  African Development Foundation (Parts 5700--5799)
        61  Civilian Board of Contract Appeals, General Services 
                Administration (Parts 6100--6199)
        63  Department of Transportation Board of Contract Appeals 
                (Parts 6300--6399)
        99  Cost Accounting Standards Board, Office of Federal 
                Procurement Policy, Office of Management and 
                Budget (Parts 9900--9999)

                       Title 49--Transportation

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Transportation 
                (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to 
                Transportation
         I  Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Federal Railroad Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                400--499)

[[Page 1183]]

         V  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Federal Transit Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) 
                (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  National Transportation Safety Board (Parts 800--999)
         X  Surface Transportation Board, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1000--1399)
        XI  Research and Innovative Technology Administration, 
                Department of Transportation [Reserved]
       XII  Transportation Security Administration, Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 1500--1699)

                   Title 50--Wildlife and Fisheries

         I  United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of 
                the Interior (Parts 1--199)
        II  National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Fishing and Related Activities (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife 
                Service, Department of the Interior and National 
                Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and 
                Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce); Endangered Species Committee 
                Regulations (Parts 400--499)
         V  Marine Mammal Commission (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 600--699)

                      CFR Index and Finding Aids

            Subject/Agency Index
            List of Agency Prepared Indexes
            Parallel Tables of Statutory Authorities and Rules
            List of CFR Titles, Chapters, Subchapters, and Parts
            Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR

[[Page 1185]]




<R03>
           Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR


<R04>

                     (Revised as of October 1, 2011)

                                                  CFR Title, Subtitle or 
                     Agency                               Chapter

Administrative Committee of the Federal Register  1, I
Administrative Conference of the United States    1, III
Advanced Research Projects Agency                 32, I
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation         36, VIII
African Development Foundation                    22, XV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 57
Agency for International Development              22, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
Agricultural Marketing Service                    7, I, IX, X, XI
Agricultural Research Service                     7, V
Agriculture Department                            2, IV; 5, LXXIII
  Agricultural Marketing Service                  7, I, IX, X, XI
  Agricultural Research Service                   7, V
  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service      7, III; 9, I
  Chief Financial Officer, Office of              7, XXX
  Commodity Credit Corporation                    7, XIV
  Economic Research Service                       7, XXXVII
  Energy Policy and New Uses, Office of           2, IX; 7, XXIX
  Environmental Quality, Office of                7, XXXI
  Farm Service Agency                             7, VII, XVIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 4
  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation              7, IV
  Food and Nutrition Service                      7, II
  Food Safety and Inspection Service              9, III
  Foreign Agricultural Service                    7, XV
  Forest Service                                  36, II
  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards        7, VIII; 9, II
       Administration
  Information Resources Management, Office of     7, XXVII
  Inspector General, Office of                    7, XXVI
  National Agricultural Library                   7, XLI
  National Agricultural Statistics Service        7, XXXVI
  National Institute of Food and Agriculture.     7, XXXIV
  Natural Resources Conservation Service          7, VI
  Operations, Office of                           7, XXVIII
  Procurement and Property Management, Office of  7, XXXII
  Rural Business-Cooperative Service              7, XVIII, XLII, L
  Rural Development Administration                7, XLII
  Rural Housing Service                           7, XVIII, XXXV, L
  Rural Telephone Bank                            7, XVI
  Rural Utilities Service                         7, XVII, XVIII, XLII, L
  Secretary of Agriculture, Office of             7, Subtitle A
  Transportation, Office of                       7, XXXIII
  World Agricultural Outlook Board                7, XXXVIII
Air Force Department                              32, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement       48, 53
Air Transportation Stabilization Board            14, VI
Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau          27, I
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives,       27, II
     Bureau of
AMTRAK                                            49, VII
American Battle Monuments Commission              36, IV
American Indians, Office of the Special Trustee   25, VII
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service        7, III; 9, I
Appalachian Regional Commission                   5, IX

[[Page 1186]]

Architectural and Transportation Barriers         36, XI
     Compliance Board
Arctic Research Commission                        45, XXIII
Armed Forces Retirement Home                      5, XI
Army Department                                   32, V
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 51
Bilingual Education and Minority Languages        34, V
     Affairs, Office of
Blind or Severely Disabled, Committee for         41, 51
     Purchase From People Who Are
Broadcasting Board of Governors                   22, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 19
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation,    30, II
     and Enforcement
Census Bureau                                     15, I
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services          42, IV
Central Intelligence Agency                       32, XIX
Chief Financial Officer, Office of                7, XXX
Child Support Enforcement, Office of              45, III
Children and Families, Administration for         45, II, III, IV, X
Civil Rights, Commission on                       5, LXVIII; 45, VII
Civil Rights, Office for                          34, I
Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency    5, LXX
     for the District of Columbia
Coast Guard                                       33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)                46, III
Commerce Department                               44, IV; 50, VI
  Census Bureau                                   15, I
  Economic Affairs, Under Secretary               37, V
  Economic Analysis, Bureau of                    15, VIII
  Economic Development Administration             13, III
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 13
  Foreign-Trade Zones Board                       15, IV
  Industry and Security, Bureau of                15, VII
  International Trade Administration              15, III; 19, III
  National Institute of Standards and Technology  15, II
  National Marine Fisheries Service               50, II, IV
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric                15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
       Administration                             VI
  National Telecommunications and Information     15, XXIII; 47, III, IV
       Administration
  National Weather Service                        15, IX
  Patent and Trademark Office, United States      37, I
  Productivity, Technology and Innovation,        37, IV
       Assistant Secretary for
  Secretary of Commerce, Office of                15, Subtitle A
  Technology, Under Secretary for                 37, V
  Technology Administration                       15, XI
  Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for      37, IV
Commercial Space Transportation                   14, III
Commodity Credit Corporation                      7, XIV
Commodity Futures Trading Commission              5, XLI; 17, I
Community Planning and Development, Office of     24, V, VI
     Assistant Secretary for
Community Services, Office of                     45, X
Comptroller of the Currency                       12, I
Construction Industry Collective Bargaining       29, IX
     Commission
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau              12, X
Consumer Product Safety Commission                5, LXXI; 16, II
Copyright Office                                  37, II
Copyright Royalty Board                           37, III
Corporation for National and Community Service    2, XXII; 45, XII, XXV
Cost Accounting Standards Board                   48, 99
Council on Environmental Quality                  40, V
Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency    28, VIII
     for the District of Columbia
Customs and Border Protection                     19, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I

[[Page 1187]]

Defense Department                                5, XXVI; 32, Subtitle A; 
                                                  40, VII
  Advanced Research Projects Agency               32, I
  Air Force Department                            32, VII
  Army Department                                 32, V; 33, II; 36, III, 
                                                  48, 51
  Defense Acquisition Regulations System          48, 2
  Defense Intelligence Agency                     32, I
  Defense Logistics Agency                        32, I, XII; 48, 54
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Human Resources Management and Labor Relations  5, XCIX
       Systems
  National Imagery and Mapping Agency             32, I
  Navy Department                                 32, VI; 48, 52
  Secretary of Defense, Office of                 2, XI; 32, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Intelligence Agency                       32, I
Defense Logistics Agency                          32, XII; 48, 54
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board           10, XVII
Delaware River Basin Commission                   18, III
District of Columbia, Court Services and          28, VIII
     Offender Supervision Agency for the
Drug Enforcement Administration                   21, II
East-West Foreign Trade Board                     15, XIII
Economic Affairs, Under Secretary                 37, V
Economic Analysis, Bureau of                      15, VIII
Economic Development Administration               13, III
Economic Research Service                         7, XXXVII
Education, Department of                          5, LIII
  Bilingual Education and Minority Languages      34, V
       Affairs, Office of
  Civil Rights, Office for                        34, I
  Educational Research and Improvement, Office    34, VII
       of
  Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of   34, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 34
  Postsecondary Education, Office of              34, VI
  Secretary of Education, Office of               34, Subtitle A
  Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,  34, III
       Office of
  Vocational and Adult Education, Office of       34, IV
Educational Research and Improvement, Office of   34, VII
Election Assistance Commission                    2, LVIII; 11, II
Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of     34, II
Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board       13, V
Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board              13, IV
Employee Benefits Security Administration         29, XXV
Employees' Compensation Appeals Board             20, IV
Employees Loyalty Board                           5, V
Employment and Training Administration            20, V
Employment Standards Administration               20, VI
Endangered Species Committee                      50, IV
Energy, Department of                             5, XXIII; 10, II, III, X
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 9
  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission            5, XXIV; 18, I
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 109
Energy, Office of                                 7, XXIX
Engineers, Corps of                               33, II; 36, III
Engraving and Printing, Bureau of                 31, VI
Environmental Protection Agency                   2, XV; 5, LIV; 40, I, IV, 
                                                  VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 15
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 115
Environmental Quality, Office of                  7, XXXI
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission           5, LXII; 29, XIV
Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary  24, I
     for
Executive Office of the President                 3, I
  Administration, Office of                       5, XV
  Environmental Quality, Council on               40, V

[[Page 1188]]

  Management and Budget, Office of                5, III, LXXVII; 14, VI; 
                                                  48, 99
  National Drug Control Policy, Office of         21, III
  National Security Council                       32, XXI; 47, 2
  Presidential Documents                          3
  Science and Technology Policy, Office of        32, XXIV; 47, II
  Trade Representative, Office of the United      15, XX
       States
Export-Import Bank of the United States           2, XXXV; 5, LII; 12, IV
Family Assistance, Office of                      45, II
Farm Credit Administration                        5, XXXI; 12, VI
Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation          5, XXX; 12, XIV
Farm Service Agency                               7, VII, XVIII
Federal Acquisition Regulation                    48, 1
Federal Aviation Administration                   14, I
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
Federal Claims Collection Standards               31, IX
Federal Communications Commission                 5, XXIX; 47, I
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of   41, 60
Federal Crop Insurance Corporation                7, IV
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation             5, XXII; 12, III
Federal Election Commission                       11, I
Federal Emergency Management Agency               44, I
Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal    48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition     48, 16
     Regulation
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission              5, XXIV; 18, I
Federal Financial Institutions Examination        12, XI
     Council
Federal Financing Bank                            12, VIII
Federal Highway Administration                    23, I, II
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation            1, IV
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office       12, XVII
Federal Housing Finance Agency                    5, LXXX; 12, XII
Federal Housing Finance Board                     12, IX
Federal Labor Relations Authority                 5, XIV, XLIX; 22, XIV
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center           31, VII
Federal Management Regulation                     41, 102
Federal Maritime Commission                       46, IV
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service        29, XII
Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission  5, LXXIV; 29, XXVII
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration       49, III
Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                   28, III
Federal Procurement Policy Office                 48, 99
Federal Property Management Regulations           41, 101
Federal Railroad Administration                   49, II
Federal Register, Administrative Committee of     1, I
Federal Register, Office of                       1, II
Federal Reserve System                            12, II
  Board of Governors                              5, LVIII
Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board        5, VI, LXXVI
Federal Service Impasses Panel                    5, XIV
Federal Trade Commission                          5, XLVII; 16, I
Federal Transit Administration                    49, VI
Federal Travel Regulation System                  41, Subtitle F
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network              31, X
Financial Research Office                         12, XVI
Financial Stability Oversight Council             12, XIII
Fine Arts, Commission on                          45, XXI
Fiscal Service                                    31, II
Fish and Wildlife Service, United States          50, I, IV
Food and Drug Administration                      21, I
Food and Nutrition Service                        7, II
Food Safety and Inspection Service                9, III
Foreign Agricultural Service                      7, XV
Foreign Assets Control, Office of                 31, V
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the       45, V
     United States
Foreign Service Grievance Board                   22, IX
Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel            22, XIV

[[Page 1189]]

Foreign Service Labor Relations Board             22, XIV
Foreign-Trade Zones Board                         15, IV
Forest Service                                    36, II
General Services Administration                   5, LVII; 41, 105
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 61
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 5
  Federal Management Regulation                   41, 102
  Federal Property Management Regulations         41, 101
  Federal Travel Regulation System                41, Subtitle F
  General                                         41, 300
  Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel    41, 304
       Expenses
  Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death    41, 303
       of Certain Employees
  Relocation Allowances                           41, 302
  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances          41, 301
Geological Survey                                 30, IV
Government Accountability Office                  4, I
Government Ethics, Office of                      5, XVI
Government National Mortgage Association          24, III
Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards          7, VIII; 9, II
     Administration
Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation            45, XVIII
Health and Human Services, Department of          2, III; 5, XLV; 45, 
                                                  Subtitle A,
  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services        42, IV
  Child Support Enforcement, Office of            45, III
  Children and Families, Administration for       45, II, III, IV, X
  Community Services, Office of                   45, X
  Family Assistance, Office of                    45, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 3
  Food and Drug Administration                    21, I
  Human Development Services, Office of           45, XIII
  Indian Health Service                           25, V
  Inspector General (Health Care), Office of      42, V
  Public Health Service                           42, I
  Refugee Resettlement, Office of                 45, IV
Homeland Security, Department of                  2, XXX; 6, I
  Coast Guard                                     33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)              46, III
  Customs and Border Protection                   19, I
  Federal Emergency Management Agency             44, I
  Human Resources Management and Labor Relations  5, XCVII
       Systems
  Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau      19, IV
  Immigration and Naturalization                  8, I
  Transportation Security Administration          49, XII
HOPE for Homeowners Program, Board of Directors   24, XXIV
     of
Housing and Urban Development, Department of      2, XXIV; 5, LXV; 24, 
                                                  Subtitle B
  Community Planning and Development, Office of   24, V, VI
       Assistant Secretary for
  Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant          24, I
       Secretary for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 24
  Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office    12, XVII
       of
  Government National Mortgage Association        24, III
  Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office   24, II, VIII, X, XX
       of Assistant Secretary for
  Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing     24, IV
       Assistance Restructuring, Office of
  Inspector General, Office of                    24, XII
  Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant  24, IX
       Secretary for
  Secretary, Office of                            24, Subtitle A, VII
Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of  24, II, VIII, X, XX
     Assistant Secretary for
Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing       24, IV
     Assistance Restructuring, Office of
Human Development Services, Office of             45, XIII
Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau        19, IV

[[Page 1190]]

Immigration and Naturalization                    8, I
Immigration Review, Executive Office for          8, V
Independent Counsel, Office of                    28, VII
Indian Affairs, Bureau of                         25, I, V
Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant           25, VI
     Secretary
Indian Arts and Crafts Board                      25, II
Indian Health Service                             25, V
Industry and Security, Bureau of                  15, VII
Information Resources Management, Office of       7, XXVII
Information Security Oversight Office, National   32, XX
     Archives and Records Administration
Inspector General
  Agriculture Department                          7, XXVI
  Health and Human Services Department            42, V
  Housing and Urban Development Department        24, XII
Institute of Peace, United States                 22, XVII
Inter-American Foundation                         5, LXIII; 22, X
Interior Department
  American Indians, Office of the Special         25, VII
       Trustee
  Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation,  30, II
       and Enforcement
  Endangered Species Committee                    50, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 14
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 114
  Fish and Wildlife Service, United States        50, I, IV
  Geological Survey                               30, IV
  Indian Affairs, Bureau of                       25, I, V
  Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant         25, VI
       Secretary
  Indian Arts and Crafts Board                    25, II
  Land Management, Bureau of                      43, II
  National Indian Gaming Commission               25, III
  National Park Service                           36, I
  Natural Resource Revenue, Office of             30, XII
  Reclamation, Bureau of                          43, I
  Secretary of the Interior, Office of            2, XIV; 43, Subtitle A
  Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,     30, VII
       Office of
Internal Revenue Service                          26, I
International Boundary and Water Commission,      22, XI
     United States and Mexico, United States 
     Section
International Development, United States Agency   22, II
     for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
International Development Cooperation Agency,     22, XII
     United States
International Joint Commission, United States     22, IV
     and Canada
International Organizations Employees Loyalty     5, V
     Board
International Trade Administration                15, III; 19, III
International Trade Commission, United States     19, II
Interstate Commerce Commission                    5, XL
Investment Security, Office of                    31, VIII
James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation      45, XXIV
Japan-United States Friendship Commission         22, XVI
Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries       20, VIII
Justice Department                                2, XXVII; 5, XXVIII; 28, 
                                                  I, XI; 40, IV
  Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives,     27, II
       Bureau of
  Drug Enforcement Administration                 21, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 28
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             31, IX
  Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                 28, III
  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the     45, V
       United States
  Immigration Review, Executive Office for        8, V
  Offices of Independent Counsel                  28, VI
  Prisons, Bureau of                              28, V
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 128
Labor Department                                  5, XLII
  Employee Benefits Security Administration       29, XXV

[[Page 1191]]

  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board           20, IV
  Employment and Training Administration          20, V
  Employment Standards Administration             20, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 29
  Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office    41, 60
       of
  Federal Procurement Regulations System          41, 50
  Labor-Management Standards, Office of           29, II, IV
  Mine Safety and Health Administration           30, I
  Occupational Safety and Health Administration   29, XVII
  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs        20, VII
  Public Contracts                                41, 50
  Secretary of Labor, Office of                   29, Subtitle A
  Veterans' Employment and Training Service,      41, 61; 20, IX
       Office of the Assistant Secretary for
  Wage and Hour Division                          29, V
  Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of       20, I
Labor-Management Standards, Office of             29, II, IV
Land Management, Bureau of                        43, II
Legal Services Corporation                        45, XVI
Library of Congress                               36, VII
  Copyright Office                                37, II
  Copyright Royalty Board                         37, III
Local Television Loan Guarantee Board             7, XX
Management and Budget, Office of                  5, III, LXXVII; 14, VI; 
                                                  48, 99
Marine Mammal Commission                          50, V
Maritime Administration                           46, II
Merit Systems Protection Board                    5, II, LXIV
Micronesian Status Negotiations, Office for       32, XXVII
Millenium Challenge Corporation                   22, XIII
Mine Safety and Health Administration             30, I
Minority Business Development Agency              15, XIV
Miscellaneous Agencies                            1, IV
Monetary Offices                                  31, I
Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in     36, XVI
     National Environmental Policy Foundation
Museum and Library Services, Institute of         2, XXXI
National Aeronautics and Space Administration     2, XVIII; 5, LIX; 14, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 18
National Agricultural Library                     7, XLI
National Agricultural Statistics Service          7, XXXVI
National and Community Service, Corporation for   45, XII, XXV
National Archives and Records Administration      2, XXVI; 5, LXVI; 36, XII
  Information Security Oversight Office           32, XX
National Capital Planning Commission              1, IV
National Commission for Employment Policy         1, IV
National Commission on Libraries and Information  45, XVII
     Science
National Council on Disability                    34, XII
National Counterintelligence Center               32, XVIII
National Credit Union Administration              12, VII
National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact     28, IX
     Council
National Drug Control Policy, Office of           21, III
National Endowment for the Arts                   2, XXXII
National Endowment for the Humanities             2, XXXIII
National Foundation on the Arts and the           45, XI
     Humanities
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration    23, II, III; 47, VI; 49, V
National Imagery and Mapping Agency               32, I
National Indian Gaming Commission                 25, III
National Institute for Literacy                   34, XI
National Institute of Food and Agriculture.       7, XXXIV
National Institute of Standards and Technology    15, II
National Intelligence, Office of Director of      32, XVII
National Labor Relations Board                    5, LXI; 29, I
National Marine Fisheries Service                 50, II, IV
National Mediation Board                          29, X
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration   15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
                                                  VI

[[Page 1192]]

National Park Service                             36, I
National Railroad Adjustment Board                29, III
National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)  49, VII
National Science Foundation                       2, XXV; 5, XLIII; 45, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 25
National Security Council                         32, XXI
National Security Council and Office of Science   47, II
     and Technology Policy
National Telecommunications and Information       15, XXIII; 47, III, IV
     Administration
National Transportation Safety Board              49, VIII
Natural Resources Conservation Service            7, VI
Natural Resource Revenue, Office of               30, XII
Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, Office of      25, IV
Navy Department                                   32, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 52
Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation             24, XXV
Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste  10, XVIII
     Commission
Nuclear Regulatory Commission                     2, XX; 5, XLVIII; 10, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 20
Occupational Safety and Health Administration     29, XVII
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission  29, XX
Offices of Independent Counsel                    28, VI
Office of Workers' Compensation Programs          20, VII
Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust             36, XV
Operations Office                                 7, XXVIII
Overseas Private Investment Corporation           5, XXXIII; 22, VII
Patent and Trademark Office, United States        37, I
Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel      41, 304
     Expenses
Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of   41, 303
     Certain Employees
Peace Corps                                       22, III
Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation       36, IX
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation              29, XL
Personnel Management, Office of                   5, I, XXXV; 45, VIII
  Human Resources Management and Labor Relations  5, XCIX
       Systems, Department of Defense
  Human Resources Management and Labor Relations  5, XCVII
       Systems, Department of Homeland Security
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 17
  Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal  48, 21
       Acquisition Regulation
  Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition   48, 16
       Regulation
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety           49, I
     Administration
Postal Regulatory Commission                      5, XLVI; 39, III
Postal Service, United States                     5, LX; 39, I
Postsecondary Education, Office of                34, VI
President's Commission on White House             1, IV
     Fellowships
Presidential Documents                            3
Presidio Trust                                    36, X
Prisons, Bureau of                                28, V
Procurement and Property Management, Office of    7, XXXII
Productivity, Technology and Innovation,          37, IV
     Assistant Secretary
Public Contracts, Department of Labor             41, 50
Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant    24, IX
     Secretary for
Public Health Service                             42, I
Railroad Retirement Board                         20, II
Reclamation, Bureau of                            43, I
Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board    4, II
Refugee Resettlement, Office of                   45, IV
Relocation Allowances                             41, 302
Research and Innovative Technology                49, XI
     Administration
Rural Business-Cooperative Service                7, XVIII, XLII, L
Rural Development Administration                  7, XLII
Rural Housing Service                             7, XVIII, XXXV, L

[[Page 1193]]

Rural Telephone Bank                              7, XVI
Rural Utilities Service                           7, XVII, XVIII, XLII, L
Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation     33, IV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of          32, XXIV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of, and     47, II
     National Security Council
Secret Service                                    31, IV
Securities and Exchange Commission                5, XXXIV; 17, II
Selective Service System                          32, XVI
Small Business Administration                     2, XXVII; 13, I
Smithsonian Institution                           36, V
Social Security Administration                    2, XXIII; 20, III; 48, 23
Soldiers' and Airmen's Home, United States        5, XI
Special Counsel, Office of                        5, VIII
Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,    34, III
     Office of
Special Inspector General for Iraq                5, LXXXVII
     Reconstruction
State Department                                  2, VI; 22, I; 28, XI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 6
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,       30, VII
     Office of
Surface Transportation Board                      49, X
Susquehanna River Basin Commission                18, VIII
Technology Administration                         15, XI
Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for        37, IV
Technology, Under Secretary for                   37, V
Tennessee Valley Authority                        5, LXIX; 18, XIII
Thrift Supervision Office, Department of the      12, V
     Treasury
Trade Representative, United States, Office of    15, XX
Transportation, Department of                     2, XII; 5, L
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 63
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 12
  Federal Aviation Administration                 14, I
  Federal Highway Administration                  23, I, II
  Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration     49, III
  Federal Railroad Administration                 49, II
  Federal Transit Administration                  49, VI
  Maritime Administration                         46, II
  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  23, II, III; 47, IV; 49, V
  Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety         49, I
       Administration
  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation   33, IV
  Secretary of Transportation, Office of          14, II; 49, Subtitle A
  Surface Transportation Board                    49, X
  Transportation Statistics Bureau                49, XI
Transportation, Office of                         7, XXXIII
Transportation Security Administration            49, XII
Transportation Statistics Bureau                  49, XI
Travel Allowances, Temporary Duty (TDY)           41, 301
Treasury Department                               5, XXI; 12, XV; 17, IV; 
                                                  31, IX
  Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau        27, I
  Community Development Financial Institutions    12, XVIII
       Fund
  Comptroller of the Currency                     12, I
  Customs and Border Protection                   19, I
  Engraving and Printing, Bureau of               31, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 10
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             31, IX
  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center         31, VII
  Financial Crimes Enforcement Network            31, X
  Fiscal Service                                  31, II
  Foreign Assets Control, Office of               31, V
  Internal Revenue Service                        26, I
  Investment Security, Office of                  31, VIII
  Monetary Offices                                31, I
  Secret Service                                  31, IV
  Secretary of the Treasury, Office of            31, Subtitle A
  Thrift Supervision, Office of                   12, V

[[Page 1194]]

Truman, Harry S. Scholarship Foundation           45, XVIII
United States and Canada, International Joint     22, IV
     Commission
United States and Mexico, International Boundary  22, XI
     and Water Commission, United States Section
Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation      43, III
     Commission
Veterans Affairs Department                       2, VIII; 38, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 8
Veterans' Employment and Training Service,        41, 61; 20, IX
     Office of the Assistant Secretary for
Vice President of the United States, Office of    32, XXVIII
Vocational and Adult Education, Office of         34, IV
Wage and Hour Division                            29, V
Water Resources Council                           18, VI
Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of         20, I
World Agricultural Outlook Board                  7, XXXVIII

[[Page 1195]]


<R03>
List of CFR Sections Affected

<R04>

All changes in this volume of the Code of Federal Regulations that were 
made by documents published in the Federal Register since January 1, 
2001, are enumerated in the following list. Entries indicate the nature 
of the changes effected. Page numbers refer to Federal Register pages. 
The user should consult the entries for chapters and parts as well as 
sections for revisions.
For the period before January 1, 2001, see the ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected, 1949-1963, 1964-1972, 1973-1985, and 1986-2000'' published in 
11 separate volumes.

                                  2001

49 CFR
                                                                   66 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter V
533.5 (a) Table IV revised.........................................17516
541 Appendixes A, A-I, A-II and B revised..........................40624
544.5 (a) revised..................................................53733
544 Appendixes A and B revised.....................................53733
    Appendix C revised.............................................53734
571 Policy statement................................................9673
    Actions on petitions...........................................18208
    Regulation at 66 FR 20199 withdrawn............................64358
571.121 Amended....................................................64158
571.122 Amended; eff. 8-14-02......................................42617
571.208 Amended.............................................48221, 65403
571.221 Regulation at 63 FR 59740 eff. date delayed to 6-1-02......20199
    Amended........................................................64366
571.305 Regulation at 65 FR 57988 eff. date delayed to 12-1-01......9533
    Amended........................................................60160
571.401 Revised....................................................43121

                                  2002

49 CFR
                                                                   67 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter V
501.3 (a)(3) and (c) revised; (a)(4) and (6) removed; (a)(5) and 
        (7) redesignated as (a)(4) and (5); new (a)(6) added.......44083
    (a)(3) removed; eff. 10-3-02...................................44085
501.4 Revised......................................................44084
    Revised; eff. 10-3-02..........................................44085
501.8 (b), (e), (f) and (g) revised; (h) through (k) removed; (l) 
        redesignated as new (h)....................................44084
    (b) removed; eff. 10-3-02......................................44085
533.5 (a) table revised............................................16060
541 Policy statement...............................................53756
    Appendixes A and A-1 revised...................................44087
544.5 (a) revised..................................................46611
544 Appendixes A, B and C revised..................................46611
567.4 (h)(2) revised...............................................69623
571.3 (b) amended; eff. 12-27-04...................................79439
571.5 (b)(2) through (6) and (8) revised...........................77193
571.101 Amended....................................................38743
571.105 Amended; eff. 12-27-04.....................................79439
571.109 Amended....................................................69623
571.110 Heading revised; text amended; Figures 1 and 2 added.......69623
571.117 Amended....................................................69627
571.120 Amended....................................................69627
571.121 Amended....................................................36820
571.129 Amended....................................................69627
571.138 Added......................................................38746
571.139 Added......................................................69627
571.201 Amended; interim...........................................41354
    Amended; eff. 12-27-04.........................................79439
571.205 Amended; eff. 12-27-04.....................................79439
571.208 Amended; eff. 12-27-04.....................................79439
571.213 Amended; eff. 10-1-03......................................61529
    Amended........................................................61529
    Amended; interim...............................................64823
571.217 Amended; eff. 4-21-03......................................19351
    Figures 6A through D added; eff. 4-21-03.......................19352
571.401 Amended....................................................19523

[[Page 1196]]

571.403 Added; eff. 12-27-04.......................................79439
571.404 Added; eff. 12-27-04.......................................79451

                                  2003

49 CFR
                                                                   68 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter IV
Chapter IV Heading correctly added.................................16953
Chapter V
512 Revised........................................................44228
533.5 (a) Table IV revised.........................................16899
541 Theft data.....................................................54857
    Appendixes A and A-I revised...................................39473
544.5 (a) revised..................................................59135
544 Appendixes A and C revised.....................................59135
567.4 Regulation at 67 FR 69623 eff. date delayed to 9-1-04........33655
571 Announcement...................................................43972
    Actions on petitions...........................................69046
571.3 (b) amended..................................................44901
571.5 (b)(10) redesignated as (b)(11); new (b)(10) added; eff. 12-
        22-03......................................................37654
571.101 Amended; Table 2 revised...................................65406
571.105 Amended; eff. 10-10-03.....................................47495
571.108 Amended....................................................44901
571.109 Regulation at 67 FR 69623 eff. date delayed to 9-1-04......33655
    Amended........................................................37982
    Amended; heading revised; eff. 6-1-07..........................38146
571.110 Regulation at 67 FR 69623 eff. date delayed to 9-1-04......33655
    Amended........................................................37982
    Amended; eff. 6-1-07...........................................38146
571.117 Regulation at 67 FR 69627 eff. date delayed to 9-1-04......33655
571.119 Amended; eff. 6-1-07.......................................38148
571.120 Regulation at 67 FR 69627 eff. date delayed to 9-1-04......33655
    Amended........................................................37982
    Amended; eff. 6-1-07...........................................38149
571.121 Amended; eff.10-10-03......................................47497
571.129 Regulation at 67 FR 69627 eff. date delayed to 9-1-04......33655
571.131 Amended....................................................44901
571.138 Amended.....................................................4110
    Removed........................................................65409
571.139 Regulation at 67 FR 69627 eff. date delayed to 9-1-04......33655
    Amended; eff. 6-1-07...........................................38150
571.201 Amended; interim...........................................51711
571.205 Amended; Figure 1 removed..................................43971
    Regulation at 68 FR 43971 eff. date delayed to 1-22-04.........55545
    Amended; eff. 1-22-04..........................................55544
571.208 Amended..................................513, 4965, 23617, 50078
    Figures 6a, 6b, 7, 8 and 9 revised.............................34839
    Amended; Figure 13 added.......................................65191
571.213 Amended; eff. 12-22-03.....................................37654
    Regulation at 67 FR 64818 eff. date delayed to 9-1-04..........66741
    Amended........................................................66743
571.214 Amended....................................................67083
571.217 Regulation at 67 FR 19351 eff. date corrected to 4-21-04 
                                                                   19752
    Corrected; CFR correction......................................48572
571.221 Corrected...................................................6360
571.225 Amended; interim...........................................24667
    Amended........................................................38226
571.301 Amended....................................................44471
    Figure 2 revised...............................................44472
    Amended; Figure 3 added........................................67083
571.500 Amended....................................................43972
    Regulation at 68 FR 43972 eff. date delayed to 1-22-04.........55544

                                  2004

49 CFR
                                                                   69 FR
                                                                    Page
Title 49 Nomenclature change.......................................18803
Chapter IV
450 Authority citation revised.....................................58352
450.3 (a)(2)(iv)(B) amended; (a)(2)(v) added.......................58352
450.11 (a) and (d) amended.........................................58352
450.12 (a) introductory text amended...............................58352
450.13 Amended.....................................................58352
450.14 Amended.....................................................58352
450.15 (a) amended.................................................58352
450.16 (a) introductory text and (b) introductory text amended.....58352
451 Authority citation revised.....................................58352
451.1 (a) amended..................................................58352
451.3 (a) amended..................................................58352
451.5 (b) amended..................................................58352
451.7 (a) amended..................................................58352
451.12 (a)(4) amended..............................................58353
451.18 (a) amended.................................................58353
452 Authority citation revised.....................................58353
452.1 (a) amended..................................................58353
452.3 (a)(2) and (b) amended.......................................58353

[[Page 1197]]

452.7 (a) amended; OMB number......................................58353
452.9 (b) amended; OMB number......................................58353
453 Authority citation revised.....................................58353
453.7 Nomenclature change; (a) amended.............................58353
Chapter V
501.4 Revised......................................................63957
512.21 (c) revised.................................................21425
512 Appendixes B and C amended.....................................21425
534 Added..........................................................77671
538.1 Revised.......................................................7703
538.2 Revised.......................................................7703
538.9 Added.........................................................7703
541 Authority citation.............................................34612
    Revised; eff. 9-1-06...........................................17967
    Theft data.....................................................53354
    Theft data corrected...........................................63957
541.3 (a) corrected; eff. 9-1-06...................................34612
541.5 (e)(2) amended; eff. 9-1-06..................................17967
541 Appendixes A and A-I revised....................................9965
    Appendixes A and B revised; Appendixes A-I, A-II and C 
amended; eff. 9-1-06...............................................17967
    Appendix C corrected; eff. 9-1-06..............................34613
542 Heading revised; eff. 9-1-06...................................17967
    Authority citation corrected...................................34613
542.1 Revised; eff. 9-1-06.........................................17967
    (b) corrected; eff. 9-1-06.....................................34613
542.2 Revised; eff. 9-1-06.........................................17968
543 Authority citation.............................................34613
543.3 Revised; eff. 9-1-06.........................................17968
543.5 (a) revised; eff. 9-1-06.....................................17968
544.5 (a) revised..................................................41976
544 Appendixes A and C revised.....................................41976
567.4 Regulation at 67 FR 69623 and 68 FR 37981 eff. date delayed 
        to 9-1-05..................................................31317
571 Policy statement..........................................279, 67069
    Actions on petitions..............................9229, 60316, 60968
571.3 Policy statement.............................................61322
571.105 Amended....................................................75488
571.106 Amended; eff. 12-20-06.....................................76321
571.108 Amended.............................................48814, 55993
571.109 Regulation at 67 FR 69623 and 68 FR 37981 eff. date 
        delayed to 9-1-05..........................................31317
571.110 Regulation at 67 FR 69623 and 68 FR 37981 eff. date 
        delayed to 9-1-05..........................................31317
    Amended; Figures 1 and 2 revised; eff. 9-1-05..................31317
    Correctly amended.......................................51399, 51400
571.111 Amended....................................................18497
571.116 Amended....................................................67660
571.117 Regulation at 67 FR 69627 and 68 FR 37981 eff. date 
        delayed to 9-1-05..........................................31317
    Amended; eff. 9-1-05...........................................31319
571.118 Amended; eff. 11-15-04.....................................55531
    Amended; eff. 9-1-05...........................................55544
571.120 Regulation at 67 FR 69627 and 68 FR 37981 eff. date 
        delayed to 9-1-05..........................................31317
571.129 Regulation at 67 FR 69627 and 68 FR 37981 eff. date 
        delayed to 9-1-05..........................................31317
    Amended; eff. 9-1-05...........................................31319
571.139 Regulation at 67 FR 69627 and 68 FR 37981 eff. date 
        delayed to 9-1-05..........................................31317
    Heading revised; text amended; eff. 9-1-05.....................31319
571.201 Amended.....................................................9226
    Corrected......................................................54249
    Amended........................................................70914
571.202 Heading revised; text amended..............................74883
571.202a Added.....................................................74884
571.205 Amended....................................................51191
571.208 Amended......................................31034, 51604, 70914
571.208a Added......................................................3840
571.213 Amended; Figure 12 added...................................10934
    Amended.................................................11340, 13958
    Amended; eff. 1-12-05..........................................42601
    Amended........................................................59146
571.217 Regulation at 67 FR 19351 and 68 FR 19752 eff. date 
        delayed to 4-21-06.........................................11815
571.223 Amended....................................................67662
571.224 Amended.............................................64500, 67668
571.225 Amended...............................48823, 60565, 61155, 70915
571.301 Amended..............................................6583, 51398
571.305 Amended....................................................51399
571.403 Amended; eff. 12-27-04.....................................58852
    Amended; interim...............................................76870
571.404 Amended; eff. 12-27-04.....................................58855
    Amended; interim...............................................76870
571.500 Policy statement...........................................61322

[[Page 1198]]

                                  2005

49 CFR
                                                                   70 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter V
541 Theft data.....................................................46092
    Actions on petitions...........................................69688
541.3 Regulation at 69 FR 17967 and 34612 withdrawn; revised; eff. 
        9-1-06.....................................................28851
541 Appendices A and A-1 revised...................................20483
543 Actions on petitions...........................................69688
543.3 Regulation at 69 FR 17968 withdrawn; revised.................28851
543.5 Regulation at 69 FR 17968 withdrawn; (a) amended; eff. 9-1-
        06.........................................................28851
544.5 (a) revised..................................................42507
544 Appendices A, B and C revised..................................42507
545 Added; eff. 9-1-06.............................................28851
545 Actions on petitions...........................................69688
551.45--551.68 (Subpart D) Revised; eff. 10-7-05...................45567
555.1--555.10 (Subpart A) Designated as Subpart A; heading added; 
        eff. 9-1-06.................................................7429
555.5 (b)(6) revised; eff. 9-1-06...................................7429
555.11--555.18 (Subpart B) Added; eff. 9-1-06.......................7429
565.3 (j) revised..................................................23939
567 Revised; eff. 9-1-06............................................7430
568 Revised; eff. 9-1-06............................................7434
571 Actions on petitions.....................................6777, 40917
    Actions on petitions...........................................61908
571.3 (b) amended; eff. 10-3-05....................................48320
571.8 Revised; eff. 9-1-06..........................................7435
571.101 Amended; Table 2 revised...................................18184
    Revised; eff. 2-13-05..........................................48305
571.102 Revised; eff. 12-28-05.....................................38051
571.102 Regulation at 70 FR 38051 eff. date delayed to 9-1-07......75961
    Amended; eff. 9-1-07...........................................75965
571.105 Amended; eff. 6-30-06......................................37713
571.109 Correctly amended..........................................25789
571.110 Amended; eff. in part 6-1-07...............................14424
571.111 Corrected; CFR correction..................................73383
571.119 Amended......................................................300
571.123 Amended; eff. 8-30-06......................................51295
571.135 Amended; eff. in part 6-30-06..............................37713
571.138 Added......................................................18187
    Amended; eff. 10-7-05..........................................53100
571.201 Amended....................................................51673
571.205 Amended....................................................29965
    (a) Added......................................................29966
571.208 Amended....................................................41634
571.209 Amended; eff. 10-21-05.....................................48894
571.213 Amended....................................................15600
    Amended; eff. 6-21-06..........................................35556
    Amended; interim...............................................44523
    Amended; eff. 11-08-05.........................................52575
571.217 Amended; eff. 4-24-06......................................47136
571.301 Amended....................................................46434

                                  2006

49 CFR
                                                                   71 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter V
523.2 Amended......................................................17676
    Correctly amended..............................................19450
523.3 (b)(3) added.................................................17676
523.5 (a)(5) revised...............................................17676
    (a)(5)(ii) correctly revised...................................19450
533.5 (a) Table IV revised; (a) Figure I, Table V, (g) and (h) 
        added......................................................17676
    (a) Figure 1 correctly revised.................................19450
533 Appendix A added...............................................17677
    Appendix A correctly amended...................................19451
573 Authority citation revised.....................................17678
537.7 (c)(4)(xvi) through (xxi) revised............................17678
537.8 (e) added....................................................17678
541 Theft data.....................................................59400
    Appendix A-I revised...........................................20024
544.5 (a) amended; eff. 11-6-06....................................52293
544 Appendix A revised; eff. 11-6-06...............................52293
    Appendices B and C revised; eff. 11-6-06.......................52294
555.11 Revised.....................................................28196
555.12 Revised.....................................................28196
555.13 Revised.....................................................28196
563 Added; eff. 10-27-06...........................................51043
568.4 (a)(5) amended...............................................28197
571.3 (b) amended..................................................20029
571.101 Regulation at 70 FR 48305 delayed...........................3786
    Amended........................................................27971
571.106 Regulation at 69 FR 76321 delayed to 12-20-07..............74823
571.109 Regulation at 68 FR 38146 eff. date delayed to 9-1-07........877
    Amended; eff. 6-1-07.............................................885
571.110 Regulation at 68 FR 38146 eff. date delayed to 9-1-07........877
    Amended; eff. 6-1-07.............................................885
571.114 Revised; eff. 9-1-07.......................................17755
571.118 Amended....................................................18683

[[Page 1199]]

    Corrected......................................................25285
571.119 Regulation at 68 FR 38148 eff. date delayed to 9-1-07........877
    Amended; eff. 6-1-07.............................................885
571.120 Regulation at 68 FR 38149 eff. date delayed to 9-1-07........877
    Amended; eff. 6-1-07.............................................886
571.139 Regulation at 68 FR 38150 eff. date delayed to 9-1-07........877
    Amended; eff. 6-1-07.............................................886
571.201 Amended; compliance date extended..........................51133
571.202a Amended...................................................12148
571.205 Correctly amended..........................................64474
571.208 Appendix A amended; compliance date extended...............51131
    Amended; eff. 11-29-06.........................................51778
571.209 Amended....................................................51529
571.213 Amended....................................................32861
    Regulation at 70 FR 35556 withdrawn............................35558
    (m) and (k) amended............................................35559
571.224 Amended.....................................................9277

                                  2007

49 CFR
                                                                   72 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter V
512.6 (b)(3) removed; (c) added....................................59469
512.7 Revised......................................................59470
512 Appendix D redesignated as Appendix E; new Appendix D added; 
        Appendix C and new Appendix E revised......................59470
531 Authority citation revised.....................................28620
531.5 (b)(15) added................................................28620
541 Appendix A-I revised...........................................54602
544.5 (a) amended..................................................50080
544 Appendices A, B and C revised..................................50080
545.1 Correctly revised............................................46176
545.4 First and second paragraphs correctly designated as (a) and 
        (b)........................................................46176
545.6 Heading, (a) introductory text and (b)(1) correctly revised 
                                                                   46176
545.7 Heading correctly revised....................................46176
571.101 Amended....................................................17305
571.109 Amended....................................................49210
571.110 Amended....................................................49210
571.119 Tables II and III amended..................................49210
571.126 Added......................................................17310
    Correctly amended..............................................34410
571.138 Amended....................................................38025
571.139 Amended....................................................49211
571.201 Amended....................................................50906
    Amended; eff. 11-13-07.........................................51956
571.202 Amended....................................................25514
571.202a Revised...................................................25514
571.206 Correctly amended....................................5399, 35307
571.208 Amended....................................................40258
571.214 Revised; eff. 11-13-07.....................................51957
571.301 Amended; eff. 11-13-07.....................................51972
571.305 Amended; eff. 11-13-07.....................................51972

                                  2008

49 CFR
                                                                   73 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter V
541 Theft data..............................................13150, 60633
    Appendix A-I revised...........................................47848
    Appendix A-I corrected.........................................50885
544.5 (a) amended..................................................48153
544 Appendices A and C revised.....................................48154
563.3 Revised.......................................................2179
563.4 Removed.......................................................2180
563.5 Revised.......................................................2180
563.7 Revised.......................................................2181
    (b) Table II corrected..........................................8408
563.8 Revised.......................................................2183
563.9 Revised.......................................................2184
564 Regulation at 72 FR 68266 eff. date delayed to 12-1-09.........50730
565 Revised; eff. 10-27-08.........................................23379
565.2 Correctly revised............................................28370
565.11 Correctly amended...........................................28371
565.21 Correctly amended...........................................28371
571.3 Amended......................................................58896
571.5 Revised......................................................58896
571.10 Added.......................................................58897
571.101 Amended; eff. 10-22-08.....................................54537
571.108 Regulation at 72 FR 68269 eff. date delayed to 12-1-09.....50730
571.118 Amended....................................................38339
571.126 Amended; eff. 10-22-08.....................................54542
571.139 Correctly amended..........................................72358
571.201 Amended....................................................32482
571.207 Amended....................................................62779
571.208 Amended.............................................62779, 66798
    Correctly amended..............................................72358
571.210 Amended.............................................58898, 62779
571.213 Amended....................................................45357
571.214 Amended....................................................32483
571.222 Amended....................................................62781

[[Page 1200]]

                                  2009

49 CFR
                                                                   74 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter IV
450 Nomenclature change............................................49241
450.11 (a) amended.................................................49241
451 Nomenclature change............................................49241
451.1 (a) amended..................................................49241
452.7 (a) amended..................................................49241
453 Nomenclature change............................................49241
Chapter V
501.4 (a) revised..................................................46021
501.8 (d)(2) revised...............................................41067
512 Appendix E revised; Appendix F added...........................37897
523 Authority citation revised.....................................14449
523.2 Amended......................................................14449
523.3 (a) revised..................................................14449
523.5 Revised......................................................14449
531.5 (a) revised; (b) redesignated as (d); new (b) and (c) added 
                                                                   14449
533.5 (a) Table V and (h) revised..................................14451
534.4 (c) and (d) revised..........................................14452
534.5 (c) and (d) revised..........................................14452
535 Removed........................................................14452
536 Added..........................................................14452
537 Authority citation revised.....................................14456
537.7 (b), (c)(4)(xvi)(A) and (B) revised..........................14456
541 Appendix A-1 revised...........................................30000
564 Regulation at 72 FR 68266 eff. date delayed to 12-1-12.........58213
565.13 (a) and (g) revised.........................................67977
565.23 (a) and (g) revised.........................................67978
571 Actions on petitions...........................................30993
571.3 (b) amended; (c) removed.....................................68190
571.10 (b)(1) and (2) amended......................................68190
571.101 Amended; eff. 2-9-10.......................................40764
571.108 Regulation at 72 FR 68269 eff. date delayed to 12-1-12.....58213
571.121 Amended; interim............................................9176
    Amended; eff. 11-24-09.........................................37157
    Amended.................................................42785, 58565
571.206 Amended....................................................35135
    Corrected......................................................37176
571.216 Heading revised; amended...................................22384
571.216a Added.....................................................22384

                                  2010

49 CFR
                                                                   75 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter V
531.5 (a) introductory text and (c) revised; (d) redesignated as 
        (e); new (d) added.........................................25718
531 Appendix A added...............................................25719
533.5 (a) Figures 2 and 3, Table VI and (i) added..................25723
533 Appendix A amended.............................................25724
536.3 Amended......................................................25727
536.4 (c) amended..................................................25727
537.5 (c)(4) revised...............................................25728
537.6 (c)(1) removed; (c)(2) redesignated as (c)...................25728
537.7 (c)(4)(xvi)(A)(4) and (B)(4) revised.........................25728
537.8 (c)(1) revised; (c)(2) removed...............................25728
537.9 (c) revised..................................................25728
538.1 Revised......................................................25728
538.2 Revised......................................................25728
538.7 (b)(1) revised...............................................25728
541 Theft data.....................................................11005
    Theft data corrected...........................................47720
541 Appendix A-I revised...........................................34948
544.5 (a) amended...................................................1550
    (a) amended; eff. 10-4-10......................................54044
544 Appendixes A, B and C revised...................................1550
    Appendixes A, B and C revised; eff. 10-4-10....................54044
571 Response to comments...........................................17590
    Actions on petitions....................................17605, 22532
571.114 Amended....................................................15624
571.121 Corrected..................................................15620
571.202a Amended...................................................67246
571.206 Amended.....................................................7382
571.208 Amended.....................................................6129
571.210 Amended....................................................66697
571.214 Amended....................................................12139
571.216a Corrected.................................................17605
571.222 Amended....................................................66698
571.301 Amended....................................................12141
571.305 Amended....................................................12141
    Amended; eff. 9-1-11...........................................33527

                                  2011

  (Regulations published from January 1, 2011, through October 1, 2011)

49 CFR
                                                                   76 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter IV
450 Authority citation revised.....................................60754
451 Authority citation revised.....................................60754
452 Authority citation revised.....................................60754
453 Authority citation revised.....................................60754
Chapter V
523.2 Revised; eff. 11-14-11.......................................57490
523.6 Added; eff. 11-14-11.........................................57491
523.7 Added; eff. 11-14-11.........................................57491

[[Page 1201]]

523.8 Added; eff. 11-14-11.........................................57491
523.9 Added; eff. 11-14-11.........................................57492
534.1 Revised; eff. 11-14-11.......................................57492
534.2 Revised; eff. 11-14-11.......................................57492
534.4 Revised; eff. 11-14-11.......................................57492
534.5 (a), (c) and (d) revised; eff. 11-14-11......................57492
534.6 Revised; eff. 11-14-11.......................................57493
535 Added; eff. 11-14-11...........................................57493
535.6 (a)(4)(ii) and (c)(4)(ii) correctly revised..................59922
541 Theft data......................................................2598
541.5 (e)(2) amended...............................................24403
541.6 (e)(3) amended...............................................24403
541 Appendix A-I revised...........................................20252
544.5 (a) amended..................................................41140
544 Appendices A, B and C revised..................................41140
563.5 (b) amended; eff. 10-4-11....................................47486
563.7 (a) Table I and (b) Table II revised; eff. 10-4-11...........47486
563.8 (a) Table III amended; eff. 10-4-11..........................47488
563.9 Revised; eff. 10-4-11........................................47489
567.4 (k)(4)(i) revised............................................53078
571.5 (b) table amended.............................................3296
    (l)(4) revised; eff. 5-13-13...................................28160
571.108 Figures 19 and 20 revised..................................23510
    Tables V-b and V-c revised; eff. 12
</pre></body></html>
