<html><body><pre>
[Title 39 CFR ]
[Code of Federal Regulations (annual edition) - July 1, 1997 Edition]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]


          39


<R02>
          Postal Service

<R03>

[[Page i]]

          Revised as of July 1, 1997
          CONTAINING
          A CODIFICATION OF DOCUMENTS
          OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY
          AND FUTURE EFFECT

          AS OF JULY 1, 1997

          With Ancillaries
          Published
          by the Office of the Federal Register
          National Archives and Records
          Administration

          as a Special Edition of
          the Federal Register



[[Page ii]]

                                      




                     U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                            WASHINGTON : 1997



               For sale by U.S. Government Printing Office
 Superintendent of Documents, Mail Stop: SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-9328



[[Page iii]]



<R02>
                            Table of Contents


<R03>
                                                                    Page
  Explanation ................................................       v

  Title 39:
    Chapter I--United States Postal Service...................       3
    Chapter III--Postal Rate Commission.......................     321
  Finding Aids:
    Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference..........     457
    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters..........................     459
    Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR........     475
    List of CFR Sections Affected.............................     485

[[Page iv]]



      



                                                                                                                
                                  ----------------------------------------------------------                    

   Cite this Code:  CFR                                                         
                                                                                              
   To cite the regulations in this volume use title, part                       
   and section number. Thus, 39 CFR 1.1 refers to title                        
   39, part 1, section 1.                                                      
                                  ----------------------------------------------------------                    
                                                                                                                


[[Page v]]

                               EXPLANATION

    The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and 
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided 
into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal 
regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the 
name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into 
parts covering specific regulatory areas.
    Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year 
and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:

Title 1 through Title 16.................................as of January 1
Title 17 through Title 27..................................as of April 1
Title 28 through Title 41...................................as of July 1
Title 42 through Title 50................................as of October 1
    The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each 
volume.

LEGAL STATUS

    The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially 
noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie 
evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).

HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

    The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual 
issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used 
together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
    To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its 
revision date (in this case, July 1, 1997), consult the ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected (LSA),'' which is issued monthly, and the ``Cumulative 
List of Parts Affected,'' which appears in the Reader Aids section of 
the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal 
Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.

EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES

    Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal 
Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source 
citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page 
number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication 
dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be 
exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In 
instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the 
Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In 
those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register 
states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be 
inserted following the text.

OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

    The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires 
Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information 
collection request.

[[Page vi]]

Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as 
amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are 
placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting 
requirements.

OBSOLETE PROVISIONS

    Provisions that become obsolete before the revision date stated on 
the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text 
of provisions in effect on a given date in the past by using the 
appropriate numerical list of sections affected. For the period before 
January 1, 1986, consult either the List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-
1963, 1964-1972, or 1973-1985, published in seven separate volumes. For 
the period beginning January 1, 1986, a ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected'' is published at the end of each CFR volume.

INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE

    What is incorporation by reference? Incorporation by reference was 
established by statute and allows Federal agencies to meet the 
requirement to publish regulations in the Federal Register by referring 
to materials already published elsewhere. For an incorporation to be 
valid, the Director of the Federal Register must approve it. The legal 
effect of incorporation by reference is that the material is treated as 
if it were published in full in the Federal Register (5 U.S.C. 552(a)). 
This material, like any other properly issued regulation, has the force 
of law.
    What is a proper incorporation by reference? The Director of the 
Federal Register will approve an incorporation by reference only when 
the requirements of 1 CFR part 51 are met. Some of the elements on which 
approval is based are:
    (a) The incorporation will substantially reduce the volume of 
material published in the Federal Register.
    (b) The matter incorporated is in fact available to the extent 
necessary to afford fairness and uniformity in the administrative 
process.
    (c) The incorporating document is drafted and submitted for 
publication in accordance with 1 CFR part 51.
    Properly approved incorporations by reference in this volume are 
listed in the Finding Aids at the end of this volume.
    What if the material incorporated by reference cannot be found? If 
you have any problem locating or obtaining a copy of material listed in 
the Finding Aids of this volume as an approved incorporation by 
reference, please contact the agency that issued the regulation 
containing that incorporation. If, after contacting the agency, you find 
the material is not available, please notify the Director of the Federal 
Register, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington DC 
20408, or call (202) 523-4534.

CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

    A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a 
separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index 
and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Statutory 
Authorities and Agency Rules (Table I), and Acts Requiring Publication 
in the Federal Register (Table II). A list of CFR titles, chapters, and 
parts and an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are 
also included in this volume.
    An index to the text of ``Title 3--The President'' is carried within 
that volume.
    The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. 
This index is based on a consolidation of the ``Contents'' entries in 
the daily Federal Register.

[[Page vii]]

    A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to 
the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.

REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL

    There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing 
in the Code of Federal Regulations.

INQUIRIES

    For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this 
volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at 
the top of odd-numbered pages.
    For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-523-5227 
or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC 20408.
SALES

    The Government Printing Office (GPO) processes all sales and 
distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call 202-512-1800, 
M-F, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or fax your order to 202-512-2233, 24 hours 
a day. For payment by check, write to the Superintendent of Documents, 
Attn: New Orders, P.O. Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. For GPO 
Customer Service call 202-512-1803.

                              Raymond A. Mosley,
                                    Director,
                          Office of the Federal Register.

July 1, 1997.



[[Page ix]]



                               THIS TITLE

    Title 39--Postal Service is composed of one volume. The contents of 
this volume represent all current regulations codified under this title 
of the CFR as of July 1, 1997.

    For Chapter I--United States Postal Service, the ``Domestic Mail 
Manual'', the ``Postal Service Publication 42, International Mail'' and 
the ``Postal Contracting Manual, U.S. Postal Service Publication 41'' 
are incorporated by reference. For Federal Register documentation, see 
the Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.

    For this volume, Ruth Reedy Green was Chief Editor. The Code of 
Federal Regulations publication program is under the direction of 
Frances D. McDonald, assisted by Alomha S. Morris.

[[Page x]]

<GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>

 

[[Page 1]]


<R01>
                        TITLE 39--POSTAL SERVICE


<R02>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Part
Chapter i--United States Postal Service.....................           1
Chapter iii--Postal Rate Commission.........................        3000




[[Page 3]]


<R02>
                 CHAPTER I--UNITED STATES POSTAL SERVICE


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

     SUBCHAPTER A--THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE U.S. POSTAL SERVICE
                    BYLAWS OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS
Part                                                                Page
1               Postal policy [Article I]...................           9
2               General and technical provisions [Article 
                    II].....................................           9
3               Board of Governors [Article III]............          11
4               Officers [Article IV].......................          14
5               Committees [Article V]......................          15
6               Meetings [Article VI].......................          15
7               Public observation [Article VII]............          17
8               [Reserved]
9               Policy on communications with Governors of 
                    the Postal Service during pendency of 
                    rate and classification proceedings 
                    [Appendix]..............................          21
10              Rules of conduct for Postal Service 
                    Governors [Appendix]....................          22
11              Advisory boards [Article XI]................          23
                    SUBCHAPTER B--INTERNATIONAL MAIL

20              International Postal Service................          24
           SUBCHAPTER C--POST OFFICE SERVICES [DOMESTIC MAIL]
                  GENERAL INFORMATION ON POSTAL SERVICE
111             General information on Postal Service.......          29
              SUBCHAPTER D--ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION

211             Application of regulations..................          34
221             General principles of organization..........          35
222             Delegations of authority....................          38
223             Relationships and channels of communication.          42
224             Organizations reporting directly to the 
                    Postmaster General......................          43
225             Organizations reporting directly to the 
                    Deputy Postmaster General...............          46

[[Page 4]]

226             Groups and departments reporting to the 
                    Associate Postmaster General............          47
227             Headquarters related field units............          49
228             Service centers.............................          51
229             Field organizations.........................          52
                     INSPECTION SERVICE REQUIREMENTS

231             Protection of post offices..................          54
232             Conduct on postal property..................          55
233             Inspection Service/Inspector General 
                    authority...............................          58
235             Defense Department liaison..................          81
               POST OFFICE ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION

241             Establishment and classification, and 
                    discontinuance..........................          82
242             Change of site..............................          90
243             Conduct of offices..........................          90
                      GENERAL POSTAL ADMINISTRATION

255             Access of handicapped persons to postal 
                    services, programs, facilities, and 
                    employment..............................          91
259             Services performed for other agencies.......          95
                         RECORDS AND INFORMATION

261             Records and information management..........          96
262             Records and information management 
                    definitions.............................          97
263             Records retention and disposition...........         100
264             Vital records...............................         100
265             Release of information......................         101
266             Privacy of information......................         127
267             Protection of information...................         139
268             Privacy of information--employee rules of 
                    conduct.................................         141
273             Administration of Program Fraud Civil 
                    Remedies Act............................         142
                DAMAGE TO OR DESTRUCTION OF FIRM MAILINGS

281             Firm mailings damaged or destroyed through 
                    transportation accidents or catastrophes         147
        SUBCHAPTER E--RESTRICTIONS ON PRIVATE CARRIAGE OF LETTERS

310             Enforcement of the private express statutes.         149

[[Page 5]]

320             Suspension of the private express statutes..         153
                         SUBCHAPTER F--PERSONNEL

447             Rules of conduct for postal employees.......         160
491             Garnishment of salaries of employees of the 
                    Postal Service and the Postal Rate 
                    Commission..............................         164
                      SUBCHAPTER G--POSTAGE METERS
501             Authorization to Manufacture and Distribute 
                    Postage Meters..........................         167
     SUBCHAPTER H--PROCUREMENT SYSTEM FOR THE U.S. POSTAL SERVICE: 
             INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS OTHER THAN PATENTS

601             Procurement of property and services........         182
602             Intellectual property rights other than 
                    patents.................................         184
                        SUBCHAPTER I--[RESERVED]
SUBCHAPTER J--POSTAL SERVICE DEBT OBLIGATIONS; DISBURSEMENT POSTAL MONEY 
                                 ORDERS

760             Applicability of Treasury Department 
                    regulations.............................         186
761             Book-entry procedures.......................         186
762             Disbursement postal money orders............         189
                    SUBCHAPTER K--SPECIAL REGULATIONS

775             Environmental procedures....................         194
776             Floodplain management and protection of 
                    wetlands procedures.....................         202
777             Relocation assistance and real property 
                    acquisition policies....................         205
778             Intergovernmental review of Postal Service 
                    facility actions........................         224
                     SUBCHAPTERS L AND M--[RESERVED]
                        SUBCHAPTER N--PROCEDURES
         RULES OF PROCEDURE BEFORE THE OFFICE OF GENERAL COUNSEL

912             Procedures to adjudicate claims for personal 
                    injury or property damage arising out of 
                    the operation of the U.S. Postal Service         228

[[Page 6]]

916       [Reserved]
        RULES OF PROCEDURE BEFORE THE MAIL PROCESSING DEPARTMENT

927             Rules of procedure relating to fines, 
                    deductions, and damages.................         231
931             Rules of procedure governing the compromise 
                    of obligations..........................         233
         RULES OF PROCEDURE BEFORE THE POSTAL INSPECTION SERVICE
946             Rules of procedure relating to the 
                    disposition of stolen mail matter and 
                    property acquired by the postal 
                    inspection service for use as evidence..         234
             RULES OF PROCEDURE BEFORE THE JUDICIAL OFFICER

951             Procedure governing the eligibility of 
                    persons to practice before the Postal 
                    Service.................................         236
952             Rules of practice in proceedings relative to 
                    false representation and lottery orders.         238
953             Rules of practice in proceedings relative to 
                    mailability.............................         247
954             Rules of practice in proceedings relative to 
                    the denial, suspension, or revocation of 
                    second-class mail privileges............         250
955             Rules of practice before the Board of 
                    Contract Appeals........................         255
956             Rules of practice in proceedings relative to 
                    disciplinary action for violation of 
                    restrictions on post-employment activity         266
957             Rules of practice in proceedings relative to 
                    debarment and suspension from 
                    contracting.............................         272
958             Rules of practice in proceedings relative to 
                    the refusal to provide Post Office box 
                    or caller service and the termination of 
                    Post Office box or caller service.......         278
959             Rules of practice in proceedings relative to 
                    the private express statutes............         280
960             Rules relative to implementation of the 
                    Equal Access to Justice Act in Postal 
                    Service proceedings.....................         287
961             Rules of practice in proceedings relative to 
                    employee hearing petitions under section 
                    5 of the Debt Collection Act............         294
962             Rules of practice in proceedings relative to 
                    the Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act....         297
963             Rules of practice in proceedings relative to 
                    violations under 39 U.S.C. 3008.........         306

[[Page 7]]

964             Rules of practice governing disposition of 
                    mail withheld from delivery pursuant to 
                    39 U.S.C. 3003, 3004....................         309
965             Rules of practice in proceedings relative to 
                    mail disputes...........................         314
966             Rules of practice in proceedings relative to 
                    administrative offsets initiated by the 
                    Postal Inspection Service...............         315

[[Page 9]]


<R03>
     SUBCHAPTER A--THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE U.S. POSTAL SERVICE

<R05>


<R03>
Bylaws of the Board of Governors--Table of Contents

<R05>



<R03>
PART 1--POSTAL POLICY (ARTICLE I)--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
1.1  Establishment of the U.S. Postal Service.
1.2  Delegation of authority.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 101, 202, 205, 401(2), 402, 403, 3621, as 
enacted by Public Law 91-375.

    Source: 59 FR 18447, Apr. 18, 1994, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1.1  Establishment of the U.S. Postal Service.

    The U.S. Postal Service is established under the provisions of the 
Postal Reorganization Act (the Reorganization Act) of August 12, 1970, 
Public Law 91-375, 84 Stat. 719, as an independent establishment of the 
executive branch of the Government of the United States, under the 
direction of a Board of Governors, with the Postmaster General as its 
chief executive officer. The Board of Governors of the Postal Service 
(the Board) directs the exercise of its powers through management that 
is expected to be honest, efficient, economical, and mindful of the 
competitive business environment in which the Postal Service operates. 
The Board consists of nine Governors appointed by the President, by and 
with the advice and consent of the Senate, to represent the public 
interest generally, together with the Postmaster General and Deputy 
Postmaster General.


<R05>
Sec. 1.2  Delegation of authority.

    Except for powers, duties, or obligations specifically vested in the 
Governors by law, the Board may delegate its authority to the Postmaster 
General under such terms, conditions, and limitations, including the 
power of redelegation, as it finds desirable. The bylaws of the Board 
are the framework of the system through which the Board monitors the 
exercise of the authority it has delegated, measures progress toward the 
goals it has set, and shapes the policies to guide the future 
development of the Postal Service. Delegations of authority do not 
relieve the Board of full responsibility for carrying out its duties and 
functions, and are revocable by the Governors in their exclusive 
judgment.


<R03>
PART 2--GENERAL AND TECHNICAL PROVISIONS (ARTICLE II)--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
2.1  Office of the Board of Governors.
2.2  Agent for receipt of process.
2.3  Offices.
2.4  Seal.
2.5  Authority.
2.6  Severability, amendment, repeal, and waiver of bylaws.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 202, 203, 205(c), 207, 401(2), as enacted by 
Pub. L. 91-375, and 5 U.S.C. 552b(f), (g), as enacted by Pub. L. 94-409.

    Source: 59 FR 18447, Apr. 18, 1994, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 2.1  Office of the Board of Governors.

    There shall be located in Washington, DC an Office of the Board of 
Governors of the United States Postal Service. It shall be the function 
of this Office to provide staff support for the Board, as directed by 
the Chairman of the Board, to enable the Board to carry out effectively 
its duties under the Reorganization Act.


<R05>
Sec. 2.2  Agent for receipt of process.

    The General Counsel of the Postal Service shall act as agent for the 
receipt of legal process against the Postal Service, and as agent for 
the receipt of legal process against the Board of Governors or a member 
of the Board, in his or her official capacity, and all other officers 
and employees of the Postal Service to the extent that the process 
arises out of the official functions of those officers and employees. 
The General Counsel shall also issue public certifications concerning 
closed meetings of the Board as appropriate under 5 U.S.C. 552b(f).

[[Page 10]]


<R05>
Sec. 2.3  Offices.

    The principal office of the Postal Service is located in Washington, 
DC, with such regional and other offices and places of business as the 
Postmaster General establishes from time to time, or the business of the 
Postal Service requires.


<R05>
Sec. 2.4  Seal.

    (a) The Seal of the Postal Service is filed by the Board in the 
Office of the Secretary of State, and is required by 39 U.S.C. 207 to be 
judicially noticed. The Seal shall be in the custody of the General 
Counsel, who shall affix it to all commissions of officers of the Postal 
Service, and use it to authenticate records of the Postal Service and 
for other official purposes. The following describes the Seal adopted 
for the Postal Service:
    (1) A stylized bald eagle is poised for flight, facing to the 
viewer's right, above two horizontal bars between which are the words 
``U.S. MAIL'', surrounded by a square border with rounded corners 
consisting of the words ``UNITED STATES POSTAL SERVICE'' on the left, 
top, and right, and consisting of nine five-pointed stars on the base.
    (2) The color representation of the Seal shows, a white field on 
which the bald eagle appears in dark blue, the words ``U.S. MAIL'' in 
black, the bar above the words in red, the bar below in blue, and the 
entire border consisting of the words ``UNITED STATES POSTAL SERVICE'' 
and stars in ochre.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR18AP94.000

    (b) The location and description of the Postal Service emblem is 
described at 39 CFR 221.9.


<R05>
Sec. 2.5  Authority.

    These bylaws are adopted by the Board under the authority conferred 
upon the Postal Service by 39 U.S.C. 401(2) and 5 U.S.C. 552b(g).


<R05>
Sec. 2.6  Severability, amendment, repeal, and waiver of bylaws.

    The invalidity of any provision of these bylaws does not affect the 
validity of the remaining provisions, and for this purpose these bylaws 
are severable. The Board may amend or repeal these bylaws at any special 
or regular meeting, provided that each member of the Board has received 
a written notice containing a statement of the proposed amendment or 
repeal at least 5 days before the meeting. The members of the Board may 
waive the 5 days' notice or the operation of any other provision of 
these bylaws by unanimous consent, if that action is not prohibited by 
law. The Secretary shall submit the text of any amendment to these 
bylaws for publication in the Federal Register

[[Page 11]]

as soon as practicable after the amendment is adopted by the Board.


<R03>
PART 3--BOARD OF GOVERNORS (ARTICLE III)--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
3.1  Responsibilities of Board.
3.2  Compensation of Board.
3.3  Matters reserved for decision by the Board.
3.4  Matters reserved for decision by the Governors.
3.5  Delegation of authority by Board.
3.6  Information furnished to Board--financial and operating reports.
3.7  Information furnished to Board--program review.
3.8  Information furnished to Board--special reports.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 202, 203, 205, 401(2), (10), 402, 1003, 3013; 5 
U.S.C. 552b(g), (j).

    Source: 59 FR 18448, Apr. 18, 1994, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 3.1  Responsibilities of Board.

    The composition of the Board is described in 39 U.S.C. 202. The 
Board directs the exercise of the powers of the Postal Service, reviews 
the practices and policies of the Postal Service, and directs and 
controls the expenditures of the Postal Service. Consistent with the 
broad delegation of authority to the Postmaster General in Sec. 3.5 of 
these bylaws, and except for those powers, duties, or obligations which 
the Reorganization Act specifically vests in the Governors, as 
distinguished from the Board of Governors, the Board accomplishes its 
purposes by monitoring the operations and performance of the Postal 
Service, and by establishing basic objectives, broad policies, and long-
range goals for the Postal Service.


<R05>
Sec. 3.2  Compensation of Board.

    Section 202(a) of title 39 provides for the compensation of the 
Governors and for reimbursement for travel and reasonable expenses 
incurred in attending Board meetings. Compensation is provided for not 
more than 42 days of meetings per year.


<R05>
Sec. 3.3  Matters reserved for decision by the Board.

    The following matters are reserved for decision by the Board of 
Governors:
    (a) Election of the Vice Chairman of the Board.
    (b) Adoption of, and amendments to, the bylaws of the Board.
    (c) (1) Approval of the annual Postal Service budget program in both 
tentative and final form, including requests for appropriations;
    (2) Approval of the annual Postal Service operating budget.
    (d) Approval of the annual financial statements of the Postal 
Service following receipt of the annual report of the Postal Service's 
independent, certified public accounting firm.
    (e) Approval of the Postal Service Five-Year Capital Investment 
Plans, including specific approval of each capital investment project, 
each new lease/rental agreement, and each research and development 
project exceeding such amount specified by resolution at the annual 
Board meeting in January. In the case of any project or agreement 
subject to the requirement of Board approval under this provision, the 
expenditure of any funds in excess of the amount previously authorized 
by the Board must be specifically approved by the Board. For the purpose 
of determining the cost of a capital investment project, lease/rental 
agreement, or research and development project,
    (1) All such projects and agreements undertaken as part of a unitary 
plan (either for contemporaneous or sequential development in one of 
several locations) shall be considered one project or agreement, and
    (2) The cost of a lease/rental agreement shall be the present value 
of all lease payments over the term of the lease, including all periods 
covered by renewal options or all periods for which failure to renew 
imposes a penalty or a hardship such that renewal appears to be 
reasonably assured, plus the cost of any leasehold improvements planned 
in connection with the lease/rental agreement. The present value will be 
determined using the cost of capital of the Postal Service.
    (f) Authorization of the Postal Service to request the Postal Rate 
Commission to submit a recommended decision on changes in postal rates.

[[Page 12]]

    (g) Authorization of the Postal Service to request the Postal Rate 
Commission to submit a recommended decision on changes in the mail 
classification schedule.
    (h) Determination of an effective date for changes in postal rates 
or mail classification.
    (i) Authorization of the Postal Service to request the Postal Rate 
Commission to submit an advisory opinion on a proposed change in the 
nature of postal services which will generally affect service on a 
nationwide or substantially nationwide basis.
    (j) Approval of any use of the authority of the Postal Service to 
borrow money under 39 U.S.C. 2005, except for short-term borrowings, 
having maturities of one year or less, assumed in the normal course of 
business.
    (k) Approval of the terms and conditions of each series of 
obligations issued by the Postal Service under 39 U.S.C. 2005, including 
the time and manner of sale and the underwriting arrangements, except 
for short-term borrowings, having maturities of one year or less, 
assumed in the normal course of business.
    (l) Approval of any use of the authority of the Postal Service to 
require the Secretary of the Treasury to purchase Postal Service 
obligations under 39 U.S.C. 2006(b), or to request the Secretary of the 
Treasury to pledge the full faith and credit of the Government of the 
United States for the payment of principal and interest on Postal 
Service obligations under 39 U.S.C. 2006(c).
    (m) Determination of the number of officers, described in 39 U.S.C. 
204 as Assistant Postmasters General, whether so denominated or not, as 
the Board authorizes by resolution.
    (n) Compensation of officers of the Postal Service whose positions 
are included in Level II of the Postal Career Executive Service.
    (o) Selection of an independent, certified public accounting firm to 
certify the accuracy of Postal Service financial statements as required 
by 39 U.S.C. 2008(e).
    (p) Approval of official statements adopting major policy positions 
or departing from established major policy positions, and of official 
positions on legislative proposals having a major impact on the Postal 
Service.
    (q) Approval of all major policy positions taken with the Department 
of Justice on petitioning the Supreme Court of the United States for 
writs of certiorari.
    (r) Approval and transmittal to the President and the Congress of 
the annual report of the Postmaster General under 39 U.S.C. 2402.
    (s) Approval and transmittal to the Congress of the annual report of 
the Board under 5 U.S.C. 552b(j).
    (t) Approval of the annual comprehensive statement of the Postal 
Service to Congress under 39 U.S.C. 2401(g).
    (u) Approval and transmittal to the Congress of the semi-annual 
report of the Postmaster General under 39 U.S.C. 3013, summarizing the 
investigative activities of the Postal Service.
    (v) All other matters that the Board may consider appropriate to 
reserve for its decision.


<R05>
Sec. 3.4  Matters reserved for decision by the Governors.

    The following matters are reserved for decision by the Governors:
    (a) Appointment, pay, term of service, and removal of the Postmaster 
General, 39 U.S.C. 202(c).
    (b) Appointment, term of service, and removal of the Deputy 
Postmaster General (by the Governors and the Postmaster General, 39 
U.S.C. 202(d)); pay of the Deputy Postmaster General, 39 U.S.C. 202(d).
    (c) Election of the Chairman of the Board of Governors, 39 U.S.C. 
202(a).
    (d) Approval of the budget of the Postal Rate Commission, or 
adjustment of the total amount of the budget (by unanimous written vote 
of the Governors in office, 39 U.S.C. 3604(d)).
    (e) Action upon a recommended decision of the Postal Rate 
Commission, including action to approve, allow under protest, reject, or 
modify that decision, 39 U.S.C. 3625.
    (f) Concurrence of the Governors with the Postmaster General in the 
removal or transfer of the Chief Postal Inspector under 5 U.S.C. App. 
8E(f).

[[Page 13]]

    (g) The Governors shall meet annually in closed session to discuss 
compensation, term of service, and appointment/removal of the Secretary 
and other necessary staff.


<R05>
Sec. 3.5  Delegation of authority by Board.

    As authorized by 39 U.S.C. 402, these bylaws delegate to the 
Postmaster General the authority to exercise the powers of the Postal 
Service to the extent that this delegation of authority does not 
conflict with powers reserved to the Governors or to the Board by law, 
these bylaws, or resolutions adopted by the Board. Any of the powers 
delegated to the Postmaster General by these bylaws may be redelegated 
by the Postmaster General to any officer, employee, or agency of the 
Postal Service.


<R05>
Sec. 3.6  Information furnished to Board--financial and operating reports.

    To enable the Board to monitor the performance of the Postal Service 
during the most recent accounting periods for which data are available, 
postal management shall furnish the Board (on a monthly basis) financial 
and operating statements for the fiscal year to date, addressing the 
following categories: (a) Mail volume by class; (b) income and expense 
by principal categories; (c) balance sheet information; (d) service 
quality measurements; (e) productivity measurements (reflecting workload 
and resource utilization); and (f) changes in postal costs. These 
statements shall include, where applicable, comparable figures for the 
previous year and the current year's plan.


<R05>
Sec. 3.7  Information furnished to Board--program review.

    (a) To enable the Board to review the Postal Service operating 
program, postal management shall furnish the Board information on all 
aspects of the Postal Service budget plan, including:
    (1) The tentative and final annual budgets submitted to the Office 
of Management and Budget and the Congress, and amendments to the budget;
    (2) Five-year plans, annual operating and investment plans, and 
significant departures from estimates upon which the plans were based;
    (3) The need for rate increases or decreases and the progress of any 
pending rate cases and related litigation; and
    (4) Debt financing needs, including a review of all borrowings of 
the Postal Service from the U.S. Treasury and private sources.
    (b) To enable the Board to review the effectiveness of the Postal 
Service's equal employment opportunity program, performance data 
relating to this program shall be furnished to the Board at least 
quarterly. This data shall be categorized in such manner as the Board, 
from time to time, specifies.
    (c) Postal management shall also regularly furnish the Board 
information regarding major programs for improving postal service or 
reducing the cost of postal operations.
    (d) Management shall furnish to the Board:
    (1) Information regarding any significant, new program, policy, 
major modification or initiative; any plan to offer a significant, new 
or unique product or system implementation; or any significant, new 
project not related directly to the core business function of the Postal 
Service. This information shall be provided to the Board in advance of 
entering into any agreement in furtherance of such project. For the 
purposes of this paragraph, ``significant'' means a project anticipated 
to have a notable or conspicuous impact on (i) corporate visibility or 
(ii) the operating budget (including increases in expense amounts) or 
the capital investment budget. The notification requirement of this 
paragraph governs applicable projects regardless of the level of 
expenditure involved.
    (2) Information regarding any project, in advance of entering into 
any agreement in furtherance of such project, where the potential 
liability due to termination, breach, or other reason would equal or 
exceed the amount specified by resolution for approval of capital 
investment projects pursuant to section 3.3(e) hereof.

[59 FR 18448, Apr. 18, 1994, as amended 62 FR 18519, Apr. 16, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 3.8  Information furnished to Board--special reports.

    To insure that the Board receives significant information of 
developments

[[Page 14]]

meriting its attention, postal management shall bring to the Board's 
attention the following matters:
    (a) Major developments in personnel areas, including but not limited 
to equal employment opportunity, career development and training, and 
grade and salary structures.
    (b) Major litigation activities. Postal management shall also notify 
the Board in a timely manner whenever it proposes to seek review by any 
United States Court of Appeals of an adverse judicial decision.
    (c) Any significant changes proposed in the Postal Service's system 
of accounts or methods of accounting.
    (d) Matters of special importance, including but not limited to 
important research and development initiatives, major changes in Postal 
Service organization or structure, major law enforcement activities, and 
other matters having a significant impact upon the relationship of the 
Postal Service with its employees, with any major branch of Government, 
or with the general public.
    (e) Information concerning any proposed grant of unique or exclusive 
licenses to use Postal Service intellectual properties (other than 
patents and technical data rights), or any proposed joint venture 
involving the use of such property.
    (f) Other matters having important policy implications.


<R03>
PART 4--OFFICERS (ARTICLE IV)--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
4.1  Chairman.
4.2  Vice  Chairman.
4.3  Postmaster General.
4.4  Deputy Postmaster General.
4.5  Assistant Postmasters General, General Counsel, Judicial Officer.
4.6  Chief Postal Inspector.
4.7  Secretary of the Board.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 202, 203, 205, 401(2), (10), 1003, 3013.

    Source: 59 FR 18450, Apr. 18, 1994, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 4.1  Chairman.

    (a) The Chairman of the Board of Governors is elected by the 
Governors from among the members of the Board. The Chairman:
    (1) Shall preside at all regular and special meetings of the Board, 
and shall set the agenda for such meetings;
    (2) Shall select and appoint the Chairman and members of any 
committee properly established by the Board;
    (3) Serves a term that commences upon election and expires at the 
end of the first annual meeting following the meeting at which he or she 
was elected.
    (b) If the Postmaster General is elected Chairman of the Board, the 
Governors shall also elect one of their number to preside during 
proceedings dealing with matters upon which only the Governors may vote.


<R05>
Sec. 4.2  Vice Chairman.

    The Vice Chairman is elected by the Board from among the members of 
the Board and shall perform the duties and exercise the powers of the 
Chairman during the Chairman's absence or disability. The Vice Chairman 
serves a term that commences upon election and expires at the end of the 
first annual meeting following the meeting at which he or she was 
elected.


<R05>
Sec. 4.3  Postmaster General.

    The appointment and role of the Postmaster General are described at 
39 U.S.C. 202(c), 203. The Governors set the salary of the Postmaster 
General by resolution, subject to the limitations of 39 U.S.C. 1003(a).


<R05>
Sec. 4.4  Deputy Postmaster General.

    The appointment and role of the Deputy Postmaster General are 
described at 39 U.S.C. 202(d), 203. The Deputy Postmaster General shall 
act as Postmaster General during the Postmaster General's absence or 
disability, and when a vacancy exists in the office of Postmaster 
General. The Governors set the salary of the Deputy Postmaster General 
by resolution, subject to the limitations of 39 U.S.C. 1003(a).


<R05>
Sec. 4.5  Assistant Postmasters General, General Counsel, Judicial Officer.

    There are within the Postal Service a General Counsel, a Judicial 
Officer, and such number of officers, described in 39 U.S.C. 204 as 
Assistant Postmasters General, whether so denominated or not, as the 
Board authorizes

[[Page 15]]

by resolution. These officers are appointed by, and serve at the 
pleasure of, the Postmaster General.


<R05>
Sec. 4.6  Chief Postal Inspector.

    The Postmaster General, in consultation with the Governors, appoints 
the Chief Postal Inspector, certain of whose powers and duties are 
delegated to the holder of that office by the Postmaster General, 
consistent with these bylaws and the Reorganization Act. The Chief 
Postal Inspector reports to and is under the general supervision of the 
Postmaster General. The Postmaster General has the power, with the 
concurrence of the Governors, to remove or transfer the Chief Postal 
Inspector to another position or location within the Postal Service. In 
the event of any such removal or transfer, the Postmaster General must 
promptly notify the Governors and both Houses of the Congress in writing 
of the reasons for such removal or transfer.

[62 FR 18519, Apr. 16, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 4.7  Secretary of the Board.

    The Secretary of the Board of Governors is appointed by the 
Governors and serves at the pleasure of the Governors. The Secretary 
shall be responsible for carrying out the functions of the Office of the 
Board of Governors, under the direction of the Chairman of the Board. 
The Secretary shall also issue notices of meetings of the Board and its 
committees, keep minutes of these meetings, and take steps necessary for 
compliance with all statutes and regulations dealing with public 
observation of meetings. The Secretary shall perform all those duties 
incident to this office, including those duties assigned by the Board or 
by the Chairman of the Board. The Chairman may designate such assistant 
secretaries as may be necessary to perform any of the duties of the 
Secretary.


<R03>
PART 5--COMMITTEES (ARTICLE V)--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
5.1  Establishment and appointment.
5.2  Committee procedure.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 202, 203, 204, 205, 401(2), (10), 1003, 3013.

    Source: 59 FR 18450, Apr. 18, 1994, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 5.1  Establishment and appointment.

    From time to time the Board may establish by resolution special and 
standing committees of one or more members of the Board. The Board shall 
specify, in the resolution establishing any committee, whether the 
committee is authorized to submit recommendations or preliminary 
decisions to the Board, to conduct hearings for the Board, or otherwise 
to take action on behalf of the Board. Each committee may exercise only 
those duties, functions, and powers prescribed from time to time by the 
Board, and the Board may affirm, alter, or revoke any action of any 
committee. Each member of the Board may have access to all of the 
information and records of any committee at any time. The Chairman of 
the Board shall appoint the chairman and members of each committee, who 
serve terms which expire at the end of each annual meeting. Each 
committee chairman may assign responsibilities to members of the 
committee that are considered appropriate. The committee chairman, or 
the chairman's designee, shall preside at all meetings of the committee.


<R05>
Sec. 5.2  Committee procedure.

    Each committee establishes its own rules of procedure, consistent 
with these bylaws, and meets as provided in its rules. A majority of the 
members of a committee constitute a quorum.

[61 FR 36499, July 11, 1996]


<R03>
PART 6--MEETINGS (ARTICLE VI)--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
6.1  Regular meetings, annual meeting.
6.2  Special meetings.
6.3  Notice of meetings.
6.4  Attendance by conference telephone call.
6.5  Minutes of meetings.
6.6  Quorum and voting.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 202, 205, 401(2), (10), 1003, 3013; 5 U.S.C 
552b (e), (g).

    Source: 59 FR 18451, Apr. 18, 1994, unless otherwise noted.

[[Page 16]]


<R05>
Sec. 6.1  Regular meetings, annual meeting.

    The Board shall meet regularly each month and shall meet normally on 
the first Monday and Tuesday of each month. The first regular meeting of 
each calendar year is designated as the annual meeting. Consistent with 
the provisions of Sec. 7.5 of these bylaws, the time or place of a 
regular or annual meeting may be varied by a recorded unanimous vote of 
the entire membership of the Board, with the earliest practicable notice 
to the Secretary. The Secretary shall distribute to the members an 
agenda setting forth the proposed subject matter for any regular or 
annual meeting in advance of the meeting.


<R05>
Sec. 6.2  Special meetings.

    Consistent with the provisions of Sec. 7.5 of these bylaws, the 
Chairman may call a special meeting of the Board at any place in the 
United States, with not less than 8 days' notice to the other members of 
the Board and to the Secretary, specifying the time, date, place, and 
subject matter of the meeting. By recorded vote a majority of the 
members of the Board may call a special meeting of the Board at any 
place in the United States, with the earliest practicable notice to the 
other members of the Board and to the Secretary, specifying the time, 
date, place and subject matter of the meeting.


<R05>
Sec. 6.3  Notice of meetings.

    The Chairman or the members of the Board may give the notice 
required under Sec. 6.1 or Sec. 6.2 of these bylaws in oral or written 
form. Oral notice to a member may be delivered by telephone and is 
sufficient if made to the member personally or to a responsible person 
in the member's home or office. Any oral notice to a member must be 
subsequently confirmed by written notice. Written notice to a member may 
be delivered by telegram or by mail sent by the fastest regular delivery 
method addressed to the member's address of record filed with the 
Secretary, and except for written notice confirming a previous oral 
notice, must be sent in sufficient time to reach that address at least 2 
days before the meeting date under normal delivery conditions. A member 
waives notice of any meeting by attending the meeting, and may otherwise 
waive notice of any meeting at any time. Neither oral nor written notice 
to the Secretary is sufficient until actually received by the Secretary. 
The Secretary may not waive notice of any meeting.


<R05>
Sec. 6.4  Attendance by conference telephone call.

    Unless prohibited by law or by these bylaws, a member of the Board 
may participate in a meeting of the Board by conference telephone or 
similar communication equipment which enables all persons participating 
in the meeting to hear each other and which permits full compliance with 
the provisions of these bylaws concerning public observation of 
meetings. Attendance at a meeting by this method constitutes presence at 
the meeting, except that no Governor may receive compensation for any 
meeting attended in this manner.


<R05>
Sec. 6.5  Minutes of meetings.

    The Secretary shall preserve the minutes of Board meetings prepared 
under Sec. 4.7 of these bylaws. After the minutes of any meeting are 
approved by the Board, the Secretary shall promptly make available to 
the public, in the Communications Department at Postal Service 
Headquarters, or in another place easily accessible to the public, 
copies of the minutes, except for those portions which contain 
information inappropriate for public disclosure under 5 U.S.C. 552(b) or 
39 U.S.C. 410(c).


<R05>
Sec. 6.6  Quorum and voting.

    As provided by 39 U.S.C. 205(c), the Board acts by resolution upon a 
majority vote of those members who are present. No proxies are allowed 
in any vote of the members of the Board. Any 6 members constitute a 
quorum for the transaction of business by the Board, except:
    (a) In the appointment or removal of the Postmaster General, and in 
setting the compensation of the Postmaster General and Deputy Postmaster 
General, 39 U.S.C. 205(c)(1) requires a favorable vote of an absolute 
majority of the Governors in office;

[[Page 17]]

    (b) In the appointment or removal of the Deputy Postmaster General, 
39 U.S.C. 205(c)(2) requires a favorable vote of an absolute majority of 
the Governors in office and the Postmaster General;
    (c) In the appointment, removal, or in the setting of the 
compensation of the Secretary, Assistant Secretary, or other necessary 
staff, a favorable vote of an absolute majority of the Governors in 
office is required;
    (d) In the adjustment of the total budget of the Postal Rate 
Commission, 39 U.S.C. 3604(c) requires a unanimous written vote of the 
Governors in office;
    (e) In the modification of a recommended decision of the Postal Rate 
Commission, 39 U.S.C. 3625 requires a unanimous written vote of the 
Governors in office; and
    (f) In the approval, allowance under protest, or rejection of a 
recommended decision of the Postal Rate Commission, the Governors act 
upon a majority vote of the Governors present, and the required quorum 
of 6 members must include at least 5 Governors;
    (g) In the determination to close a portion of a meeting or to 
withhold information concerning a meeting, 5 U.S.C. 552b(d)(1) requires 
a vote of a majority of the entire membership of the Board; and
    (h) In the decision to call a meeting with less than a week's 
notice, 5 U.S.C. 552b(e)(1) requires a vote of a majority of the members 
of the Board. In the decision to change the subject matter of a meeting, 
or the determination to open or close a meeting, 5 U.S.C. 552b(e)(2) 
requires a vote of a majority of the entire membership of the Board.


<R03>
PART 7--PUBLIC OBSERVATION (ARTICLE VII)--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
7.1  Definitions.
7.2  Open meetings.
7.3  Exceptions.
7.4  Procedure for closing a meeting.
7.5  Public notice of meetings, subsequent changes.
7.6  Certification and transcripts of closed meetings.
7.7  Enforcement.
7.8  Open meetings, Freedom of Information, and Privacy of Information.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401(a), as enacted by Pub. L. 91-375, and 5 
U.S.C. 552b(a)-(m) as enacted by Pub. L. 94-409.

    Source: 59 FR 18451, Apr. 18, 1994, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 7.1  Definitions.

    For purposes of Secs. 7.2 through 7.8 of these bylaws:
    (a) The term Board means the Board of Governors, and any subdivision 
or committee of the Board authorized to take action on behalf of the 
Board.
    (b) The term meeting means the deliberations of at least the number 
of individual members required to take action on behalf of the Board 
under Sec. 5.2 or Sec. 6.5 of these bylaws, where such deliberations 
determine or result in the joint conduct or disposition of the official 
business of the Board. The term ``meeting'' does not include any 
procedural deliberations required or permitted by Secs. 6.1, 6.2, 7.4, 
or Sec. 7.5 of these bylaws.

[59 FR 18451, Apr. 18, 1994, as amended at 61 FR 36499, July 11, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 7.2  Open meetings.

    (a) It is the policy of the United States, established in section 2 
of the Government in the Sunshine Act, Public Law 94-409, 90 Stat. 1241, 
that the public is entitled to the fullest practicable information 
regarding the decisionmaking processes of the Federal Government. The 
Postal Service is charged to provide the public with this information 
while protecting the rights of individuals and the ability of the 
Government to carry out its responsibilities. Accordingly, except as 
specifically permitted by statute, every portion of every meeting of the 
Board of Governors is open to public observation.
    (b) Except as provided in Sec. 7.3 of these bylaws, every portion of 
every meeting of the Board is open to public observation. Members of the 
Board may not jointly conduct or dispose of business of the Board 
without complying with Secs. 7.2 through 7.8 of these bylaws. Members of 
the public may obtain access to documents considered at meetings to the 
extent provided in the regulations of the Postal Service concerning the 
release of information.

[[Page 18]]

    (c) Without the permission of a majority of the Board, no person may 
participate in, film, televise, or broadcast any portion of any meeting 
of the Board. Any person may electronically record or photograph a 
meeting, as long as that action does not tend to impede or disturb the 
members of the Board in the performance of their duties, or members of 
the public while attempting to attend or observe a meeting of the Board. 
The rules and penalties of 39 CFR 232.6, concerning conduct on postal 
property, apply with regard to meetings of the Board.


<R05>
Sec. 7.3  Exceptions.

    Section 7.2 of these bylaws does not apply to a portion of a 
meeting, and Secs. 7.4 and 7.5 do not apply to information concerning 
the meeting which otherwise would be required to be disclosed to the 
public, if the Board properly determines that the public interest does 
not require otherwise, and that such portion of the meeting or the 
disclosure of such information is likely to:
    (a) Disclose matters that are (1) specifically authorized under 
criteria established by an Executive order to be kept secret in the 
interests of national defense or foreign policy, and (2) in fact 
properly classified under that Executive order;
    (b) Relate solely to the internal personnel rules and practices of 
the Postal Service, including the Postal Service position in 
negotiations or consultations with employee organizations.
    (c) Disclose matters specifically exempted from disclosure by 
statute (other than the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552), 
provided that the statute (1) requires that the matters be withheld from 
the public in such a manner as to leave no discretion on the issue, or 
(2) establishes particular criteria for withholding or refers to 
particular types of matters to be withheld;
    (d) Disclose trade secrets and commercial or financial information 
obtained from a person and privileged or confidential, such as market 
information pertinent to Postal Service borrowing or investments, 
technical or patent information related to postal mechanization, or 
commercial information related to purchases of real estate;
    (e) Involve accusing any person of a crime, or formally censuring 
any person;
    (f) Disclose information of a personal nature, such as personal or 
medical data regarding any individual if disclosure would constitute a 
clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy;
    (g) Disclose investigatory records compiled for law enforcement 
purposes, or information which if written would be contained in those 
records, but only to the extent that the production of those records or 
information would (1) interfere with enforcement proceedings, (2) 
deprive a person of a right to a fair trial or an impartial 
adjudication, (3) constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal 
privacy, (4) disclose the identity of a confidential source and, in the 
case of a record compiled by a criminal law enforcement authority in the 
course of a criminal investigation, or by an agency conducting a lawful 
national security intelligence investigation, confidential information 
furnished only by the confidential source, (5) disclose investigative 
techniques and procedures, or (6) endanger the life or physical safety 
of law enforcement personnel;
    (h) Disclose information contained in or related to examination, 
operating, or condition reports prepared by, on behalf of, or for the 
use of an agency responsible for the regulation or supervision of 
financial institutions;
    (i) Disclose information the premature disclosure of which would be 
likely significantly to frustrate implementation of a proposed action of 
the Board, such as information relating to the negotiation of a labor 
contract or proposed Postal Service procurement activity, except that 
this provision does not apply in any instance where (1) the Postal 
Service has already disclosed to the public the content or nature of the 
proposed action, or (2) the Postal Service is required by law to make 
such disclosure on its own initiative before taking final action on the 
proposal; or
    (j) Specifically concern the issuance of a subpoena by the Postal 
Service, or the participation of the Postal Service in a civil action or 
proceeding, such as

[[Page 19]]

a postal rate or classification proceeding, an action in a foreign court 
or international tribunal, or an arbitration, or the initiation, 
conduct, or disposition by the Postal Service of a particular case of 
formal adjudication under the procedures of 5 U.S.C. 554 or otherwise 
involving a determination on the record after opportunity for a hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 7.4  Procedure for closing a meeting.

    (a) A majority of the entire membership of the Board may vote to 
close a portion of a meeting or to withhold information concerning a 
meeting under the provisions of Sec. 7.3 of these bylaws. The members 
shall take a separate vote with respect to each meeting a portion of 
which is proposed to be closed to the public, or with respect to any 
information which is proposed to be withheld, and shall make every 
reasonable effort to take any such vote at least 8 days before the date 
of the meeting involved. The members may take a single vote with respect 
to a series of meetings, portions of which are proposed to be closed to 
the public, or with respect to information concerning the series, so 
long as each portion of a meeting in the series involves the same 
particular matters, and no portion of any meeting is scheduled to be 
held more than 30 days after the initial portion of the first meeting in 
the series.
    (b) Whenever any person whose interest may be directly affected by a 
portion of a meeting requests that the Board close that portion to the 
public for any of the reasons referred to in Sec. 7.3 (e), (f), or (g) 
of these bylaws, upon request of any one of its members the Board shall 
vote by recorded vote whether to close that portion of the meeting.
    (c) The Secretary shall record the vote of each member participating 
in a vote under paragraph (a) or (b) of this section. Within 1 day of 
any vote under paragraph (a) or (b) of this section, the Secretary shall 
make publicly available a written copy of the vote showing the vote of 
each member on the question. If a portion of a meeting is to be closed 
to the public, the Secretary shall, within 1 day of the vote, make 
publicly available a full written explanation of the action closing the 
portion, together with a list of all persons expected to attend the 
meeting and their affiliation.

[59 FR 18451, Apr. 18, 1994, as amended at 62 FR 4459, Jan. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 7.5  Public notice of meetings, subsequent changes.

    (a) At least one week before any meeting of the Board, the Secretary 
shall publicly announce the time, date, place, and subject matter of the 
meeting, whether it is to be open or closed to the public, and the name 
and phone number of the official designated by the Board to respond to 
requests for information about the meeting.
    (b) By a recorded vote, a majority of the members of the Board may 
determine that the business of the Board requires a meeting to be called 
with less than a week's notice. At the earliest practicable time, the 
Secretary shall publicly announce the time, date, place, and subject 
matter of the meeting, and whether it is to be open or closed to the 
public.
    (c) Following the public announcement required by paragraphs (a) or 
(b) of this section:
    (1) As provided in Sec. 6.1 of these bylaws, the Board may change 
the time or place of a meeting. At the earliest practicable time, the 
Secretary shall publicly announce the change.
    (2) A majority of the entire membership of the Board may change the 
subject matter of a meeting, or the determination to open or close a 
meeting to the public, if it determines by a recorded vote that the 
change is required by the business of the Board and that no earlier 
announcement of the change was possible. At the earliest practicable 
time, the Secretary shall publicly announce the change, and the vote of 
each member upon the change.
    (d) Immediately following each public announcement required under 
paragraphs (a), (b), or (c) of this section, the Secretary shall submit 
for publication in the Federal Register a notice of the time, date, 
place, and subject matter of the meeting, whether the meeting is open or 
closed, any change in the preceding, and the name and phone number of 
the official designated by the Board to respond to requests for 
information about the meeting. The

[[Page 20]]

Secretary shall also submit the announcement and information to the 
Postal Service Public and Employee Communications Department for 
dissemination to the public.


<R05>
Sec. 7.6  Certification and transcripts of closed meetings.

    (a) At the beginning of every meeting or portion of a meeting closed 
under Sec. 7.3 (a) through (j) of these bylaws, the General Counsel 
shall publicly certify that, in his or her opinion, the meeting or 
portion of the meeting may be closed to the public, stating each 
relevant exemptive provision. The Secretary shall retain this 
certification, together with a statement from the officer presiding at 
the meeting which sets forth the time and place of the meeting, and the 
persons present.
    (b) The Secretary shall arrange for a complete transcript or 
electronic recording adequate to record fully the proceedings to be made 
of each meeting or portion of a meeting of the Board which is closed to 
the public. The Secretary shall maintain a complete verbatim copy of the 
transcript, or a complete electronic recording of each meeting or 
portion of a meeting closed to the public for at least 2 years after the 
meeting, or for 1 year after the conclusion of any Postal Service 
proceeding with respect to which the meeting was held, whichever occurs 
later.
    (c) Except for those items of discussion or testimony which the 
Board, by a majority vote of those members who are present, determines 
to contain information which may be withheld under Sec. 7.3 of these 
bylaws, the Secretary shall promptly make available to the public, in 
the Public and Employee Communications Department at Postal Service 
Headquarters, or in another place easily accessible to the public, the 
transcript or electronic recording of a closed meeting, including the 
testimony of any witnesses received at the meeting. The Secretary shall 
furnish a copy of this transcript, or a transcription of this electronic 
recording disclosing the identity of each speaker, to any person at the 
actual cost of duplication or transcription.


<R05>
Sec. 7.7  Enforcement.

    (a) Under 5 U.S.C. 552b(g), any person may bring a proceeding in the 
United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia to set aside 
any provisions of these bylaws which are not in accord with the 
requirements of 5 U.S.C. 552b (a)-(f) and to require the promulgation of 
provisions that are in accord with those requirements.
    (b) Under 5 U.S.C. 552b(h) any person may bring a civil action 
against the Board in an appropriate U.S. District Court to obtain 
judicial review of the alleged failure of the Board to comply with 5 
U.S.C. 552b (a)-(f). The burden is on the Board to sustain its action. 
The court may grant appropriate equitable relief, including enjoining 
future violations, or ordering the Board to make public information 
improperly withheld from the public.
    (c) Under 5 U.S.C. 552b(i) the court may assess against any party 
reasonable attorney fees and other litigation costs reasonably incurred 
by any other party who substantially prevails, except that the court may 
assess costs against the plaintiff only if the court finds that he 
initiated the suit primarily for frivolous or dilatory purposes.


<R05>
Sec. 7.8  Open meetings, Freedom of Information, and Privacy of Information.

    The provisions of 5 U.S.C. 552b(c) (1)-(10), enacted by Public Law 
94-409, the Government in the Sunshine Act, govern in the case of any 
request under the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552, to copy or 
to inspect the transcripts or electronic recordings described in 
Sec. 7.6 of these bylaws. Nothing in 5 U.S.C. 552b authorizes the Board 
to withhold from any individual any record, including the transcripts or 
electronic recordings described in Sec. 7.6 of these bylaws, to which 
the individual may otherwise have access under 5 U.S.C. 552a, enacted by 
the Privacy Act of 1974, Public Law 93-579.

[[Page 21]]


<R03>
PART 8--[RESERVED]

<R05>



<R03>
PART 9--POLICY ON COMMUNICATIONS WITH GOVERNORS OF THE POSTAL SERVICE DURING PENDENCY OF RATE AND CLASSIFICATION PROCEEDINGS [APPENDIX]--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
9.1  General policy.
9.2  Communications with the Governors during the restricted period.
9.3  Public availability of communications.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 202, 203, 205, 401 (2), (10), 3621, 3625.

    Source: 49 FR 2888, Jan. 24, 1984, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 9.1  General policy.

    (a) To represent the public interest generally and to insure that 
the Postal Service meets the needs of the mailing public, the Governors 
must be free to hold uninhibited discussions on broad postal issues with 
mailers and the general public. Nevertheless, the Governors believe that 
certain restrictions on communications with the public are appropriate 
when the Governors act in their capacity as final administrative 
decisionmakers on recommended decisions of the Postal Rate Commission 
concerning postal rates and classifications. These restrictions should 
reflect a balance between, on the one hand, the need to safeguard the 
integrity of the administrative process for setting rates and 
classifications and insure meaningful judicial review of decisions of 
the Governors on these subjects, and on the other hand, the need for 
open access to the Board to permit the members to meet their statutory 
responsibilities. To strike an appropriate balance, the Board has 
adopted the following general guidelines: From the time the Postal Rate 
Commission issues a recommended decision until the Governors have acted 
on the recommended decision, any communication from an interested person 
to the Governors that is relevant to the merits of the proceeding should 
be on the public record and available for public inspection.
    (b) In reviewing recommended decisions of the Commission, the 
Governors act on the record before them. They are under no obligation to 
take communications from the public into account in reaching their 
decision.


<R05>
Sec. 9.2  Communications with the Governors during the restricted period.

    Once the Commission issues a recommended decision, and until the 
Governors have acted on that recommended decision by approving, 
rejecting, allowing under protest or modifying it, the following 
guidelines apply to communications with the Governors that are relevant 
to the merits of the proceeding.
    (a) Oral communications. During the restricted period, it is the 
policy of the Governors not to receive oral communications relevant to 
the merits of the proceeding from any interested person. In the event 
such a conversation does inadvertently take place, the Governor involved 
shall prepare a memorandum of the conversation and submit it to the 
Secretary of the Board for inclusion in the public record, where it 
shall be available for public inspection.
    (b) Written communications. (1) During the restricted period any 
communication relevant to the merits of the proceeding that an 
interested person may wish to submit to the Governors must be in writing 
and should not exceed fifteen pages in length. Such comments should be 
based on the record and addressed to the Governors through the Secretary 
of the Board. If the commenter has been a party to the Commission 
proceeding, copies should be sent to all other parties to that 
proceeding. The Secretary shall make all such communications available 
for public inspection.
    (2) Because the Governors are often required to act promptly on a 
recommended decision from the Commission, interested persons seeking to 
communicate with the Governors should submit their comments no later 
than ten (10) days after the Commission has issued its recommended 
decision. This period may be extended at the discretion of the 
Governors.
    (c) Scope of the guidelines. These guidelines apply to 
communications from interested persons to the Governors, their staff, 
personal assistants (if any), the Secretary of the Board and

[[Page 22]]

any official of the Office of the Board. Since the Act assigns final 
decisionmaking authority on Commission recommended decisions to the 
Governors and not the Board, these guidelines do not apply to the 
Postmaster General or the Deputy Postmaster General, nor do they apply 
to other officers or officials of the Postal Service. Moreover, in order 
to carry out their statutory responsibility to direct ``the exercise of 
the power of the Postal Service,'' 39 U.S.C. 202(a), the Governors must 
be free to discuss all matters of postal policy with officers and 
employees of the Postal Service. Accordingly, no restrictions apply to 
communications between the Governors and Postal Service employees.


<R05>
Sec. 9.3  Public availability of communications.

    All communications placed on the public record pursuant to these 
guidelines shall be available for public inspection at the Office of the 
Board of Governors, United States Postal Service, Room 10-300, 475 
L'Enfant Plaza West, SW., Washington, DC 20260-1000, between 8:30 a.m. 
and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday except Federal holidays.


<R03>
PART 10--RULES OF CONDUCT FOR POSTAL SERVICE GOVERNORS [APPENDIX]--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
10.1  Applicability.
10.2  Advisory service.
10.3  Post-employment activities.
10.4  Financial disclosure reports.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401.

    Source: 52 FR 29697, Aug. 11, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 10.1  Applicability.

    This part contains rules of conduct for the members of the Board of 
Governors of the United States Postal Service. As special employees 
within the meaning of 18 U.S.C. 202(a), the members of the Board are 
also subject to the Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the 
Executive Branch, 5 CFR part 2635, and Postal Service regulations 
supplemental thereto, 5 CFR part 7001.

[61 FR 36499, July 11, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 10.2  Advisory service.

    (a) The General Counsel is the Ethical Conduct Officer of the Postal 
Service and the Designated Agency Ethics Official for purposes of the 
Ethics in Government Act, as amended, and the implementing regulations 
of the Office of Government Ethics, including 5 CFR part 2638.
    (b) A Governor may obtain advice and guidance on questions of 
conflicts of interest, and may request any ruling provided for by either 
the Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch, 
or the Postal Service regulations supplemental thereto, from the General 
Counsel or a designated assistant.
    (c) If the General Counsel determines that a Governor is engaged in 
activity which involves a violation of federal statute or regulation, 
including the ethical conduct regulations contained in 5 CFR parts 2635 
and 7001, or conduct which creates the appearance of such a violation, 
he or she shall bring this to the attention of the Governor or shall 
notify the Chairman of the Board of Governors, or the Vice Chairman, as 
appropriate.

[61 FR 36499, July 11, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 10.3  Post-employment activities.

    Governors are subject to the restrictions on the post-employment 
activities of special Government employees imposed by 18 U.S.C. 207. 
Guidance concerning post-employment restrictions applicable to Governors 
may be obtained in accordance with Sec. 10.2(b).

[61 FR 36500, July 11, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 10.4  Financial disclosure reports.

    (a) Requirement of submission of reports. At the time of their 
nomination, Governors complete a financial disclosure report which, 
under the practice of the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee, is kept 
confidential. Because the Director of the Office of Government Ethics 
has ruled that Governors who do not perform the duties of their office 
for more than 60 days in any calendar year are not required to

[[Page 23]]

file financial disclosure reports that are open to the public, Governors 
file non-public reports annually, in accordance with this section. A 
Governor who performs the duties of his or her office for more than 60 
days in a particular calendar year is required to file a public report 
in accordance with 5 CFR 2634.204(c).
    (b) Person with whom reports should be filed and time for filing. 
(1) A Governor shall file a financial disclosure report with the General 
Counsel on or before May 15 of each year when the Governor has been in 
office for more than 60 consecutive calendar days during the previous 
year.
    (2) The General Counsel may, for good cause shown, grant to a 
Governor an extension of up to 45 days. An additional extension of up to 
45 days may be granted by the Director of the Office of Government 
Ethics for good cause shown.
    (c) Information required to be reported. Each report shall be a full 
and complete statement, on the form prescribed by the General Counsel 
and the Office of Government Ethics and in accordance with instructions 
issued by him or her. The form currently in use is Standard Form 278.
    (d) Reviewing reports. (1) Financial disclosure reports filed in 
accordance with the provisions of this section shall, within 60 days 
after the date of filing, be reviewed by the General Counsel who shall 
either approve the report, or make an initial determination that a 
conflict or appearance thereof exists. If the General Counsel determines 
initially that a conflict or the appearance of a conflict exists, he or 
she shall inform the Governor of his determination.
    (2) If the General Counsel considers that additional information is 
needed to complete the report or to allow an adequate review to be 
conducted, he or she shall request the reporting Governor to furnish 
that information by a specified date.
    (3) The General Counsel shall refer to the Chairman of the Board of 
Governors or the Vice Chairman the name of any Governor he or she has 
reasonable cause to believe has wrongfully failed to file a report or 
has falsified or wrongfully failed to report required information.
    (e) Custody of and public access to reports--(1) Retention of 
reports. Each report filed with the General Counsel shall be retained by 
him or her for a period of six years. After the six-year period, the 
report shall be destroyed unless needed in connection with an 
investigation then pending.
    (2) Confidentiality of reports. Unless a public report is required 
by this section, the financial disclosure reports filed by Governors 
shall not be made public.

[52 FR 29697, Aug. 11, 1987. Redesignated and amended at 61 FR 36500, 
July 11, 1996]


<R03>
PART 11--ADVISORY BOARDS [ARTICLE XI]--Table of Contents

<R05>


    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 202, 203, 204, 205, 401(2), (10), 402, 403, 
1003, 3013, 5 U.S.C. 552b(a), (b) (g).


<R05>
Sec. 11.1  Establishment.

    The Board of Governors may create such advisory boards as it may 
deem appropriate and may appoint persons to serve thereon or may 
delegate such latter authority to the Postmaster General.

[59 FR 18454, Apr. 18, 1994]

[[Page 24]]


<R03>
                    SUBCHAPTER B--INTERNATIONAL MAIL

<R05>


<R03>
PART 20--INTERNATIONAL POSTAL SERVICE--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
20.1  The International Mail Manual; incorporation by reference of 
          international mail regulations.
20.2  Availability of the International Mail Manual.
20.3  Amendments to the International Mail Manual.
20.4  Approval of the Director of the Federal Register.
20.5  Contents of the International Mail Manual.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 552(a), 39 U.S.C. 401, 404, 407, 408.

    Source: 47 FR 7831, Feb. 23, 1982, unless otherwise noted. 
Redesignated at 52 FR 29697, Aug. 11, 1987.


<R05>
Sec. 20.1  The International Mail Manual; incorporation by reference of international mail regulations.

    Section 552(a) of title 5, United States Code, relating to the 
public information requirements of the Administrative Procedure Act, 
provides in pertinent part that ``* * * matter reasonably available to 
the class of persons affected thereby is deemed published in the Federal 
Register when incorporated by reference therein with the approval of the 
Director of the Federal Register.'' In conformity with that provision, 
and with 39 U.S.C. 410(b)(1), and as provided in this part, the United 
States Postal Service hereby incorporates by reference in this part, the 
International Mail Manual, a looseleaf publication published and 
maintained by the U.S. Postal Service, Washington, DC 20260-5365.

[47 FR 7831, Feb. 23, 1982. Redesignated at 52 FR 29697, Aug. 11, 1987, 
as amended at 53 FR 52697, Dec. 29, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 20.2  Availability of the International Mail Manual.

    (a) Copies of the International Mail Manual are available for 
reference and inspection upon request at the National Headquarters and 
regional offices of the U.S. Postal Service and at all United States 
Post Offices and classified stations and branches during normal business 
hours. Regional offices are located in Philadelphia, Memphis, Chicago, 
San Bruno, and Windsor, CT.
    (b) A copy of the International Mail Manual, together with each 
amendment of it, is on file with the Director, Office of the Federal 
Register, National Archives and Records Administration, at 800 North 
Capitol Street, NW., suite 700, Washington, DC.
    (c) Copies of the International Mail Manual may be purchased from 
the Superintendent of Documents, Washington, DC 20402-9371 for $14.00. 
This price covers two complete issues of the International Mail Manual. 
Information about international mail also appears in condensed form in 
Publication 51, which the Postal Service publishes and distributes to 
all post offices and area supply centers. This publication is available 
to the public free of charge at all post offices and classified stations 
and branches.

[47 FR 7831, Feb. 23, 1982. Redesignated at 52 FR 29697, Aug. 11, 1987, 
as amended at 53 FR 52697, Dec. 29, 1988; 54 FR 1050, Jan. 11, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 20.3  Amendments to the International Mail Manual.

    (a) Except for interim or final regulations published as provided in 
paragraph (b) of this section, notices of changes made in the 
International Mail Manual will periodically be published in the Federal 
Register. A complete issue of the International Mail Manual, including 
the text of all changes published to date, will be filed with the 
Director, Office of the Federal Register. Subscribers to the 
International Mail Manual will automatically receive the latest issue of 
the International Mail Manual from the Government Printing Office.
    (b) When the Postal Service invites comment from the general public 
on a proposed change to the International Mail Manual, the proposed 
change and, if adopted, the interim or final regulation will be 
published in the Federal Register.
    (c) Interim or final regulations published as provided in paragraph 
(b) of this section, and other changes to the International Mail Manual, 
adopted

[[Page 25]]

subsequent to the notices published under paragraph (a) of this section 
(except for corrections of minor errors or other nonsubstantive 
changes), are published in the Postal Bulletin, a weekly postal 
publication that may be purchased from the Superintendent of Documents, 
Washington, DC 20402-9371.
    (d) Interim regulations will be published in full text or 
referenced, as appropriate, in the International Mail Manual at the 
place where they would appear if they become final regulations.
    (e) For references to amendments to the International Mail Manual 
adopted under paragraph (b) of this section subsequent to issuance of 
the most recent transmittal letter listed below, see Sec. 10.3 in the 
List of CFR Sections Affected at the end of this volume.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Transmittal letter for issue           Dated           FR publication 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1...............................  Nov. 13, 1981......  47 FR 7831.      
2...............................  Mar. 1, 1983.......  48 FR 28268.     
3...............................  July 4, 1985.......  50 FR 49387.     
4...............................  Sept. 18, 1986.....  52 FR 3226.      
5...............................  April 21, 1988.....  53 FR 24068.     
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[47 FR 7831, Feb. 23, 1982, as amended at 48 FR 28268, June 21, 1983; 50 
FR 49387, Dec. 2, 1985; 52 FR 3226, Feb. 3, 1987; 53 FR 24068, June 27, 
1988; 53 FR 24830, June 30, 1988; 53 FR 52697, Dec. 29, 1988; 54 FR 
1050, Jan. 11, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 20.4  Approval of the Director of the Federal Register.

    Incorporation by reference of the publication now titled the 
International Mail Manual was approved by the Director of the Federal 
Register under 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR Part 51 on June 24, 1981.

[49 FR 47389, Dec. 4, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 20.5  Contents of the International Mail Manual.

    The International Mail Manual contains the following parts:

               (A) Chapter 1--International Mail Services

                 (1) Subchapter 110--General Information

    (i) Part 111--Scope
    (ii) Part 112--Mailer Responsibility
    (iii) Part 113--Individual Country Listings (ICLs)
    (iv) Part 114--Availability
    (v) Part 115--Official Correspondence

               (2) Subchapter 120--Preparation for Mailing

    (i) Part 121--Packaging--Sender's Responsibility
    (ii) Part 122--Addressing
    (iii) Part 123--Customs Forms Required

                     (3) Subchapter 130--Mailability

    (i) Part 131--General
    (ii) Part 132--Written, Printed, and Graphic Matter
    (iii) Part 133--Improperly Addressed Mail
    (iv) Part 134--Valuable Articles
    (v) Part 135--Animals and Plants
    (vi) Part 136--Special Packaging Requirements
    (vii) Part 137--Perishable Biological Substances
    (viii) Part 138--Radioactive Materials
    (ix) Part 139--Dangerous Materials

             (4) Subchapter 140--International Mail Classes

    (i) Part 141--Definitions
    (ii) Part 142--Size Limits
    (iii) Part 143--Envelope and Card Specifications
    (iv) Part 144--Official Mail
    (v) Part 145--Air Service

                       (5) Subchapter 150--Postage

    (i) Part 151--Postage Rates
    (ii) Part 152--Payment Methods
    (iii) Part 153--Placement of Postage
    (iv) Part 154--Postage for Combination Pieces
    (v) Part 155--Remailed Items

                  (B) Chapter 2--Conditions for Mailing

         (1) Subchapter 210--Express Mail International Service

    (i) Part 211--Description
    (ii) Part 212--Postage
    (iii) Part 213--Weight and Size Limits
    (iv) Part 214--Preparation Requirements

             (2) Subchapter 220--Letters and Letter Packages

    (i) Part 221--Description
    (ii) Part 222--Postage
    (iii) Part 223--Weight and Size Limits
    (iv) Part 224--Preparation Requirements

              (3) Subchapter 230--Postcards and Aerogrammes

    (i) Part 231--Description
    (ii) Part 232--Postage Rates
    (iii) Part 233--Weight and Size Limits
    (iv) Part 234--Preparation Requirements

                   (4) Subchapter 240--Printed Matter

    (i) Part 241--Description
    (ii) Part 242--Postage
    (iii) Part 243--Weight and Size Limits
    (iv) Part 244--Preparation Requirements
    (v) Part 245--Direct Sacks of Printed Matter to One Addressee (``M'' 
Bags)

[[Page 26]]

                (5) Subchapter 250--Matter for the Blind

    (i) Part 251--Description
    (ii) Part 252--Postage Rates
    (iii) Part 253--Weight and Size Limits
    (iv) Part 254--Preparation Requirements

                    (6) Subchapter 260--Small Packets

    (i) Part 261--Description
    (ii) Part 262--Postage Rates
    (iii) Part 263--Weight and Size Limits
    (iv) Part 264--Preparation Requirements

                     (7) Subchapter 270--Parcel Post

    (i) Part 271--Description
    (ii) Part 272--Postage
    (iii) Part 273--Weight and Size Limits
    (iv) Part 274--Preparation Requirements

                     (C) Chapter 3--Special Services

               (1) Subchapter 310--Certificate of Mailing

    (i) Part 311--Description
    (ii) Part 312--Availability
    (iii) Part 313--Fees
    (iv) Part 314--Processing Requests

                      (2) Subchapter 320--Insurance

    (i) Part 321--Description
    (ii) Part 322--Availability
    (iii) Part 323--Fees and Insured Value
    (iv) Part 324--Processing Requests
    (v) Part 325--Indemnity Claims and Payments

                   (3) Subchapter 330--Registered Mail

    (i) Part 331--Description
    (ii) Part 332--Availability
    (iii) Part 333--Fees and Indemnity Limit
    (iv) Part 334--Processing Requests
    (v) Part 335--Indemnity Claims and Payments

                   (4) Subchapter 340--Return Receipt

    (i) Part 341--Description
    (ii) Part 342--Availability
    (iii) Part 343--Fee
    (iv) Part 344--Processing Requests

                 (5) Subchapter 350--Restricted Delivery

    (i) Part 351--Description
    (ii) Part 352--Availability
    (iii) Part 353--Fee
    (iv) Part 354--Processing Requests

              (6) Subchapter 360--Recall/Change of Address

    (i) Part 361--Description
    (ii) Part 362--Conditions and Limitations
    (iii) Part 363--Fees and Charges
    (iv) Part 364--Processing Requests

                  (7) Subchapter 370--Special Delivery

    (i) Part 371--Description
    (ii) Part 372--Availability
    (iii) Part 373--Fees
    (iv) Part 374--Processing Requests

                  (8) Subchapter 380--Special Handling

    (i) Part 381--Description
    (ii) Part 382--Availability
    (iii) Part 383--Fees
    (iv) Part 384--Processing Requests

               (9) Subchapter 390--Supplementary Services

    (i) Part 391--International Postal Money Orders
    (ii) Part 392--International Reply Coupons

                (D) Chapter 4--Treatment of Outbound Mail

                     (1) Subchapter 410--Postmarking

              (2) Subchapter 420--Shortpaid and Unpaid Mail

    (i) Part 421--Check for Sufficient Postage
    (ii) Part 422--Unpaid Mail
    (iii) Part 423--Shortpaid Mail

              (3) Subchapter 430--Improperly Prepared Mail

    (i) Part 431--Insufficient Address
    (ii) Part 432--Oversized or Undersized Items
    (iii) Part 433--Oversized Cards
    (iv) Part 434--Reply-Paid Cards

                (4) Subchapter 440--Special Services Mail

    (i) Part 441--Registered Mail
    (ii) Part 442--Special Delivery
    (iii) Part 443--Special Handling

                     (5) Subchapter 450--Forwarding

               (E) Chapter 5--Nonpostal Export Regulations

                      (1) Subchapter 510 [Reserved]

            (2) Subchapter 520--Shipper's Export Declaration

    (i) Part 521--Description
    (ii) Part 522--When Required
    (iii) Part 523--How to obtain Commercial Forms
    (iv) Part 524--How to Prepare Shipper's Export Declaration (Commerce 
Form 7525-V)
    (v) Part 525--Handling and Disposal of Shipper's Export Declaration

           (3) Subchapter 530--Commodities and Technical Data

    (i) Part 531--Scope and Applicability of Licensing Requirements
    (ii) Part 532--General Export Licenses
    (iii) Part 533--Validated Export Licenses

        (4) Subchapter 540--Munitions and Related Technical Data

    (i) Part 541--Licensing Requirements
    (ii) Part 542--Mailing Under Individual Licenses

[[Page 27]]

                  (5) Subchapter 550--Dried Whole Eggs

    (i) Part 551--Description
    (ii) Part 552--Charges
    (iii) Part 553--How to Mail

          (6) Subchapter 560--Tobacco Seeds and Tobacco Plants

    (i) Part 561--Description
    (ii) Part 562--Charges
    (iii) Part 563--How to Mail

          (7) Subchapter 570--Consular and Commercial Invoices

                (8) Subchapter 580--Drawback Arrangement

    (i) Part 581--Description
    (ii) Part 582--Processing Drawback Claims

                        (F) Chapter 6--[Reserved]

                (G) Chapter 7--Treatment of Inbound Mail

              (1) Subchapter 710--U.S. Customs Information

    (i) Part 711--Customs Examination of Mail Believed to Contain 
Dutiable or Prohibited Articles
    (ii) Part 712--Customs Clearance and Delivery Fee
    (iii) Part 713--Treatment of Dutiable Mail at Delivery Office

             (2) Subchapter 720--Plant and Animal Quarantine

    (i) Part 721--What is Subject to Inspection
    (ii) Part 722--Segregation and Handling
    (iii) Part 723--Agriculture Inspection Stations and Offices

              (3) Subchapter 730--Shortpaid Mail to U.S.A.

    (i) Part 731--Computation of Postage Due
    (ii) Part 732--Shortpaid Letters and Cards From Canada
    (iii) Part 733--Shortpaid Items Bearing U.S. Postage

                   (4) Subchapter 740--Irregular Mail

    (i) Part 741--Invalid Foreign Postage
    (ii) Part 742--Unauthorized Letters Enclosed
    (iii) Part 743--Stamps Not Affixed
    (iv) Part 744--Parcels Addressed Through Banks or Other 
Organizations
    (v) Part 745--Foreign Dispatch Notes

                  (5) Subchapter 750--Special Services

    (i) Part 751--Insured Parcels
    (ii) Part 752--Registered Mail
    (iii) Part 753--Return Receipt
    (iv) Part 754--Restricted Delivery
    (v) Part 755--Special Delivery
    (vi) Part 756--Recall and Change of Address

                       (6) Subchapter 760--Storage

    (i) Part 761--Retention Period
    (ii) Part 762--Storage Charges

                     (7) Subchapter 770--Forwarding

    (i) Part 771--General Procedures
    (ii) Part 772--Mail of Domestic Origin
    (iii) Part 773--Items Mailed Aboard Ships (Paquebot)
    (iv) Part 774--Mail of Foreign Origin
    (v) Part 775--Directory Service

                 (8) Subchapter 780--Undeliverable Mail

    (i) Part 781--Mail of Domestic Origin
    (ii) Part 782--Mail of Foreign Origin

 (9) Subchapter 790--Items Mailed Abroad by or on Behalf of Senders in 
                                the U.S.

    (i) Part 791--Mailings Affected
    (ii) Part 792--Postage Payment Required
    (iii) Part 793--Advance Payment Required
    (iv) Part 794--Treatment if Advance Payment Not Made
    (v) Part 795--Report of Mailings

                        (H) Chapter 8--[Reserved]

            (I) Chapter 9--Inquiries, Indemnities and Refunds

                 (1) Subchapter 910--Reports Encouraged

                (2) Subchapter 920--Inquiries and Claims

    (i) Part 921--Inquiry Described
    (ii) Part 922--Filing of Inquiries
    (iii) Part 923--Claim Described
    (iv) Part 924--Initiation of Claims
    (v) Part 925--Documents to Accompany Claims
    (vi) Part 926--Disposition of Damaged Mail
    (vii) Part 927--Charges for Inquiries
    (viii) Part 928--Processing Inquiries

                 (3) Subchapter 930--Indemnity Payments

    (i) Part 931--Adjudication and Approval
    (ii) Part 932--General Exceptions to Payment--Insured Parcel Post 
and Registered Letter Post Mail
    (iii) Part 933--Payments for Insured Parcel Post
    (iv) Part 934--Payments for Registered Mail
    (v) Part 935--Payments for Express Mail International Service

                   (4) Subchapter 940--Postage Refunds

    (i) Part 941--Refunds for Postal Union Mail and Parcel Post
    (ii) Part 942--Refunds for Express Mail International Service
    (iii) Part 943--Applications by Senders
    (iv) Part 944--Processing Refund Applications

[[Page 28]]

                     (J) Appendix A--World Map Index

                   (K) Appendix B--Index of Localities

(L) Appendix C--Conversion Table: U.S. Dollars to Gold Francs (GFRs) and 
                    to Special Drawing Rights (SDRs)

   (M) Appendix D--Express Mail International Service (EMIS) Country 
                                Listings

  (N) Appendix E--International Surface Air Lift Network Countries and 
                                  Rates

                 (O) Individual Country Listings (ICLs)

                                (P) Index

[50 FR 49387, Dec. 2, 1985]

[[Page 29]]


<R03>
           SUBCHAPTER C--POST OFFICE SERVICES [DOMESTIC MAIL]

<R05>


<R03>
General Information on Postal Service--Table of Contents

<R05>



<R03>
PART 111--GENERAL INFORMATION ON POSTAL SERVICE--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
111.1  Domestic Mail Manual; incorporation by reference of regulations 
          governing domestic mail services.
111.2  Availability of the Domestic Mail Manual.
111.3  Amendments to the Domestic Mail Manual.
111.4  Approval of the Director of the Federal Register.
111.5  Contents of the Domestic Mail Manual.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 552(a); 39 U.S.C. 101, 401, 403, 404, 3001-3011, 
3201-3219, 3403-3406, 3621, 3626, 5001.

    Source: 44 FR 39852, July 6, 1979, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 111.1  Domestic Mail Manual; incorporated by reference of regulations governing domestic mail services.

    Section 552(a) of title 5, U.S.C., relating to the public 
information requirements of the Administrative Procedure Act, provides 
in pertinent part that ``* * * matter reasonably available to the class 
of persons affected thereby is deemed published in the Federal Register 
when incorporated by reference therein with the approval of the Director 
of the Federal Register.'' In conformity with that provision, and with 
39 U.S.C. section 410(b)(1), and as provided in this part, the U.S. 
Postal Service hereby incorporates by reference in this part, the 
Domestic Mail Manual, a looseleaf document published twice each year in 
January and July, unless otherwise determined by the Postal Service.

[62 FR 14827, Mar. 28, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 111.2  Availability of the Domestic Mail Manual.

    (a) Copies of the Domestic Mail Manual, both current and previous 
issues, are available during regular business hours for reference and 
public inspection at the U.S. Postal Service Library, National 
Headquarters in Washington, DC. Copies of only the current issue are 
available during regular business hours for public inspection at area 
and district offices of the Postal Service and at all post offices, 
classified stations, and classified branches.
    (b) A copy of the current Domestic Mail Manual is on file with the 
Director, Office of the Federal Register, National Archives and Records 
Administration, 800 North Capitol Street, NW, Suite 700, Washington, DC.
    (c) A 1-year subscription to the Domestic Mail Manual for two 
consecutive issues can be purchased by the public from the 
Superintendent of Documents, Washington, DC 20402-9375.

[62 FR 14827, Mar. 28, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 111.3  Amendments to the Domestic Mail Manual.

    (a) Except for interim or final regulations published as provided in 
paragraph (b) of this section, only notices rather than complete text of 
changes made to the Domestic Mail Manual are published in the Federal 
Register. These notices are published in the form of one summary 
transmittal letter for each issue of the Domestic Mail Manual. A 
complete issue of the Domestic Mail Manual, including the text of all 
changes published to date, will be filed with the Director, Office of 
the Federal Register. Subscribers to the Domestic Mail Manual receive 
the latest issue of the Domestic Mail Manual from the Government 
Printing Office.
    (b) When the Postal Service invites comments from the public on a 
proposed change to the Domestic Mail Manual, the proposed change and, if 
adopted, the full text of the interim or the final regulation is 
published in the Federal Register.
    (c) The Postal Bulletin contains the full text of all interim and 
final regulations published as provided in paragraph (b) of this 
section, and the full text of all other changes to the Domestic Mail 
Manual that are summarized in the notices published under paragraph (a) 
of this section, except for nonsubstantive changes and corrections of 
typographical errors. The

[[Page 30]]

Postal Bulletin is a biweekly document issued by the Postal Service to 
amend and revise policies and procedures. A 1-year subscription to the 
Postal Bulletin and certain back copies can be purchased by the public 
from the Superintendent of Documents, Washington, DC 20402-9371.
    (d) Interim regulations published in full text or referenced as 
provided in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, are published, as 
appropriate, in the Domestic Mail Manual in full text or referenced at 
the place where they would appear if they become final regulations.
    (e) Announcements of changes to the Domestic Mail Manual not 
published in the Federal Register as provided in paragraphs (a) and (b) 
of this section and not published in the Postal Bulletin as provided in 
paragraph (c) are not deemed final under the provisions of this part 
111.
    (f) For references to amendments to the Domestic Mail Manual adopted 
under paragraph (b) of this section after issuance of the most recent 
transmittal letter (termed Summary of Changes in the Domestic Mail 
Manual) listed below, see Sec. 111.3 in the List of CFR Sections 
affected at the end of this volume.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       Federal Register 
  Transmittal letter for issue           Dated            publication   
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1...............................  July 30, 1979.....  44 FR 39742.      
2...............................  May 15, 1980......  45 FR 42616.      
3...............................  July 30, 1980.....  45 FR 73925.      
4...............................  Oct. 1, 1980......  46 FR 10154.      
5...............................  Mar. 1, 1981......  46 FR 25446.      
6...............................  July 7, 1981......  46 FR 58079.      
7...............................  Nov. 1, 1981......  47 FR 8179.       
8...............................  Jan. 21, 1982.....  47 FR 8358.       
9...............................  May 1, 1982.......  47 FR 27266.      
10..............................  Aug. 1, 1982......  47 FR 43952.      
11..............................  Jan. 20, 1983.....  48 FR 10649.      
13..............................  Dec. 29, 1983.....  49 FR 18304.      
14..............................  Apr. 12, 1984.....  49 FR 26228.      
15..............................  July 12, 1984.....  49 FR 33248.      
16..............................  Sept. 27, 1984....  49 FR 47232.      
17..............................  Dec. 20, 1984.....  50 FR 5580.       
18..............................  Feb. 21, 1985.....  50 FR 12019.      
19..............................  June 7, 1985......  50 FR 30834.      
20..............................  Nov. 14, 1985.....  51 FR 8495.       
21..............................  Sept. 4, 1986.....  51 FR 43910.      
22..............................  Jan.22, 1987......  52 FR 10750.      
23..............................  May 1, 1987.......  52 FR 23981.      
24..............................  Sept. 20, 1987....  52 FR 34778.      
25..............................  Dec. 20, 1987.....  52 FR 48437.      
26..............................  April 3, 1988.....  53 FR 18557.      
27..............................  June 19, 1988.....  53 FR 21821.      
28..............................  Sept. 18, 1988....  53 FR 35315.      
29..............................  Dec.18, 1988......  53 FR 49658.      
30..............................  Mar. 19, 1989.....  54 FR 9212.       
31..............................  June 18, 1989.....  54 FR 27880.      
32..............................  Sept. 17, 1989....  54 FR 37795.      
33..............................  Dec. 17, 1989.....  54 FR 50619.      
34..............................  Mar. 18, 1990.....  55 FR 10061.      
35..............................  June 17, 1990.....  55 FR 24561.      
36..............................  Sept. 16, 1990....  55 FR 40658.      
37..............................  Dec. 16, 1990.....  56 FR 1112.       
38..............................  Feb. 24, 1991.....  56 FR 11513.      
39..............................  June 16, 1991.....  56 FR 56015       
40..............................  September 15, 1991  56 FR 56013       
41..............................  December 15, 1991.  57 FR 21611       
42..............................  March 15, 1992....  57 FR 21613       
43..............................  June 21, 1992.....  57 FR 37884       
44..............................  September 20, 1992  61 FR 67218       
45..............................  December 20, 1992.  61 FR 67218       
46..............................  July 1, 1993......  61 FR 67218       
47..............................  April 10, 1994....  61 FR 67218       
48..............................  January 1, 1995...  61 FR 67218       
49..............................  September 1, 1995.  61 FR 67218       
50..............................  July 1, 1996......  61 FR 60190       
51..............................  January 1, 1997...  61 FR 64618       
52..............................  July 1, 1997......  62 FR 30457       
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[45 FR 40115, June 13, 1980]

    Editorial Note For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 111.3, 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids section of 
this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 111.4  Approval of the Director of the Federal Register.

    Incorporation by reference of the publication now titled the 
Domestic Mail Manual was approved by the Director of the Federal 
Register under 5 U.S.C 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51 on March 29, 1979.

(5 U.S.C. 552(a); 39 U.S.C. 401, 404, 407, 408, 3001-3011, 3201-3218, 
3403-3405, 3601, 3621; 42 U.S.C. 1973cc-13, 1973cc-14)

[49 FR 47389, Dec. 4, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 111.5  Contents of the Domestic Mail Manual.

                              A--Addressing

                         A000  Basic Addressing

A010  General Addressing Standards
A040  Alternative Addressing Formats
A060  Detached Address Labels (DALs)

                     A800  Addressing for Automation

                         A900  Customer Support

A910  Mailing List Services
A920  Address Sequencing Services
A930  Other Services
A950  Coding Accuracy Support System (CASS)

[[Page 31]]

                     C--Characteristics and Content

                        C000  General Information

C010  General Mailability Standards
C020  Restricted or Nonmailable Articles and Substances
    C021  Articles and Substances Generally
    C022  Perishables
    C023  Hazardous Matter
    C024  Other Restricted or Nonmailable Matter
C030  Nonmailable Written, Printed, and Graphic Matter
    C031  Written, Printed, and Graphic Matter Generally
    C032  Sexually Oriented Advertisements
    C033  Pandering Advertisements
C050  Mail Processing Categories

                         C100  First-Class Mail

                            C200  Periodicals

                           C500  Express Mail

                           C600  Standard Mail

                    C800  Automation-Compatible Mail

C810  Letters and Cards
C820  Flats
C830  OCR Standards
C840  Barcoding Standards

                  D--Deposit, Collection, and Delivery

                         D000  Basic Information

D010  Pickup Service
D020  Plant Load
D030  Recall of Mail
D040  Delivery of Mail
    D041  Customer Mail Receptacles
    D042  Conditions of Delivery
D070  Drop Shipment
    D071  Express Mail and Priority Mail
    D072  Metered Mail

                         D100  First-Class Mail

                            D200  Periodicals

D210  Basic Information
D230  Additional Entry

                           D500  Express Mail

                           D600  Standard Mail

                      D900  Other Delivery Services

D910  Post Office Box Service
D920  Caller Service
D930  General Delivery and Firm Holdout

                             E--Eligibility

                   E000  Special Eligibility Standards

E010  Overseas Military Mail
E020  Department of State Mail
E030  Mail Sent by U.S. Armed Forces
E040  Free Matter for the Blind and Other Handicapped Persons
E050  Official Mail (Franked)
E060  Official Mail (Penalty)
E070  Mixed Classes
E080  Absentee Balloting Materials

                         E100  First-Class Mail

E110  Basic Standards
E120  Priority Mail
E130  Nonautomation Rates
E140  Automation Rates

                            E200  Periodicals

E210  Basic Standards
    E211  All Periodicals
    E212  Qualification Categories
    E213  Periodicals Mailing Privileges
    E214  Reentry
    E215  Copies Not Paid or Requested by Addressee
    E216  Publisher Records
E230  Nonautomation Rates
E240  Automation Rates
E250  Destination Entry
E270  Preferred Periodicals

                           E500  Express Mail

                           E600  Standard Mail

E610  Basic Standards
    E611  All Standard Mail
    E612  Additional Standards for Standard Mail (A)
    E613  Additional Standards for Standard Mail (B)
E620  Nonautomation Nonpresort Rates
E630  Nonautomation Presort Rates
E640  Automation Rates
E650  Destination Entry
    E651  Regular, Nonprofit, and Enhanced Carrier Route Standard Mail
    E652  Parcel Post
E670  Nonprofit Standard Mail

                   F--Forwarding and Related Services

                          F000  Basic Services

F010  Basic Information
F020  Forwarding
F030  Address Correction, Address Change, FASTforward<SUP>SM</SUP>, and 
          Return Services

                         G--General Information

                  G000  The USPS and Mailing Standards

G010  Basic Business Information
    G011  Post Offices and Postal Services
    G013  Trademarks and Copyrights
G020  Mailing Standards
G030  Postal Zones
G040  Information Resources
    G041  Postal Business Centers
    G042  Rates and Classification Service Centers
    G043  Address List for Correspondence

[[Page 32]]

G090  Experimental Classifications and Rates
    G091  Barcoded Small Parcels
    G092  Nonletter-Size Business Reply Mail

                        G900  Philatelic Services

                            L--Labeling Lists

                            L000  General Use

    L002  3-Digit ZIP Code Prefix Matrix
    L003  3-Digit ZIP Code Prefix Groups--3-Digit Scheme Sortation
    L004  3-Digit ZIP Code Prefix Groups--ADC Sortation
    L005  3-Digit ZIP Code Prefix Groups--SCF Sortation

                         L100  First-Class Mail

    L102  ADCs--Presorted Priority Mail

                           L600  Standard Mail

    L601  BMCs--Machinable Parcels
    L602  BMCs--DBMC Rates
    L603  ADCs--Irregular Parcels
    L604  Originating ADCs--Irregular Parcels

                     L800  Automation Rate Mailings

    L801  AADCs--Letter-Size Mailings
    L802  BMC/ASF Entry--Periodicals and Standard Mail (A)
    L803  Non-BMC/ASF Entry--Periodicals and Standard Mail (A)

                    M--Mail Preparation and Sortation

                   M000  General Preparation Standards

M010  Mailpieces
    M011  Basic Standards
    M012  Markings and Endorsements
    M013  Optional Endorsement Lines
    M014  Carrier Route Information Lines
M020  Packages and Bundles
M030  Containers
    M031  Labels
    M032  Barcoded Labels
    M033 Sacks and Trays
M040 Pallets
    M041 General Standards
    M045 Palletized Mailings
M050 Delivery Sequence
M070 Mixed Classes
    M071 Basic Information
    M072 Express Mail and Priority Mail Drop Shipment
    M073 Combined Mailings of Standard Mail Machinable Parcels
    M074 Plant Load Mailings

                  M100 First-Class Mail (Nonautomation)

M120 Priority Mail
M130 Presorted First-Class Mail

                    M200 Periodicals (Nonautomation)

                            M500 Express Mail

                   M600 Standard Mail (Nonautomation)

M610 Single--Piece and Nonautomation Standard Mail (A)
M620 Enhanced Carrier Route Standard Mail
M630 Standard Mail (B)

                        M800 All Automation Mail

M810 Letter-Size Mail
M820 Flat-Size Mail

                     P--Postage and Payment Methods

                         P000 Basic Information

P010 General Standards
    P011 Payment
    P012 Documentation
    P013 Rate Application and Computation
    P014 Refunds and Exchanges
P020 Postage Stamps and Stationery
    P021 Stamped Stationery
    P022 Adhesive Stamps
    P023 Precanceled Stamps
P030 Postage Meters and Meter Stamps
P040 Permit Imprints
P070 Mixed Classes

                          P100 First-Class Mail

                            P200 Periodicals

                            P500 Express Mail

                           P600 Standard Mail

                  P700 Special Postage Payment Systems

P710 Manifest Mailing System (MMS)
P720 Optional Procedure (OP) Mailing System
P730 Alternate Mailing Systems (AMS)
P750 Plant-Verified Drop Shipment (PVDS)
P760 First-Class or Standard Mail Mailings With Different Payment 
          Methods

                            R--Rates and Fees

                       R000 Stamps and Stationery

                          R100 First-Class Mail

                            R200 Periodicals

                            R500 Express Mail

                           R600 Standard Mail

                              R900 Services

                           S--Special Services

                       S000 Miscellaneous Services

S010 Indemnity Claims
S020 Money Orders and Other Services
S070 Mixed Classes
S500 Special Services for Express Mail

[[Page 33]]

                      S900 Special Postal Services

S910 Security and Accountability
    S911 Registered Mail
    S912 Certified Mail
    S913 Insured Mail
    S914 Certificate of Mailing
    S915 Return Receipt
    S916 Restricted Delivery
    S917 Return Receipt for Merchandise
S920 Convenience
    S921 Collect on Delivery (COD) Mail
    S922 Business Reply Mail (BRM)
    S923 Merchandise Return Service
    S930 Handling

                          I--Index Information

                            I000 Information

I010 Summary of Changes
I020 References
    I021 Forms Glossary
    I022 Subject Index

[62 FR 30460, June 4, 1997]

[[Page 34]]


<R03>
              SUBCHAPTER D--ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION

<R05>


<R03>
PART 211--APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
211.1  Disposition of former title 39, U.S.C.
211.2  Regulations of the Postal Service.
211.3  Executive orders and other executive pronouncements; circulars, 
          bulletins, and other issuances of the Office of Management and 
          Budget.
211.4  Interim personnel regulations.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 201, 202, 401(2), 402, 403, 404, 410, 1001, 
1005, 1209; Pub. L. 91-375, Secs. 3-5, 84 Stat. 773-75.

    Source: 38 FR 20402, July 31, 1973, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 211.1  Disposition of former title 39, U.S.C.

    Except as otherwise continued in effect as postal regulations, all 
provisions of former title 39, U.S.C., which were continued in effect as 
regulations of the Postal Service by section 5(f) of the Postal 
Reorganization Act, are revoked. This revocation does not apply to 
postal regulations which embody or are derived from provisions of former 
title 39.


<R05>
Sec. 211.2   Regulations of the Postal Service.

    (a) The regulations of the Postal Service consist of:
    (1) The resolutions of the Governors and the Board of Governors of 
the U.S. Postal Service and the bylaws of the Board of Governors;
    (2) The Domestic Mail Manual, the Postal Operations Manual, the 
Administrative Support Manual, the Employee and Labor Relations Manual, 
the Financial Management Manual, the Postal Contracting Manual, 
Publication 42 (International Mail), and those portions of Chapter 2 of 
the former Postal Service Manual and chapter 7 of the former Postal 
Manual retained in force;
    (3) Headquarters Circulars, Management Instructions, Regional 
Instructions, handbooks, delegations of authority, and other regulatory 
issuances and directives of the Postal Service or the former Post Office 
Department. Any of the foregoing may be published in the Federal 
Register and the Code of Federal Regulations.
    (b) Except as otherwise provided by law, the resolutions of the 
Governors and the Board of Governors of the U.S. Postal Service and the 
bylaws of the Board of Governors take precedence over all regulations 
issued by other authority.
    (c) The adoption, by reference or otherwise, of any rule of law or 
regulation in this or any other regulation of the Postal Service shall 
not be interpreted as any expression on the issue of whether such rule 
of law or regulation would apply to the Postal Service if it were not 
adopted as a regulation, nor shall it restrict the authority of the 
Postal Service to amend or revoke the rule so adopted at a subsequent 
time.
    (d) All regulations of the Post Office Department in effect at the 
time the U.S. Postal Service commenced operations, continue in effect, 
except as subsequently modified or repealed by the Postal Service. 
Except as otherwise continued in effect as postal regulations, all 
regulations of other agencies of the United States continued in effect 
as postal regulations by section 5(a) of the Postal Reorganization Act 
are repealed.

[38 FR 20402, July 31, 1973, as amended at 46 FR 34329, July 1, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 211.3   Executive orders and other executive pronouncements; circulars, bulletins, and other issuances of the Office of Management and Budget.

    (a) By virtue of the Postal Reorganization Act, certain executive 
orders, and other executive pronouncements and certain circulars, 
bulletins, and other issuances of the Office of Management and Budget or 
particular provisions thereof, or requirements therein, apply to the 
Postal Service and certain others do not apply.
    (b) It is the policy of the Postal Service to continue to comply 
with issuances of the kind mentioned in paragraph (a) of this section 
with which it has previously complied, unless a management decision by 
an appropriate department head is made to terminate compliance, in whole 
or in

[[Page 35]]

part, following advice from the General Counsel that the issuance is not 
binding, in whole or in part, on the Postal Service. This policy is not 
enforceable by any party outside the Postal Service. No party outside 
the Postal Service is authorized to use the mere non-compliance with 
this policy against the Postal Service in any way.


<R05>
Sec. 211.4   Interim personnel regulations.

    (a) Continuation of Personnel Regulations of the Post Office 
Department. All regulations of the former Post Office Department dealing 
with officers and employees, in effect at the time the U.S. Postal 
Service commenced operations, continue in effect according to their 
terms until modified or repealed by the Postal Service or pursuant to a 
collective bargaining agreement under the Postal Reorganization Act.
    (b) Continuation of Personnel Provisions of Former title 39, U.S.C.. 
Except as they may be inconsistent with other regulations adopted by the 
Postal Service or with a collective bargaining agreement under the 
Postal Reorganization Act, all provisions of former title 39, U.S.C., 
dealing with and applicable to postal officers and employees immediately 
prior to the commencement of operations of the Postal Service continue 
in effect as regulations of the Postal Service.
    (c) Continuation of Other Laws and Regulations as Postal 
Regulations. Except as they may be inconsistent with the provisions of 
the Postal Reorganization Act, with other regulations adopted by the 
Postal Service, or with a collective bargaining agreement under the 
Postal Reorganization Act, all regulations of Federal agencies other 
than the Postal Service or Post Office Department and all laws other 
than provisions of revised title 39, U.S.C., or provisions of other laws 
made applicable to the Postal Service by revised title 39, U.S.C., 
dealing with officers and employees applicable to postal officers and 
employees immediately prior to the commencement of operations of the 
Postal Service, continue in effect as regulations of the Postal Service. 
Any regulation or law the applicability of which is continued by 
paragraphs (a) through (c) of this section which requires any action by 
any agency other than the Postal Service or Post Office Department shall 
be deemed to require such action by the Postal Service, unless by 
agreement with the Postal Service the other agency involved consents to 
the continuation of its action.
    (d) Effect of Collective Bargaining on Certain Regulations. All 
rules and regulations continued or established by paragraphs (a) through 
(c) of this section which establish fringe benefits as defined in title 
39, U.S.C. 1005(f) of employees for whom there is a collective 
bargaining representative continue to apply until modified by a 
collective bargaining agreement concluded pursuant to the Postal 
Reorganization Act. Those rules and regulations affecting other terms 
and conditions of employment encompassed by section 8(d) of the National 
Labor Relations Act, as amended, shall continue to apply to such 
employees until such collective bargaining agreement has been concluded, 
and, unless specifically continued by such agreement, shall apply 
thereafter until modified or repealed by the Postal Service pursuant to 
its authority under title 39, U.S.C. 1001(e) and other pertinent 
provisions of the Postal Reorganization Act. In the event a condition 
occurs which shall excuse the Postal Service from continuing 
negotiations prior to the parties thereto concluding an agreement in 
accordance with the Postal Reorganization Act, the Postal Service 
reserves the right in accordance with the reorganization measures 
mandated by the Congress and consistent with the provisions of the Act, 
and any collective bargaining agreements in existence at that time, 
insofar as they do not unduly impede such reorganization measures, to 
continue, discontinue, or revise all compensation, benefits, and terms 
and conditions of employment of such employees of the Postal Service.


<R03>
PART 221--GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF ORGANIZATION--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
221.1  The U.S. Postal Service.
221.2  Board of Governors of the Postal Service.
221.3  Postmaster General.
221.4  Deputy Postmaster General.
221.5  Associate Postmaster General.

[[Page 36]]

221.6  Groups and departments.
221.7  Postal Regions.
221.8  Officers.
221.9  Postal Service emblem.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 201, 202, 203, 204, 207, 401(2), 402, 403, 404; 
Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended (Pub. L. 95-452, as amended), 
5 U.S.C. App. 3.


<R05>
Sec. 221.1   The U.S. Postal Service.

    (a) The U.S. Postal Service has been established as an independent 
establishment within the executive branch of the Government of the 
United States under the provisions of the Postal Reorganization Act of 
August 12, 1970, Pub. L. 91-375, 84 Stat. 719.
    (b) As a complement to the information in the regulations in this 
part, a concise statement of the organization of the Postal Service can 
be found in the United State Government Organization Manual.

[38 FR 20403, July 31, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 221.2   Board of Governors of the Postal Service.

    (a) The Board of Governors directs the exercise of the powers of the 
Postal Service; reviews the practices and policies of the Postal 
Service; and directs and controls its expenditures.
    (b) For composition of the Board of Governors, see Sec. 3.1 of this 
chapter.

[38 FR 20403, July 31, 1973, as amended at 51 FR 40796, Nov. 10, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 221.3   Postmaster General.

    (a) The Postmaster General (PMG) is the chief executive officer of 
the Postal Service and is responsible for its overall operation. The PMG 
is named and can be removed by a majority of the nine Governors.
    (b) The Postmaster General determines appeals from the actions of 
staff and department heads, except that in cases where the PMG has 
delegated authority to make a decision to a subordinate, such 
subordinate may also determine appeals within the authority delegated.
    (c) The Board of Governors has directed that the Postmaster General 
exercise the powers of the Postal Service to the extent that such 
exercise does not conflict with power reserved to the Board by law. The 
Postmaster General is authorized to direct any officer, employee, or 
agent of the Postal Service to exercise such of the PMG's powers as the 
PMG deems appropriate. For the direction of the Board of Governors that 
the Postmaster General exercise the powers of the Postal Service, see 
Secs. 3.5 and 4.3 of this chapter.

[38 FR 20403, July 31, 1973, as amended at 43 FR 29117, July 6, 1978; 45 
FR 43718, June 30, 1980; 51 FR 40796, Nov. 10, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 221.4   Deputy Postmaster General.

    (a) The Deputy Postmaster General is the alternate chief executive 
officer of the Postal Service. The Deputy is appointed and can be 
removed by the Postmaster General and the Governors. The Deputy is a 
voting member of the Board of Governors.
    (b) The Deputy Postmaster General is required to perform all tasks 
as assigned by the Postmaster General. The Deputy acts as Postmaster 
General in the Postmaster General's absence or whenever a vacancy exists 
in the Office of Postmaster General.
    (c) For delineation of authority of the Deputy Postmaster General by 
the Board of Governors see Sec. 4.4 of this chapter.

[38 FR 20403, July 31, 1973, as amended at 41 FR 16941, Apr. 23, 1976; 
43 FR 29117, July 6, 1978; 45 FR 43718, June 30, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 221.5  Associate Postmasters General.

    (a) The Associate Postmasters General are appointed and can be 
removed by the Postmaster General.
    (b) The Associate Postmasters General are required to perform all 
tasks as assigned by the Postmaster General.

[54 FR 29706, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 221.6  Groups and departments.

    (a) Postal Service Headquarters is divided into five major groups: 
Operations Support, Finance, Human Resources, Marketing and 
Communications, and Administrative Services. Each group is headed by a 
Senior Assistant Postmaster General (SAPMG). The SAPMG for Finance 
reports directly to the Postmaster General. The SAPMG for Operations 
Support reports directly to the Deputy Postmaster

[[Page 37]]

General. The SAPMGs for Human Resources, Marketing and Communications, 
and Administrative Services report directly to the Associate Postmaster 
General (Systems). The SAPMGs are responsible for the following 
activities within their assigned areas:
    (1) Program planning, direction, and review;
    (2) Establishment of policies, procedures, and standards; and
    (3) Operational determinations not within the full jurisdiction of 
field officers.
    (b) Groups are divided into departments or offices headed by either 
Assistant Postmasters General (APMGs) or Directors. The heads of these 
departments and offices report to and are responsible for assisting the 
SAPMGs in carrying out their assigned activities.
    (c) Certain other Headquarters units report directly to the 
Postmaster General. These include the Inspection Service Department, 
headed by the Chief Postal Inspector; the Law Department, headed by the 
General Counsel, and the Planning Department, headed by an Assistant 
Postmaster General. The Executive Assistant to the Postmaster General 
also reports to the Postmaster General.
    (d)(1) The Senior Management Committee establishes Postal Service 
direction and policy, initiates and monitors key programs, prioritizes 
resource utilization, and serves as the review and approval body for all 
major plans, programs, and projects. It fosters cross-functional 
cooperation and develops the strategic plans for the Postal Service.
    (2) The Senior Management Committee is made up of the following: The 
Postmaster General, the Deputy Postmaster General, Associate Postmasters 
General, the Senior Assistant Postmasters General, General Counsel, 
Chief Postal Inspector, Assistant Postmaster General, Planning 
(Secretariat), Assistant Postmaster General, Communications (Observer), 
Assistant Postmaster General, Government Relations (Observer), Executive 
Assistant to the Postmaster General (Observer), Secretary to the Board 
of Governors (Observer), Field Executive (Rotational Basis).
    (e) Statements of the functions of the various groups, departments, 
and offices can be found in Part 224 of this chapter.

[51 FR 40796, Nov. 10, 1986, as amended at 54 FR 29706, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 221.7  Postal Regions.

    (a) There are five Postal Regions. Each region is headed by a 
Regional Postmaster General (RPMG) who reports to the Deputy Postmaster 
General, and has overall responsibility for operational activities 
(except those reserved to Headquarters) of the Postal Service within the 
region.
    (b) Each RPMG's office includes five functions--Operations Support, 
Marketing and Communications, Finance, Planning, and Human Resources. 
Each regional function is headed by a Regional Director who reports to 
the RPMG.
    (c)(1) Postal regions are composed of field divisions headed by 
field division general managers/postmasters whose organizational units 
are in turn composed of management sectional centers (MSCs) headed by 
MSC managers or MSC managers/postmasters, and bulk mail centers (BMCs) 
headed by BMC managers.
    (2) Each field division general manager/postmaster reports to the 
RPMG, and has line responsibility for postal activities (except those 
reserved to Headquarters associate offices) in the division area, the 
MSCs, associate offices, and BMCs within the division area.
    (3) Each MSC manager/postmaster reports to a field division general 
manager/postmaster, and has line responsibility for postal activities 
(except those reserved to Headquarters and field divisions) within the 
MSC area.
    (4) Each BMC manager reports to a field division general manager/
postmaster, and has line responsibility for postal activities (except 
those reserved to Headquarters and field divisions) within the BMC.

[51 FR 40797, Nov. 10, 1986, as amended at 54 FR 29707, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 221.8  Officers.

    (a) Except for the Chief Postal Inspector, officers serve at the 
pleasure

[[Page 38]]

of the Postmaster General. The following officers are appointed by the 
Postmaster General:
    (1) Associate Postmaster General;
    (2) Senior Assistant Postmasters General;
    (3) Assistant Postmasters General;
    (4) The General Counsel and Deputy General Counsel;
    (5) The Consumer Advocate;
    (6) The Chief Postal Inspector;
    (7) The Judicial Officer;
    (8) The Executive Assistant to the Postmaster General;
    (9) The Treasurer; and
    (10) The Regional Postmasters General.
    (b) The number of SAPMGs and APMGs is set by resolution of the Board 
of Governors.
    (c) The Postmaster General, in consultation with the Governors of 
the Postal Service, shall appoint the Chief Postal Inspector. With the 
concurrence of the Governors of the Postal Service, the Postmaster 
General may remove the Chief Postal Inspector or transfer the Chief 
Postal Inspector to another position or location in the Postal Service. 
If the Chief Postal Inspector is removed or transferred, the Postmaster 
General shall promptly notify both House of Congress in writing of the 
reasons for such removal or transfer.

[51 FR 40797, Nov. 10, 1986, as amended at 56 FR 55823, Oct. 30, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 221.9  Postal Service emblem.

    The Postal Service emblem, which is identical with the seal, is 
registered as a trademark and service mark by the U.S. Patent Office. 
Except for the emblem on official stationery, the emblem must bear one 
of the following notations: ``Reg. U.S. Pat. Off.'', ``Registered in 
U.S. Patent Office'', or the letter R enclosed within a circle.

[59 FR 18454, Apr. 18, 1994]


<R03>
PART 222--DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
222.1  Authority for delegation.
222.2  Media of delegation.
222.3  Contents of delegations.
222.4  Redelegation.
222.5  Authority to approve personnel actions and administer oaths of 
          office for employment.
222.6  Authority to administer oaths other than for employment.
222.7  Authority to designate certifying officers--headquarters.
222.8  Authority to designate certifying officers--field.
222.9  Delegation of authority to the Senior Assistant Postmaster 
          General, Finance.
222.10  Delegation of authority to the APMG, International Postal 
          Affairs Department.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 203, 204, 401(2), 402, 403, 404, 409; Inspector 
General Act of 1978, as amended (Pub. L. No. 95-452, as amended), 5 
U.S.C. App. 3.

    Source: 38 FR 20404, July 31, 1973, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 222.1   Authority for delegation.

    (a) The Postmaster General is empowered to authorize any employee or 
agent of the Service to exercise any function vested in the Postal 
Service, in the PMG, or in any other Postal Service employee.
    (b) The Deputy Postmaster General is the full alternate to the 
Postmaster General.
    (c) When, by reason of absence, disability, or vacancy in office, 
neither the Postmaster General nor the Deputy Postmaster General can act 
as Postmaster General, the first available official on the following 
list will do so:
    (1) Associate Postmaster General;
    (2) Senior Assistant Postmaster General, Operations Support.
    (d) The Postmaster General has been authorized by the Board of 
Governors to exercise the powers of the Postal Service to the full 
extent that such exercise is lawful. See Secs. 3.5 and 4.3 of this 
chapter.
    (e) The Associate Postmasters General; the SAPMGs; the Chief Postal 
Inspector; the General Counsel; the Assistant Postmaster General, 
Planning; and the Executive Assistant to the Postmaster General, act for 
the Postmaster General on assigned matters. These officers are 
authorized to exercise the powers and functions of the Postal Service 
under the Postal Reorganization Act, in respect to matters within their 
area of responsibility, except as limited by law or by the specific 
terms of their assignment.

[[Page 39]]

    (f) Heads of departments or offices who report to a Senior Assistant 
Postmaster General are authorized to exercise the powers and functions 
of that SAPMG within the area of responsibility of their department or 
office, except as such authority may be reserved or rescinded by the 
SAPMG or is limited by law or the terms of their specific assignment.

[38 FR 20404, July 31, 1973, as amended at 46 FR 34330, July 1, 1981; 48 
FR 1965, Dec. 17, 1983; 48 FR 30111, June 30, 1983; 51 FR 40797, Nov. 
10, 1986; 54 FR 29707, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 222.2   Media of delegation.

    (a) All delegations of authority must be issued through official 
directives.
    (b) Headquarters or regional officials shall not orally authorize 
postmasters to deviate from published instructions, except in 
emergencies. An oral authorization must be confirmed by a memorandum or 
order dated subsequent to the issuance date of the most recently 
published instructions on the subject. Postal inspectors shall charge as 
irregularities any improperly authorized deviations observed in the 
course of office inspections.

[38 FR 20404, July 31, 1973, as amended at 51 FR 40797, Nov. 10, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 222.3  Contents of delegations.

    (a) Delegations of authority shall ordinarily be made by position 
title rather than by name of the individual involved. An officer or 
executive acting in the absence of a principal has the principal's full 
authority.
    (b) When authority is delegated to an officer, the officers above 
that officer shall have the same authority. Delegated authority shall 
not extend to aides except when an aide serves on an acting basis (see 
paragraph (a) of this section) or unless the aide is specifically 
authorized by the superior to exercise such authority.
    (c) A delegation must agree with the law and regulations under which 
it is made and contain such specific limiting conditions as may be 
appropriate.

[51 FR 40797, Nov. 10, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 222.4  Redelegation.

    (a) Except as otherwise prohibited by law, or by a regulation that 
expressly prohibits redelegation, or by the terms of the delegation:
    (1) Heads of groups, functions, or offices at Headquarters are 
authorized to redelegate any authority vested in them.
    (2) Regional Postmasters General or heads of regional departments 
are authorized to redelegate any authority vested in them subject to the 
condition that redelegation to members of a regional staff must be 
consistent with the then current regional organizational structure.
    (3) Field division general managers/postmasters are authorized to 
redelegate, subject to or within guidelines issued by the RPMG, any 
authority vested in them, provided that the redelegation is consistent 
with the current organizational structure.
    (4) Postal data center (PDC) directors are authorized to redelegate 
any authority vested in them.
    (5) Heads of MSCs and other field installations are authorized to 
redelegate to members of their respective staffs any authority vested in 
them.

[51 FR 40797, Nov. 10, 1986, as amended at 54 FR 29707, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 222.5   Authority to approve personnel actions and administer oaths of office for employment.

    (a) Delegation. The following are authorized to effect appointments, 
administer oaths of office for employment, and take other personnel 
actions:
    (1) Senior Assistant Postmaster General, Human Resources, Assistant 
Postmasters General, Employee Relations Department and Labor Relations 
Department;
    (2) Chief Postal Inspector;
    (3) Regional Chief Postal Inspectors;
    (4) Postal Inspectors-in-Charge;
    (5) Regional Postmasters General;
    (6) Heads of postal field installations including those reporting 
directly to specified departments in Headquarters or to Regional 
Postmasters General;
    (7) Officials occupying personnel services positions EAS-16 and 
above, when their positions include responsibility for functions such as 
recruitment, appointments, replacements, position changes and 
separations, and related personnel processing.

[[Page 40]]

    (b) Personnel actions for employees of ``other installations.'' As 
specifically authorized by either the Senior Assistant Postmaster 
General, Human Resources or a Regional Postmaster General, officers and 
employees listed in paragraph (a) of this section may approve personnel 
actions for employees in offices or installations other than their own 
as a cross-service, as a central personnel office, or on a special need 
basis.
    (c) Transfers of accountability. In addition to other personnel 
authorized under this section, associate office coordinators at field 
divisions and management sectional centers may administer oaths of 
office for employment at any post office in conjunction with transfers 
of accountability of postmasters.

[38 FR 20404, July 31, 1973, as amended at 40 FR 13498, Mar. 27, 1975; 
43 FR 29117, July 6, 1978; 51 FR 40798, Nov. 10, 1986; 54 FR 29707, July 
14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 222.6   Authority to administer oaths other than for employment.

    The following are authorized to administer oaths concerning matters 
other than employment:
    (a) Postal inspectors with regard to any matter coming before them 
in the performance of their official duties;
    (b) Any member of a board who is assigned to conduct hearings or 
investigations in which sworn testimony, affidavits, or depositions are 
required and each officer or employee assigned to conduct such hearings 
or investigations;
    (c) Postmasters' authority. Postmasters are required, empowered, and 
authorized, when requested, to administer oaths with a like force and 
effect as officials having a seal, as follows:
    (1) Expense accounts. Accounts for travel or other expenses against 
the United States.
    (2) Customs documents. At post offices where customs officers are 
not stationed, any oath required to be made to statements in customs 
documents by importers of merchandise by mail, not exceeding $100 in 
value.
    (3) Recruitments for Job Training Programs. Oaths of office to 
prospective Job Training Programs enrollees.
    (4) Fees. Do not collect fees for these services. The United States 
will not reimburse postal employees for fees paid for administering 
oaths.
    (d) Postmasters in Alaska as notaries public. (1) Administer oaths 
and affirmations; take acknowledgments and make and execute certificates 
thereof; and perform all other functions of a notary public within 
Alaska whenever a certification is necessary to comply with any Act of 
Congress or of the Legislature of Alaska.
    (2) When executing certificates of oath, affirmation, or 
acknowledgment, and the title ``Postmaster'' after your signature and 
give the name of the post office and date document is executed. Place 
legible postmark impression of the post office on the document.
    (3) Keep a record of all deeds and other instruments of writing 
acknowledged, relating to the title to or transfer of property. This 
record shall be available to your successors, and shall be subject to 
public inspection.
    (e) Fees for notarial service. An officer or employee who is a 
notary public shall not charge or receive compensation for notarial 
services for another officer or employee regarding Government business; 
nor for notarial services for any person during the hours of the 
notary's services to the Government, including the lunch period.

(39 U.S.C. 401)

[36 FR 4767, Mar. 12, 1971. Redesignated at 38 FR 20327, July 31, 1973. 
38 FR 20404, July 31, 1973, as amended at 40 FR 26511, June 24, 1975; 51 
FR 40798, Nov. 10, 1986; 54 FR 29707, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 222.7   Authority to designate certifying officers--headquarters.

    (a) Delegation. The following are authorized to designate certifying 
officers at Headquarters for the items specified:
    (1) The Chief Postal Inspector, for: (i) Payment from his special 
deposit account; (ii) disbursements for rewards based on Postmaster 
General Notices of Reward; (iii) payments from confidential funds; (iv) 
salary payments for Special Investigations Division; (v) advances of 
funds for confidential purposes; (vi) inspection service, travel 
advances, transportation of things; and (vii) payments for special 
analyses and services.

[[Page 41]]

    (2) The General Counsel certifies payments relating to tort claims 
and claims under 39 U.S.C. 2603.
    (3) The Senior Assistant Postmaster General, Finance, certifies all 
payments not covered by paragraphs (a) (1) and (2) of this section.
    (b) Redelegation. The officials named in paragraph (a) of this 
section are authorized to redelegate their authority to designate 
certifying officers. The redelegation shall be made by letter to the 
appropriate Postal Data Center disbursing officer and must bear the 
specimen signature of the person to whom the authority is redelegated.
    (c) Designating certifying officers--(1) Inspection Service and Law 
Department. Officials authorized to designate certifying officers (see 
paragraph (a) of this section) will complete SF 210, Signature/
Designation Card for Certifying Officer, in duplicate for each Postal 
Data Center officer affected to show:
    (i) Name of department for which vouchers will be certified.
    (ii) Signature of certifying officer written exactly as vouchers 
will be signed.
    (iii) Class of vouchers to be certified.
    (iv) The official's signature and effective date.
    (2) Other departments and offices. Other departments and offices 
requiring certifying officers will complete SF 210 in duplicate as 
prescribed in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, except for signature and 
date. Both copies will be sent to the Senior Assistant Postmaster 
General, Finance.
    (3) Submitting SF 210 to Postal Data Center disbursing officers. The 
Chief Postal Inspector, the General Counsel, and the Senior Assistant 
Postmaster General, Finance, or their designees shall send signed 
originals of SF 210 to each of the disbursing officers affected and 
retain duplicates. These documents will be the official designations of 
the employees named on the SF 210 as certifying officers.
    (d) Maintaining designations. Each group, department and office must 
keep current its designation of authorized certifying officers. When new 
or additional designations are made, the procedures for designating 
certifying officers contained in this section shall be followed.

[38 FR 20404, July 31, 1973, as amended at 43 FR 29117, July 6, 1978; 51 
FR 40798, Nov. 10, 1986; 54 FR 29707, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 222.8   Authority to designate certifying officers--field.

    (a) Delegation. The following are authorized to designate certifying 
officers in Postal Data Centers and Inspection Service regions and 
divisions:
    (1) The Chief Postal Inspector, for obligations of the Inspection 
Service.
    (2) Postal Data Center Directors for obligations of all other 
regional functions.
    (3) The New York Postal Data Center Director for obligations for 
Headquarters functions except those under Sec. 222.7(a) (1) and (2) and 
those certified by the Senior Assistant Postmaster General, Finance, or 
designee.
    (b) Redelegation. The officials named in paragraph (a) of this 
section are authorized to redelegate their authority to designate 
certifying officers. Redelegations shall be by letter to each disbursing 
officer affected, with the specimen signature of the person to whom 
authority is redelegated.
    (c) Designating certifying officers--(1) Regional Chief Postal 
Inspectors and Postal Inspectors-in-Charge. Regional Chief Postal 
Inspectors and Postal Inspectors-in-Charge are designated certifying 
officers, as limited by the Chief Postal Inspector. They are authorized 
to designate certifying officers for obligations incurred by the Postal 
Inspection Service. They will complete SF 210 in duplicate to show:
    (i) Postal Inspection Service region or division for which vouchers 
will be certified.
    (ii) Signature of certifying officer written in the same manner that 
he will sign vouchers.
    (iii) Class of vouchers to be certified.
    (iv) Signature of the designating official and effective date. 
Regional Chief Postal Inspectors and Postal Inspectors--in--Charge are 
not authorized to redelegate their authority to designate authorized 
certifying officers.
    (2) Postal Data Center Directors. Officers under direction of Postal 
Data Center Directors will complete SF 210 in duplicate as in paragraph 
(c)(1) of

[[Page 42]]

this section except for signature and date. Both copies will be sent to 
the appropriate Postal Data Center Director for completion.
    (3) Submitting SF 210 to disbursing officer. The Regional Chief 
Postal Inspector, Postal Inspectors-in-Charge, and Postal Data Center 
Director (or designees) will send the originals of SF 210 to each 
disbursing officer affected and keep the duplicates. These will be the 
official designations of the employees named on the SF 210 as certifying 
officers.
    (d) Maintaining designations. Each office under jurisdiction of the 
officials named in Sec. 222.8 must keep current its designation of 
authorized certifying officers. When new additional designations are 
made, this Sec. 222.8 shall be followed.

[38 FR 20404, July 31, 1973, as amended at 51 FR 40796, Nov. 10, 1986; 
54 FR 29707, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 222.9  Delegation of authority to the Senior Assistant Postmaster General, Finance.

    (a) Delegation. The Senior Assistant Postmaster General, Finance, 
may take final action on:
    (1) Claims for overpayment of pay.
    (2) Relief of accountable officers of liability for loss.
    (3) Relief of accountable officers of liability for illegal, 
improper, or incorrect payments.
    (4) Certifying officers' accountability.
    (5) Deposit to and withdrawal from Postal Service fund.
    (6) Collection of debts due the Postal Service with the exception of 
those falling under the jurisdiction of the Chief Postal Inspector.
    (7) Adjustment of claims of postmasters and Armed Forces postal 
clerks, including the loss of funds or valuable papers from their 
official custody resulting from burglary, fire, or unavoidable casualty, 
with concurrence by the General Counsel is cases involving doubtful 
questions of law or fact.
    (b) Redelegation. The Senior Assistant Postmaster General, Finance, 
is authorized to redelegate all or part of the authority vested by 
paragraph (a) of this section to such other officers or executives as 
deemed appropriate.

[38 FR 20404, July 31, 1973, as amended at 43 FR 29117, July 6, 1978; 51 
FR 40798, Nov. 10, 1986; 54 FR 29707, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 222.10   Delegation of authority to the APMG, International Postal Affairs Department.

    The APMG, International Postal Affairs Department, is authorized to 
sign Express Mail agreements with foreign postal administrations, and to 
sign technical agreements for the exchange of postal personnel and 
property with foreign postal administrations.

[41 FR 52299, Nov. 29, 1976, as amended at 51 FR 40798, Nov. 10, 1986]


<R03>
PART 223--RELATIONSHIPS AND CHANNELS OF COMMUNICATION--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
223.1  Relationships.
223.2  Channels of communication.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 203, 204, 401(2), 402, 403, 404.


<R05>
Sec. 223.1   Relationships.

    (a) Between Headquarters and Regions. Each Headquarters group, 
department, and office shall provide guidance and policy interpretation 
to regional officials in its area of responsibility.
    (b) Between Postal Region Offices and Field Divisions. The Regional 
Postmaster General shall provide guidance and direction to the 
respective field division general managers/postmasters within the region 
with the assistance of Regional Directors and their staffs in their 
areas of specialization.
    (c) Between Field Divisions and MSCs. Field division general 
managers/postmasters and staffs shall provide guidance and direction to 
their respective MSC managers/postmasters.
    (d) Between Field Divisions and Bulk Mail Centers. Field division 
general managers/postmasters and staffs shall provide guidance and 
direction to their Bulk Mail Center Managers.

[38 FR 20406, July 31, 1973, as amended at 43 FR 29117, July 6, 1978; 48 
FR 1966, Jan. 17, 1983; 51 FR 40798, Nov. 10, 1986; 54 FR 29708, July 
14, 1989]

[[Page 43]]


<R05>
Sec. 223.2   Channels of communication.

    (a) Headquarters and Postal Region Offices. (1) The heads of groups, 
departments, and offices formulate the necessary directives to provide 
guidance to regional officials. Direction of regional officials is 
provided on employee and labor relations matters by the Senior Assistant 
Postmaster General, Human Resources, and on other matters by the Deputy 
Postmaster General.
    (2) Policy directives shall be issued over the signatures of the 
heads of the groups, departments, and offices covering matters within 
their responsibility, except when the Postmaster General or Deputy 
Postmaster General may wish to issue such directives personally. Policy 
directives shall be coordinated with other appropriate groups, 
departments and offices before issuance and reviewed and disseminated by 
the APMG Information Resource Management Department, and, if within the 
authority of the issuer, shall have the same effect as though sent by 
the Postmaster General or the Deputy Postmaster General.
    (3) Guidelines and program implementation instructions and 
procedures not involving policy shall ordinarily be issued over the 
signature of the group, department, or office head having jurisdiction.
    (4) Regional staff officials may communicate directly with the 
corresponding functional group, department, or office in Headquarters on 
matters within their area of jurisdiction. In addition, where 
authorized, they may also directly contact supporting Headquarters 
departments such as Law Department and Inspection Service Department on 
technical matters not requiring administrative judgment of the Regional 
Postmaster General.
    (b) Regional Offices and Field Installations. The regular channels 
of communication are:
    (1) Associate office postmasters, to and from their MSC Manager/
Postmaster.
    (2) MSC Managers/Postmasters, to and from their Field Division 
General Manager/Postmaster.
    (3) BMC managers, to and from field division general managers/
postmasters.
    (4) Field division general managers/postmasters, to and from their 
Regional Postmasters General.
    (5) Heads of other postal installations, to and from their 
designated superiors as appropriate.
    (c) Headquarters, Postal Region Offices, and other Postal 
Installations with Postal Data Centers. (1) The Information Resource 
Management Department provides the necessary directives to the PDCs. The 
Law Department shall maintain direct contact on matters relating to 
professional and policy guidance on claims.
    (2) Postal Region Offices and Postal Data Centers may communicate 
directly with each other.
    (3) Other postal installations and PDCs may communicate directly on 
routine accounting matters.

[38 FR 20406, July 31, 1973, as amended at 43 FR 29117, July 6, 1978; 48 
FR 1966, Jan. 17, 1983; 48 FR 30111, June 30, 1983; 51 FR 40798, Nov. 
10, 1986; 54 FR 29708, July 14, 1989]


<R03>
PART 224--ORGANIZATIONS REPORTING DIRECTLY TO THE POSTMASTER GENERAL--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
224.1  Finance Group.
224.2  [Reserved]
224.3  Postal Inspection Service.
224.4  General Counsel.
224.5  Planning Department.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 203, 204, 401(2), 403, 404, 409, 1001; 
Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended (Pub. L. No. 95-452, as 
amended), 5 U.S.C. App. 3.

    Source: 52 FR 46998, Dec. 11, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 224.1  Finance Group.

    (a) General. The Finance Group is headed by a Senior Assistant 
Postmaster General (SAPMG). The group consists of three departments, 
each headed by an Assistant Postmaster General, and the Office of the 
Treasurer and the USPS Records Office. The SAPMG, Finance, participates 
in the planning and budget process, and reviews and evaluates the budget 
requests of each region for the areas under control of the Finance 
Group.
    (b) Rates and Classification Department. The Rates and 
Classification Department is responsible for:

[[Page 44]]

    (1) Designing and maintaining the rate and mail classification 
structure.
    (2) Developing and administering standards and procedures related to 
cost analysis and attribution.
    (3) Forecasting mail volume.
    (4) Developing and supporting rate recommendations to the Postal 
Rate Commission.
    (5) Developing policies, regulations, systems, and procedures for 
the management and control of the admissibility, classification, and 
application of rates and fees for domestic or international mail of all 
classes and the collection of revenue from bulk mailers and special 
service users.
    (c) Controller Department. The Controller Department is responsible 
for:
    (1) Developing financing policy and forecasting long-term financing, 
capital requirements, and borrowing needs.
    (2) Establishing a comprehensive controllership program for 
financial management.
    (3) Maintaining control of the financial activities.
    (4) Developing accounting policy and procedures and operating the 
financial reporting programs and controls.
    (5) Establishing budgeting, economic and cost benefit functions, 
payroll systems, policies, and procedures.
    (6) Directing the formulation and presentation of a national budget 
to the Senior Management Committee, Board of Governors, Office of 
Management and Budget, and Congress.
    (d) Special Projects Department. The Special Projects Department is 
responsible for:
    (1) Assisting senior management in formulating policy and direction 
on complex issues.
    (2) Directing special studies identified by senior management for 
use in senior management deliberations.
    (3) Monitoring specifically designed issues on behalf of senior 
management and providing staff analysis of these issues as they change 
over time.
    (4) Providing leadership responsibility on behalf of senior 
management for special projects and organizational initiatives.
    (5) Participating in senior management meetings as appropriate.
    (e) Office of the Treasurer. The Treasurer is responsible for:
    (1) Operating a nationwide network of primary and concentration 
banks to gather revenue.
    (2) Developing cash management initiatives to speed cash flow.
    (3) Implementing debt management strategies to meet long-term 
capital and short-term borrowing needs.
    (4) Planning investment strategies to ensure liquidity and to earn a 
competitive rate of return.
    (5) Managing the investment of excess cash.
    (f) Records Office. The Records Office has responsibility for the 
retention, security, and privacy of Postal Service records; authorizes 
their preservation and disclosure; and orders their disposal by 
destruction or transfer.

[52 FR 46998, Dec. 11, 1987; 52 FR 49015, Dec. 29, 1987. Redesignated 
and amended at 54 FR 29708, July 14, 1989; 60 FR 57344, Nov. 15, 1995]
Sec. 224.2  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 224.3  Postal Inspection Service.

    (a) The Postal Inspection Service is headed by the Chief Postal 
Inspector who also acts as:
    (1) The Inspector General for the Postal Service,
    (2) The investigating official under the Program Fraud and Civil 
Remedies Act, and
    (3) The Security Officer and Defense Coordinator for the Postal 
Service.
    (b) The Postal Inspection Service is responsible for:
    (1) Protecting mail matter, postal facilities and other postal 
assets, employees, and people on postal premises.
    (2) Enforcing laws related to the Postal Service, the mails, other 
postal offenses and other laws of the United States.
    (3) Conducting investigations into violations of federal laws that 
the Attorney General determines have a detrimental effect upon the 
operations of the Postal Service.
    (4) Carrying out investigations and presenting evidence to the 
Department of Justice, U.S. Attorneys, and state and local authorities, 
in investigations of a criminal or civil nature.
    (5) Carrying out administrative and civil investigations and 
presenting

[[Page 45]]

findings and evidence to postal management and attorneys in connection 
with administrative and civil actions.
    (6) Performing internal audits of postal financial and nonfinancial 
operations.
    (7) Providing security and defense coordination for the Postal 
Service.
    (8) Maintaining liaison with investigative and law enforcement 
agencies, and all levels of government on matters of mutual interest.
    (c) The Postal Inspection Service is responsible for exercising the 
authority, and carrying out the duties, functions, and responsibilities 
assigned to the Office of the Inspector General by the Inspector General 
Act.
    (d) When the Chief Inspector determines it is necessary for carrying 
out the duties of Inspector General of the Postal Service, the Chief 
Inspector my employ independent legal counsel.

[56 FR 55823, Oct. 30, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 224.4  General Counsel.

    (a) General. The General Counsel heads the Law Department; the 
Government Relations Department reports to the General Counsel.
    (b) Law Department. The Law Department is responsible for:
    (1) Serving as legal advisor to the entire Postal Service and 
interpreting laws as they relate to the Postal Service, except as 
provided in Sec. 224.3(d).
    (2) Making rulings, giving advisory opinions, drafting or approving 
legal instruments, instituting and maintaining administrative 
proceedings, representing the Postal Service in administrative 
proceedings, and in judicial proceedings, as authorized, except as 
provided in Sec. 224.3(d).
    (3) Preparing the legislative program of the Postal Service and 
publishing regulations in the Federal Register.
    (4) Administering activities under the Tort Claims Act, and other 
personal injury and physical loss claims.
    (5)(i) Receiving service of petitions for review of a final agency 
order in an appropriate Federal circuit court of appeals. Any aggrieved 
person filing a petition for review of a decision of the Governors 
within 10 days of issuance of the Governors' decision must ensure that a 
court-stamped copy of the petition for review is received by the General 
Counsel within that 10-day period in order to qualify for participation 
in the random selection process established in 28 U.S.C. 2112(a) for 
determining the appropriate court of appeals to review an agency final 
order when petitions for review of that order are filed in more than one 
court of appeals.
    (ii) If the General Counsel receives two or more petitions filed in 
two or more United States Courts of Appeals for review of a decision by 
the Governors within ten days of the effective date of that action for 
the purpose of judicial review, the General Counsel will notify the U.S. 
Judicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation of any petitions that were 
received within the 10-day period, in accordance with the applicable 
rule of the panel.
    (iii) For the purpose of determining whether a petition for review 
has been received within the 10-day period under paragraph (b)(5)(ii) of 
this section, the petition shall be considered to be received on the 
date of delivery, if personally delivered. If the delivery is 
accomplished by mail, the date of receipt shall be the date noted on the 
return receipt card.
    (6) Acting as agent for the receipt of legal process on behalf of 
the Postal Service and the Postmaster General and other officials 
resulting from the performance of their official functions.
    (7) Administering the Ethical Conduct Program.
    (c) Government Relations Department. The Government Relations 
Department is responsible for:
    (1) Maintaining cooperative relationships among Congress, Federal 
agencies within the Executive Branch, the White House, and state and 
local government officials.
    (2) Advising postal officials on legislative or other policy matters 
in public areas involving congressional committees or individual members 
of Congress.
    (3) Maintaining liaison with members of Congress and their staffs to 
exchange information on specific legislation and Postal Service policies 
and operations.

[52 FR 46998, Dec. 11, 1987, as amended at 56 FR 785, Jan. 9, 1991; 56 
FR 55823, Oct. 30, 1991]

[[Page 46]]


<R05>
Sec. 224.5  Planning Department.

    The Planning Department is responsible for:
    (a) Forecasting trends and developments, both external and internal, 
which may have an impact on the Postal Service environment.
    (b) Assisting departments in developing plans in accordance with 
goals and objectives set by the Postmaster General and the Board of 
Governors.
    (c) Establishing and maintaining the planning calendar.
    (d) Coordinating the strategic planning process.
    (e) Assisting in the development of comprehensive and effective 
plans.
    (f) Identifying and evaluating economic, political, social, 
technical, and market trends and events.
    (g) Developing a projection of long-range business targets as a 
basis for setting goals and objectives.
    (h) Formulating alternative business strategies.
    (i) Conducting special economic studies.

[54 FR 29708, July 14, 1989]


<R03>
PART 225--ORGANIZATIONS REPORTING DIRECTLY TO THE DEPUTY POSTMASTER GENERAL--Table of Contents

<R05>


    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 203, 204, 401(2) 402, 403, 404, and 409.


<R05>
Sec. 225.1  Operations Support Group.

    The Operations Support Group is headed by an SAPMG. The group 
consists of three departments, each reporting to the SAPMG.
    (a) Delivery, Distribution, and Transportation Department. The 
Delivery, Distribution, and Transportation Department is responsible 
for:
    (1) Developing and implementing national policies, procedures, and 
short- and long-range operational plans for the collection, 
distribution, transportation, and delivery of all classes of domestic, 
international, and military mail.
    (2) Developing and implementing national policies, procedures, and 
short- and long-range operational plans for field retail operations.
    (3) Establishing and controlling national (inter-regional) 
distribution and transportation networks.
    (4) Establishing requirements and managing the acquisition and 
deployment of mail transport equipment.
    (5) Developing procurement policies for the transportation of mail.
    (6) Managing the development of policies and procedures to ensure 
the optimum use and benefits of automated equipment.
    (b) Operations Systems and Performance Department. The Operations 
Systems and Performance Department is responsible for:
    (1) Defining, operating, and maintaining the major operating 
performance management systems.
    (2) Setting goals, analyzing trends, and assessing performance in 
key operations areas.
    (3) Identifying and resolving operating problems.
    (4) Developing operating management systems, computer models, and 
new methods for distribution and delivery.
    (5) Directing the acquisition, deployment, maintenance, and disposal 
of postal vehicles.
    (6) Directing the maintenance and improvement of address information 
and related systems.
    (c) Engineering and Technical Support Department. The Engineering 
and Technical Support Department is responsible for:
    (1) Planning and approving all operating requirements and standards 
for mechanized and automated facilities.
    (2) Establishing national policy and programs for the maintenance of 
facilities and mail processing, customer services, and delivery services 
related mechanization.
    (3) Maintaining a technical and field support capacity for new and 
modified equipment and providing for the overhaul of major mail 
processing equipment.
    (d) The Regional Postmasters General report to the Deputy Postmaster 
General.

[54 FR 29708, July 14, 1989]

[[Page 47]]


<R03>
PART 226--GROUPS AND DEPARTMENTS REPORTING TO THE ASSOCIATE POSTMASTERS GENERAL--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
226.1  The Associate Postmaster General (Systems).
226.2  Facilities and Supply Group.
226.3  Human Resources Group.
226.4  Marketing and Communications Group.
226.5  Associate Postmaster General (International).

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 203, 204, 401(2), 402, 403, 404, and 409.

    Source: 52 FR 46999, Dec. 11, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 226.1  The Associate Postmaster General (Systems).

    The Associate Postmaster General (Systems) is responsible for 
managing groups, headed by an SAPMG, and departments which make up the 
support functions of the Postal Service.

[54 FR 29709, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 226.2  Facilities and Supply Group.

    (a) General. The Administrative Services Group consists of three 
departments headed by an Assistant Postmaster General and one department 
headed by the Judicial Officer.
    (b) Facilities Department. The Facilities Department is responsible 
for:
    (1) Designing, constructing, modifying, and repairing facilities.
    (2) Leasing, purchasing, managing, and disposing of real estate.
    (3) Developing policies, procedures, and new technology in support 
of facilities programs.
    (4) Maximizing the use of real estate assets.
    (c) Procurement and Supply Department. The Procurement and Supply 
Department is responsible for:
    (1) Developing, implementing, and reviewing procurement and 
contracting policies and procedures.
    (2) Developing, implementing, and reviewing warehousing and 
inventory of equipment and supplies.
    (3) Directing the day-to-day maintenance and repair of the 
headquarters building.
    (d) Information Resource Management Department. The Information 
Resource Management Department is responsible for:
    (1) Providing data processing support services including systems 
analysis and programming.
    (2) Establishing policy and procedures on the use of computers and 
telecommunications.
    (3) Guiding the development of information systems.
    (4) Managing a national data and voice communications systems.
    (5) Providing payroll processing and distribution services and 
general accounting services.
    (6) Providing technical solutions to information requirements.
    (e) Judicial Officer.
    (1) The Judicial Officer is responsible for:
    (i) The performance of quasi-judicial duties and the issuance of 
final decisions and orders.
    (ii) Serving as the agency for the purposes of the requirements of 
the Administrative Procedure Act.
    (iii) Presiding at the reception of evidence as provided in rules of 
practice.
    (iv) Revising or amending the rules governing eligibility to 
practice before the Postal Service, revising or amending Postal Service 
rules of practice governing proceedings conducted under the 
Administrative Procedure Act, and issuing and revising rules of practice 
for other proceedings.
    (v) Serving as Chairman of the Board of Contract Appeals and 
performing the functions of the agency head under the Contract Disputes 
Act of 1978, as amended.
    (vi) Administratively supervising Administrative Law Judges and 
hearing appeals from their decisions.
    (2) Board of Contract Appeals is responsible for processing, hearing 
and issuing final agency decisions in connection with contract disputes.
    (3) Office of Administrative Law Judges. Administrative Law Judges 
are responsible for presiding at administrative hearings as delegated by 
the Judicial Officer.

[52 FR 46999, Dec. 11, 1987; 54 FR 29709, July 14, 1989]

[[Page 48]]


<R05>
Sec. 226.3  Human Resources Group.

    (a) General. The Human Resources Group consists of three 
departments, each reporting to the SAPMG.
    (b) Employee Relations Department. The Employee Relations Department 
is responsible for:
    (1) Managing programs and policies for new and revised organization 
structures, staffing patterns, and job descriptions.
    (2) Establishing outside recruitment and selection and internal 
promotion procedures.
    (3) Managing all employee compensation and benefits programs and 
policies.
    (4) Administering all equal employment opportunity and affirmative 
action programs.
    (5) Managing medical, safety, and injury compensation programs and 
policies.
    (c) Labor Relations Department. The Labor Relations Department is 
responsible for:
    (1) Negotiating and interpreting collective bargaining agreements.
    (2) Coordinating programs that affect bargaining unit employees.
    (3) Developing policies and procedures for administering the 
national grievance and arbitration programs.
    (4) Administering programs to improve the quality of working life in 
the Postal Service.
    (d) Training and Development Department. The Training and 
Development Department is responsible for:
    (1) Developing all course materials for craft, supervisory, and 
management employees training.
    (2) Providing training for employees at the Technical Training 
Center and the William F. Bolger Management Academy, and at other 
training centers.
    (3) Designing in-service employee development programs.

[52 FR 46999, Dec. 11, 1987, as amended at 54 FR 29709, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 226.4   Marketing and Communications Group.

    (a) General. The Marketing and Communications Group is headed by an 
SAPMG. The group consists of three departments, each reporting to the 
SAPMG.
    (b) Marketing Department. The Marketing Department is responsible 
for:
    (1) Market research, market analysis, customer feedback, and 
marketing management information system support.
    (2) Product analysis, planning, development, and program management 
activities, including the development of advertising and sales promotion 
support.
    (3) Development and management of sales and sales promotion programs 
that support implementation by the field marketing organization of 
programs designed for principal customer segments of national, key, 
major, and local accounts.
    (c) Communications Department. The Communications Department is 
responsible for:
    (1) Planning, approving, and managing public affairs programs.
    (2) Providing information to employees through in-house publication 
of newsletters, posters, films, videotapes, and other periodicals.
    (3) Providing senior management with assistance in the development 
and production of presentations and speeches.
    (d) Philatelic and Retail Services Department. The Philatelic and 
Retail Services Department is responsible for:
    (1) Designing, manufacturing, and distributing postage stamps and 
stationery items.
    (2) Establishing and implementing philatelic marketing programs.
    (3) Managing mail order services for philatelic products.
    (4) Managing special programs to promote philately and philatelic 
products and services.
    (5) Establishing policy, business strategy, and procedures for the 
retail sale of postal services, products, and postage and the acceptance 
of mail at retail outlets.
    (e) Technology Resource Department. The Technology Resource 
Department is headed by the Consumer Advocate who reports to the 
Associate Postmaster General, and is responsible for:
    (1) Developing long-term technology development plans to meet 
changing technological trends and developments.

[[Page 49]]

    (2) Managing research and development directed to the application of 
new concepts to Postal Service functions.
    (3) Monitoring the technological interaction between the Postal 
Service and the outside environment. Responding to customer inquiries 
and complaints regarding postal products and services.
    (f) Consumer Affairs Department. The Consumer Affairs Department is 
headed by the Consumer Advocate who reports to the Associate Postmaster 
General (Systems), and is responsible for:
    (1) Responding to customer inquiries and complaints regarding postal 
products and services.
    (2) Developing, with the Communications Department, programs to 
inform the public on mailing programs, procedures, and policies.
    (3) Tracking service problems and identifying trends to resolve 
operating programs.

[52 FR 46999, Dec. 11, 1987, as amended at 54 FR 29709, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 226.5  Associate Postmaster General (International).

    (a) General. The Associate Postmaster General (International) is 
responsible for directing activities designed to increase international 
postal business, and for the relationship with foreign postal 
administrations.
    (b) International Postal Affairs Department. The International 
Postal Affairs Department reports to the Associate Postmaster General 
(International) and is responsible for:
    (1) Representing the United States in the Universal Postal Union 
(UPU) and the Postal Union of the Americas and Spain (PUAS).
    (2) Providing liaison with all foreign postal administrations.
    (3) Negotiating bilateral and multilateral postal treaties and 
agreements with foreign governments.
    (4) Providing policy guidance on all aspects of international postal 
affairs.

[54 FR 29709, July 14, 1989]


<R03>
PART 227--HEADQUARTERS RELATED FIELD UNITS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
227.1  General.
227.2  Inspection Service.
227.3  Procurement and Supply Department.
227.4  Engineering and Technical Support Department.
227.5  Employee Relations Department.
227.6  Training and Development Department.
227.7  Information Resource Management Department.
227.8  Operations Systems and Performance Department.
227.9  General Counsel.
227.10  Controller Department.
227.11  Philatelic and Retail Services Department.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401, 402, 403, and 404.

    Source: 52 FR 47000, Dec. 11,1987, unless otherwise noted


<R05>
Sec. 227.1  General.

    Headquarters Related Field Units are typically single function 
organizations that report directly to Headquarters and serve the entire 
Postal Service.

[52 FR 47000, Dec. 11, 1987, as amended at 54 FR 29709, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 227.2  Inspection Service.

    (a) General. The Inspection Service is divided into regional and 
divisional entities.
    (b) Inspection Service--Region. The Inspection Service at the 
regional level is responsible for:
    (1) Protecting the mails, enforcement of Postal laws, facility and 
employee security, and internal auditing.
    (2) Managing the accomplishment of national programs and policies.
    (3) Coordinating with other law enforcement organizations on 
security, audit, and other law enforcement matters.
    (c) Inspection Service--Division. The Inspection Service at the 
division level is responsible for all inspection and investigation 
activities within the division area served.

[52 FR 47000, Dec. 11, 1987, as amended at 54 FR 29709, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 227.3  Procurement and Supply Department.

    (a) Materiel Distribution Centers. There are two materiel 
distribution centers, one at Somerville, New Jersey, and one at Topeka, 
Kansas. Materiel Distribution Centers are responsible for:

[[Page 50]]

    (1) Procuring, storing, and issuing basic supplies for use in all 
postal facilities.
    (2) Arranging for the transportation of supplies to facilities.
    (b) Mail Equipment Shop. The Mail Equipment Shop, located in 
Washington, DC, is responsible for:
    (1) Manufacturing mail bags, sacks, and pouches.
    (2) Manufacturing locks and keys.
    (3) Manufacturing hardware items used for mail security and for 
customer service lobby equipment.

[54 FR 29709, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 227.4  Engineering and Technical Support Department.

    (a) Maintenance Technical Support Center (MTSC). The Maintenance 
Technical Support Center, located in Norman, OK, is responsible for:
    (1) Developing policies, programs, methods, and standards for the 
maintenance of mail processing equipment.
    (2) Issuing guidelines to field managers on building systems and 
mail processing equipment maintenance procedures.
    (b) Engineering and Development Center. The Engineering and 
Development Center, located in Merrifield, Virginia, is responsible for:
    (1) Providing engineering and near-term development support for 
letter mail equipment, packaged mail equipment, delivery and retail 
equipment, and associated systems and software.
    (2) Directing near-term development and modifications to equipment 
and components to increase efficiency, reliability, and to improve 
safety.
    (3) Conducting tests to evaluate new equipment for Postal service 
use; performing failure analyses on equipment and components.
    (4) Providing applied engineering to customize commercial technology 
and equipment for postal use.

[54 FR 29710, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 227.5  Employee Relations Department.

    National Test Administration Center (NTAC). The National Test 
Administration Center, located in Alexandria, VA, is responsible for:
    (a) Receipt and processing of requests to give examinations.
    (b) Preparing and distributing registers of eligible applicants and 
notices of ratings.

[54 FR 29710, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 227.6  Training and Development Department.

    (a) Technical Training Center. The Technical Training Center, 
located in Norman, OK, is responsible for:
    (1) Developing training materials for craft employees in maintenance 
and related crafts.
    (2) Performing training for technical employees.
    (b) William F. Bolger Management Academy. The William F. Bolger 
Management Academy, located in Potomac, MD, is responsible for:
    (1) Developing training materials for supervisors, postmasters, and 
other managerial employees.
    (2) Performing training for managerial employees.

[54 FR 29710, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 227.7  Information Resource Management Department.

    (a) National Information Systems Support Center. The National 
Information Systems Support Center, located in Raleigh, NC, is 
responsible for:
    (1) Designing new large-scale automated systems and writing the 
supporting program code.
    (2) Managing the nationwide voice and data communications system.
    (b) Postal Data Centers. The Postal Data Centers, located in 
Minneapolis, MN, New York, NY, St. Louis, MO, San Mateo, CA, and Wilkes-
Barre, PA, are responsible for:
    (1) Systems analysis, computer programming, and other systems 
development activities.
    (2) Accounting, accounts payable, payroll, money order disbursing, 
claims and loss settlement, and other financial services.
    (3) Data processing and related computer services.

[54 FR 29710, July 14, 1989]

[[Page 51]]


<R05>
Sec. 227.8  Operations Systems and Performance Department.

    Address Information Center. The Address Information Center, located 
in Memphis, TN, is responsible for:
    (a) Developing policies for and providing technical guidance and 
computer support to field address Information Systems units and field 
Computerized Forwarding System units.
    (b) Providing nationwide service and technical guidance for postal 
customers requiring support related to address information systems.

[54 FR 29710, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 227.9  General Counsel.

    Regional Counsels. The Regional Counsels are responsible for 
providing legal representation services within a regional geographic 
area, including representation before the Board of Contract Appeals, 
liaison with U.S. Attorneys on contract, real estate, and tort 
litigation, as well as personnel related matters, such as labor/
management relations, Equal Employment Opportunity, Merit Systems 
Protection Board, National Labor Relations Board, and district court 
actions.

[54 FR 29710, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 227.10  Controller Department.

    International Accounts Center. The International Accounts Center, 
located in New York, NY, is responsible for reviewing, approving, 
settling, and auditing international mail handling and transportation 
accounts for contracts and agreements entered into by the Postal 
service.

[54 FR 29710, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 227.11  Philatelic and Retail Services Department.

    (a) Philatelic Units. The Philatelic Sales Division, located in 
Merrifield, VA, is a large mail and telephone order sales operation for 
stamps and other philatelic products; it is supported by an order 
fulfillment unit in Kansas City, MO, which is responsible for the 
filling and shipping of domestic and international mail orders for 
philatelic products.
    (b) Stamped Envelope Unit. The Stamped Envelope Unit, located in 
Williamsburg, PA, processes, distributes, and certifies billing or 
postmaster accountability for direct orders of all stamped envelope 
products marketed by the Postal service.

[54 FR 29710, July 14, 1989]


<R03>
PART 228--SERVICE CENTERS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
228.1  General.
228.2  Engineering and Technical Support Department--Maintenance 
          Overhaul and Technical Service Centers (MOTSC).
228.3  Delivery, Distribution, and Transportation Department--
          Transportation Management Service Centers (TMSC).
228.4  Facilities Department--Facilities Service Centers.
228.5  Procurement and Supply Department--Procurement and Materiel 
          Management Service Centers.
228.6  Rates and Classification Department.
228.7  Human Resources Group.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401, 402, 403, and 404.

    Source: 52 FR 47001, Dec. 11, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 228.1  General.

    Service Centers typically serve a regional area only and report to 
headquarters, providing technical guidance and support to field division 
employees and carrying out the day-to-day responsibilities of a 
function.


<R05>
Sec. 228.2  Engineering and Technical Support Department--Maintenance Overhaul and Technical Service Centers (MOTSC).

    Maintenance Overhaul and Technical Service Centers are responsible 
for:
    (a) Refurbishing mail processing equipment such as letter sorting 
machines, facer cancellers, and related equipment.
    (b) Providing technical advice and guidance to field maintenance 
employees on procedures and practices to follow.

[54 FR 29710, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 228.3  Delivery, Distribution, and Transportation Department--Transportation Management Service Centers (TMSC).

    Transportation Management Service Centers are responsible for:

[[Page 52]]

    (a) Procuring mail transportation services between mail processing 
centers.
    (b) Controlling the inventory of empty mail equipment.
    (c) Coordinating the movement of mail between mail processing 
centers, bulk mail centers (BMCs), management sectional centers (MSCs), 
and field divisions.

[54 FR 29710, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 228.4  Facilities Department--Facilities Service Centers.

    Facilities Service Centers are responsible for:
    (a) Developing functional design specifications for new or altered 
facilities.
    (b) Investigating and evaluating sites for proposed postal 
facilities.
    (c) Purchasing, leasing, disposing of, and managing real estate and 
facilities.
    (d) Contracting for the design and construction of facilities.

[54 FR 29710, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 228.5  Procurement and Supply Department--Procurement and Materiel Management Service Centers.

    Procurement and Materiel Management Service Centers are responsible 
for:
    (a) Contracting for supplies, services, and equipment.
    (b) Maintaining systems for inventorying equipment and supplies.

[54 FR 29711, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 228.6  Rates and Classification Department.

    Rates and Classification Service Centers are responsible for:
    (a) Managing, for a geographic area, the rates and classification 
activities related to rates schedules, mail classification, and 
statistical systems, including guiding and monitoring bulk mail 
acceptance, mailing requirements, data collection programs in divisions, 
and providing classification rulings.
    (b) Providing decisions on authorizations and rulings that enable 
customers to exercise mailing privileges for various classes of mail and 
service.

[54 FR 29711, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 228.7  Human Resources Group.

    Human Resources Service Centers are responsible for:
    (a) Processing personnel actions and maintaining personnel records 
for the regional office and the service centers.
    (b) Implementing the Human Resources Information System (HRIS) in 
the field and training all users.
    (c) Providing administrative support, technical guidance, and case 
processing for Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO), Merit Systems 
Protection Board (MSPB), and nonbargaining appeals.
    (d) Overseeing all safety and health programs and issues, and 
responding to incidents or inquiries involving industrial hygiene.
    (e) Coordinating the scheduling of all arbitration cases with 
arbitrators, union representatives, and field employees.

[54 FR 29711, July 14, 1989]


<R03>
PART 229--FIELD ORGANIZATIONS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
229.1  Regions.
229.2  Field Divisions.
229.3  Management Sectional Centers (MSCs).
229.4  Other Field Organizations.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401, 402, 403, and 404.

    Source: 52 FR 47002, Dec. 11, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 229.1  Regions.

    (a) General. The Regions are responsible for monitoring the 
performance of postal operations; assessing long-term solutions to 
operating problems; and performing long-range operational planning.
    (b) Functional Units. Each region is headed by a Regional Postmaster 
General who reports to the Deputy Postmaster General. Each region is 
organized into five functions: Finance, Human Resources, Marketing and 
Communications, Operations Support, and Planning, as follows:
    (1) Finance is responsible for all accounting, budgeting, financial 
analysis, and management information programs.

[[Page 53]]

    (2) Human Resources is responsible for all employee and labor 
relations programs.
    (3) Marketing and Communications is responsible for commercial 
accounts and merchandising programs, market and product analysis, and 
for providing information to the public and employees.
    (4) Operations Support is responsible for operations planning and 
monitoring the performance of the mail processing network.
    (5) Planning is responsible for long-range planning for the region 
and for support services to the regional building.
    (c) Regional areas--(1) Central region. The headquarters for the 
Central Region is in Chicago, IL. The regional area is made up of the 
states of Colorado, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, 
Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota, Wisconsin, 
and Wyoming.
    (2) Eastern region. The headquarters for the Eastern Region is in 
Philadelphia, PA. The regional area is made of the states of Delaware, 
Kentucky, Maryland, New Jersey (ZIP Code areas 080-084, 189, 193 and 
194), North Carolina, Ohio, South Carolina (except ZIP Code areas 298 
and 299), Virginia, West Virginia and Washington, DC.
    (3) Northeast region. The headquarters for the Northeast Region is 
in Windsor, CT. The regional area is made up of the states of 
Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Jersey (ZIP Code areas 074-079 
and 085-089) New York, Rhode Island, Vermont and Puerto Rico.
    (4) Southern region. The headquarters for the Southern Region is in 
Memphis, TN. The regional area is made up of the states of Alabama, 
Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, Oklahoma, South 
Carolina (ZIP Code areas 298 and 299), Tennessee and Texas (except ZIP 
Code areas 797-799).
    (5) Western region. The headquarters for the Western Region is in 
San Bruno, CA. The regional area is made up of the states of Alaska, 
Arizona, California, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, 
Texas (ZIP areas 797-799), Utah and Washington.

[52 FR 47002, Dec. 11, 1987, as amended at 54 FR 29711, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 229.2  Field Divisions.

    (a) General. The field divisions are responsible for the day-to-day 
management of all operations and facilities within a geographic area. 
Each field division is headed by a Field Division General Manager/
Postmaster who reports to the Regional Postmaster General.
    (b) Functional Units. Each division is organized into seven 
functions: Controller, City Operations, Operations Support, Marketing 
and Communications, Human Resources, Support Services, and Field 
Operations. Responsibilities are as follows:
    (1) The Controller is responsible for the operation of all 
management information systems, accounting services, timekeeping, 
financial analysis, auditing, compliance, and statistical programs.
    (2) City Operations is responsible for all mail processing within 
the host Field Division facility, including stations and branches and 
air mail operations; fleet operations; and plant and equipment 
engineering.
    (3) Operations Support is responsible for providing staff support to 
the operations function. The functions in operation support include 
logistics and distribution systems management, industrial engineering, 
address information programs, delivery services programs and maintenance 
support.
    (4) Marketing and Communications plans and implements Postal Service 
marketing strategies, account management, technical sales support, 
retail marketing, communications programs, merchandising and sales 
information systems, and employee communications and community 
relations. It directs the consumer affairs program, provides marketing 
data to operations and other functional areas on customer demand, and 
recommends locations of retail facilities, hours of operation, 
collection boxes, and similar retail and delivery programs.
    (5) Human Resources is responsible for labor relations, EEO 
complaint processing, employment and development, training, compensation 
and staffing, affirmative action, and safety and health.
    (6) Support Services is responsible for procurement; materiel 
management;

[[Page 54]]

purchase, lease, and management of real estate and facilities; and 
design and construction of new and altered facilities.
    (7) Field Operations is responsible for the management and 
evaluation of grade 24 and below associate offices that report to the 
host division. This includes the development of operating budgets and 
disbursement of funds; investigation and correction of operational, 
service, budget, productivity and efficiency problems; and providing 
technical assistance.

[52 FR 47002, Dec. 11, 1987, as amended at 54 FR 29711, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 229.3  Management Sectional Centers (MSCs).

    (a) General. Each Management Sectional Center is headed by an MSC 
Manager/Postmaster who reports to a Field Division General Manager/
Postmaster.
    (b) Functional Units. Each Management Sectional Center is organized 
into six functions: Finance, City Operations, Operations Services, 
Marketing, Human Resources, and Field Operations, as follows:
    (1) Finance is responsible for the operation of all management 
information systems, accounting and budget, timekeeping, financial 
analysis, statistical programs, procurement and office services, 
auditing, and compliance.
    (2) City Operations is responsible for all mail processing within 
the MSC facility including stations and branches and air mail 
operations; plant and equipment engineering; fleet operations; vehicle 
operations and maintenance.
    (3) Operations Services is responsible for providing staff support 
to the operations function. The primary functions in operations services 
include quality control, logistics, address information systems, 
delivery services, and industrial engineering.
    (4) Marketing plans and implements Postal Service marketing 
strategies, account management, technical sales support, retail 
marketing, merchandising and sales information systems. It provides 
marketing data to operations and other functional areas on customer 
demand, and recommends locations of retail facilities, hours of 
operation, collection boxes, and similar retail and delivery programs.
    (5) Human Resources is responsible for labor relations, EEO 
complaint processing, employment and development, training, compensation 
and staffing, affirmative action, and safety and health.
    (6) Field Operations is responsible for the management and 
evaluation of associate offices that report to the Management Sectional 
Center. This includes the development of operating budgets and 
disbursement of funds; investigation and correction of operational, 
service, budget, productivity and efficiency problems; and providing 
technical assistance. Larger associate offices report to the MSC 
Manager/Postmaster as follows:
    (i) MSC V--Associate Office, level 22 and above.
    (ii) MSC IV--Associate Office, level 21 and above.
    (iii) MSC III--Associate Office, level 20 and above.

[54 FR 29711, July 14, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 229.4  Other Field Organizations.

    (a) Bulk Mail Centers (BMCs). Bulk Mail Centers serve a specific 
geographic area and are headed by a manager who reports to the Field 
Division General Manager/Postmaster. BMCs are responsible for processing 
certain types of second- and third-class mail in bulk form and parcel 
post mail, normally in bulk or piece form.
    (b) Associate Offices. Associate offices are headed by a postmaster 
who reports to a Director, Field Operations, in an MSC or a field 
division. Associate offices are responsible for the receipt, delivery, 
and dispatch of all classes of mail for geographic areas normally 
encompassing the boundaries of a city or town.

[54 FR 29711, July 14, 1989]


<R03>
Inspection Service Requirements--Table of Contents

<R05>



<R03>
PART 231--PROTECTION OF POST OFFICES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
231.1  Responsibility.
231.2  Security Control Officer.

[[Page 55]]


<R05>
Sec. 231.1   Responsibility.

    (a) The protection of mail, postal funds, and property is a 
responsibility of every postal employee.
    (b) The Chief Postal Inspector is designated as the Security Officer 
for the U.S. Postal Service. That official is responsible for the 
issuance of instructions and regulations pertaining to security 
requirements within the Postal Service.

(39 U.S.C. 401)

[36 FR 4762, Mar. 12, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 231.2   Security Control Officer.

    The postmaster or a supervisor designated by the postmaster shall 
act as Security Control Officer for each post office. The Security 
Control Officer shall be responsible for the general security of the 
post office, its stations and branches, in accordance with rules and 
regulations issued by the Chief Postal Inspector.

(39 U.S.C. 401)

[36 FR 4762, Mar. 12, 1971]


<R03>
PART 232--CONDUCT ON POSTAL PROPERTY--Table of Contents

<R05>


    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401, 403(b)(3), 404(a)(7); 40 U.S.C. 318, 318a, 
318b, 318c, sec. 613, Treasury, Postal Service, and General Government 
Appropriations Act, 1992, Pub. L. 102-141, 18 U.S.C. 13, 3061; 21 U.S.C. 
802, 844.


<R05>
Sec. 232.1   Conduct on postal property.

    (a) Applicability. This section applies to all real property under 
the charge and control of the Postal Service, to all tenant agencies, 
and to all persons entering in or on such property. This section shall 
be posted and kept posted at a conspicuous place on all such property.
    (b) Inspection, recording presence. (1) Purses, briefcases, and 
other containers brought into, while on, or being removed from the 
property are subject to inspection. However, items brought directly to a 
postal facility's customer mailing acceptance area and deposited in the 
mail are not subject to inspection, except as provided by section 115 of 
the Domestic Mail Manual. A person arrested for violation of this 
section may be searched incident to that arrest.
    (2) Vehicles and their contents brought into, while on, or being 
removed from restricted nonpublic areas are subject to inspection. A 
prominently displayed sign shall advise in advance that vehicles and 
their contents are subject to inspection when entering the restricted 
nonpublic area, while in the confines of the area, or when leaving the 
area. Persons entering these areas who object and refuse to consent to 
the inspection of the vehicle, its contents, or both, may be denied 
entry; after entering the area without objection, consent shall be 
implied. A full search of a person and any vehicle driven or occupied by 
the person may accompany an arrest.
    (3) Except as otherwise ordered, properties must be closed to the 
public after normal business hours. Properties also may be closed to the 
public in emergency situations and at such other times as may be 
necessary for the orderly conduct of business. Admission to properties 
during periods when such properties are closed to the public may be 
limited to authorized individuals who may be required to sign the 
register and display identification documents when requested by security 
force personnel or other authorized individuals.
    (c) Preservation of property. Improperly disposing of rubbish, 
spitting, creating any hazard to persons or things, throwing articles of 
any kind from a building, climbing upon the roof or any part of a 
building, or willfully destroying, damaging, or removing any property or 
any part thereof, is prohibited.
    (d) Conformity with signs and directions. All persons in and on 
property shall comply with official signs of a prohibitory or directory 
nature, and with the directions of security force personnel or other 
authorized individuals.
    (e) Disturbances. Disorderly conduct, or conduct which creates loud 
and unusual noise, or which obstructs the usual use of entrances, 
foyers, corridors, offices, elevators, stairways, and parking lots, or 
which otherwise tends to impede or disturb the public employees in the 
performance of their duties, or which otherwise impedes or

[[Page 56]]

disturbs the general public in transacting business or obtaining the 
services provided on property, is prohibited.
    (f) Gambling. Participating in games for money or other personal 
property, the operation of gambling devices, the conduct of a lottery or 
pool, or the selling or purchasing of lottery tickets, is prohibited on 
postal premises. This prohibition does not apply to the vending or 
exchange of State Lottery tickets at vending facilities operated by 
licensed blind persons where such lotteries are authorized by state law. 
(See Domestic Mail Manual 123.351 and 123.42; Administrative Support 
Manual 221.42; Regional Instructions, Part 782, section IV G 2c.)
    (g) Alcoholic beverages and drugs. A person under the influence of 
an alcoholic beverage or any drug which has been defined as a 
``controlled substance'' may not enter postal property or operate a 
motor vehicle on postal property. The possession, sale, or use of any 
``controlled substance'' (except when permitted by law) or the sale or 
use of any alcoholic beverage (except as authorized by the Postmaster 
General or designee) on postal premises is prohibited. The term 
``controlled substance'' is defined in section 802 of title 21 U.S.C.
    (h) Soliciting, electioneering, collecting debts, vending, and 
advertising. (1) Soliciting alms and contributions, campaigning for 
election to any public office, collecting private debts, commercial 
soliciting and vending, and displaying or distributing commercial 
advertising on postal premises are prohibited. This prohibition does not 
apply to:
    (i) Commercial activities performed under contract with the Postal 
Service or pursuant to the provisions of the Randolph-Sheppard Act;
    (ii) Posting notices on bulletin boards as authorized in 
Sec. 243.2(a) of this chapter;
    (iii) The solicitation of Postal Service and other Federal military 
and civilian personnel for contributions by recognized agencies as 
authorized by the Manual on Fund Raising Within the the Federal Service, 
issued by the Chairman of the U.S. Civil Service Commission under 
Executive Order 10927 of March 13, 1961.
    (2) Solicitations and other actions which are prohibited by 
paragraph (h)(1) of this section when conducted on Postal Service 
property should not be directed by mail or telephone to postal employees 
on Postal Service property. The Postal Service will not accept or 
distribute mail or accept telephone calls directed to its employees 
which are believed to be contrary to paragraph (h)(1) of this section.
    (i) Photographs for news, advertising, or commercial purposes. 
Except as prohibited by official signs or the directions of security 
force personnel or other authorized personnel, or a Federal court order 
or rule, photographs for news purposes may be taken in entrances, 
lobbies, foyers, corridors, or auditoriums when used for public 
meetings. Other photographs may be taken only with the permission of the 
local postmaster or installation head.
    (j) Dogs and other animals. Dogs, except seeing-eye dogs, and other 
animals, shall not be brought upon property for other than official 
purposes.
    (k) Vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
    (1) Drivers of all vehicles in or on property shall be in possession 
of a current and valid state or territory issued driver's license and 
vehicle registration, and the vehicle shall display all current and 
valid tags and licenses required by the jurisdiction in which it is 
registered.
    (2) Drivers who have had their privilege or license to drive 
suspended or revoked by any state or territory shall not drive any 
vehicle in or on property during such period of suspension or 
revocation.
    (3) Drivers of all vehicles in or on property shall drive in a 
careful and safe manner at all times and shall comply with the signals 
and directions of security force personnel, other authorized 
individuals, and all posted traffic signs.
    (4) The blocking of entrances, driveways, walks, loading platforms, 
or fire hydrants in or on property is prohibited.
    (5) Parking without authority, parking in unauthorized locations or 
in locations reserved for other persons, or continuously in excess of 18 
hours

[[Page 57]]

without permission, or contrary to the direction of posted signs is 
prohibited. This section may be supplemented by the postmaster or 
installation head from time to time by the issuance and posting of 
specific traffic directives as may be required. When so issued and 
posted such directives shall have the same force and effect as if made a 
part hereof.
    (l) Weapons and explosives. No person while on property shall carry 
firearms, other dangerous or deadly weapons, or explosives, either 
openly or concealed, except for official purposes.
    (m) Nondiscrimination. There must be no discrimination by 
segregation or otherwise against any person or persons because of race, 
color, religion, national origin, sex, age (persons 40 years of age or 
older are protected), reprisal (discrimination against a person for 
having filed or for having participated in the processing of an EEO 
complaint--29 CFR 1613.26l-262), or physical or mental handicap, in 
furnishing, or by refusing to furnish to such person or persons the use 
of any facility of a public nature, including all services, privileges, 
accommodations, and activities provided on postal property.
    (n) Conduct with regard to meetings of the Board of Governors. (1) 
Without the permission of the chairman no person may participate in, 
film, televise, or broadcast any portion of any meeting of the Board or 
any subdivision or committee of the Board. Any person may electronically 
record or photograph a meeting, as long as that action does not tend to 
impede or disturb the members of the Board in the performance of their 
duties, or members of the public while attempting to attend or observe a 
meeting.
    (2) Disorderly conduct, or conduct which creates loud or unusual 
noise, obstructs the ordinary use of entrances, foyers, corridors, 
offices, meeting rooms, elevators, stairways, or parking lots, or 
otherwise tends to impede or disturb the members of the Board in the 
performance of their duties, or members of the public while attempting 
to attend or observe a meeting of the Board or of any subdivision, or 
committee of the Board, is prohibited.
    (3) Any person who violates paragraph (n) (1) or (2) of this section 
may, in addition to being subject to the penalties prescribed in 
paragraph (p) of this section, be removed from and barred from 
reentering postal property during the meeting with respect to which the 
violation occurred.
    (4) A copy of the rules of this section governing conduct on postal 
property, including the rules of this paragraph appropriately 
highlighted, shall be posted in prominent locations at the public 
entrances to postal property and outside the meeting room at any meeting 
of the Board of Governors or of any subdivision or committee of the 
Board.
    (o)  Depositing literature. Depositing or posting handbills, flyers, 
pamphlets, signs, poster, placards, or other literature, except official 
postal and other Governmental notices and announcements, on the grounds, 
walks, driveways, parking and maneuvering areas, exteriors of buildings 
and other structures, or on the floors, walls, stairs, racks, counters, 
desks, writing tables, window-ledges, or furnishings in interior public 
areas on postal premises, is prohibited. This prohibition does not apply 
to:
    (1) Posting notices on bulletin boards as authorized in 
Sec. 243.2(a) of this chapter;
    (2) Interior space assigned to tenants for their exclusive use;
    (3) Posting of notices by U.S. Government-related organizations such 
as the Inaugural Committee as defined in 36 U.S.C. 721.
    (p) Penalties and other law. (1) Alleged violations of these rules 
and regulations are heard, and the penalties prescribed herein are 
imposed, either in a Federal district court or by a Federal magistrate 
in accordance with applicable court rules. Questions regarding such 
rules should be directed to the regional counsel for the region 
involved.
    (2) Whoever shall be found guilty of violating the rules and 
regulations in this section while on property under the charge and 
control of the Postal Service is subject to fine of not more than $50 or 
imprisonment of not more than 30 days, or both. Nothing contained in 
these rules and regulations shall be construed to abrogate any other 
Federal laws or regulations of

[[Page 58]]

any State and local laws and regulations applicable to any area in which 
the property is situated.
    (q) Enforcement. (1) Members of the U.S. Postal Service security 
force shall exercise the powers of special policemen provided by 40 
U.S.C. 318 and shall be responsible for enforcing the regulations in 
this section in a manner that will protect Postal Service property.
    (2) Local postmasters and installation heads may, pursuant to 40 
U.S.C. 318b and with the approval of the chief postal inspector or his 
designee, enter into agreements with State and local enforcement 
agencies to insure that these rules and regulations are enforced in a 
manner that will protect Postal Service property.
    (3) Postal Inspectors may likewise enforce regulations in this 
section.

[37 FR 24346, Nov. 16, 1972, as amended at 38 FR 27824, Oct. 9, 1973; 41 
FR 23955, June 14, 1976; 42 FR 17443, Apr. 1, 1977; 43 FR 38825, Aug. 
31, 1978; 46 FR 898, Jan. 5, 1981. Redesignated and amended at 46 FR 
34330, July 1, 1981; 47 FR 32113, July 26, 1982; 53 FR 29460, Aug. 5, 
1988; 54 FR 20527, May 12, 1989; 57 FR 36903, Aug. 17, 1993; 57 FR 
38443, Aug. 25, 1992]


<R03>
PART 233--INSPECTION SERVICE/INSPECTOR GENERAL AUTHORITY--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
233.1  Arrest and investigative powers of Postal Inspectors.
233.2  Circulars and rewards.
233.3  Mail covers.
233.4  Withdrawal of mail privileges.
233.5  Requesting financial records from a financial institution.
233.6  Test purchases under 39 U.S.C. 3005(e).
233.7  Forfeiture authority and procedures.
233.8  Expedited forfeiture proceedings for property seized for 
          administrative forfeiture involving controlled substances in 
          personal use quantities.
233.9  Expedited release of conveyances being forfeited in a judicial 
          forfeiture proceeding for a drug-related offense.
233.10  Notice provisions.
233.11  Mail reasonably suspected of being dangerous to persons or 
          property.
233.12  Civil penalties.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 101, 401, 402, 403, 404, 406, 410, 411, 
3005(e)(1); 12 U.S.C. 3401-3422; 18 U.S.C. 981, 1956, 1957, 2254, 3061; 
21 U.S.C. 881; Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended (Pub. L. No. 
95-452, as amended), 5 U.S.C. App. 3.


<R05>
Sec. 233.1  Arrest and investigative powers of Postal Inspectors.

    (a) Authorization. Postal Inspectors are authorized to perform the 
following functions in connection with their official duties:
    (1) Serve warrants and subpoenas issued under the authority of the 
United States;
    (2) Make arrests without warrant for offenses against the United 
States committed in their presence;
    (3) Make arrests without warrant for felonies cognizable under the 
laws of the United States if they have reasonable grounds to believe 
that the person to be arrested has committed or is committing such a 
felony;
    (4) Carry firearms; and
    (5) Make seizures of property as provided by law.
    (b) Limitations. The powers granted by paragraph (a) of this section 
shall be exercised only--
    (1) In the enforcement of laws regarding property in the custody of 
the Postal Service, property of the Postal Service, the use of the 
mails, and other postal offenses; and
    (2) To the extent authorized by the Attorney General pursuant to 
agreement between the Attorney General and the Postal Service, in the 
enforcement of other laws of the United States, if the Attorney General 
determines that the violation of such laws will have a detrimental 
effect upon the operations of the Postal Service.
    (c) Issuance of subpoenas. (1) In accordance with part 273 of this 
chapter, the Chief Postal Inspector may issue subpoenas under the 
Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act.
    (2) In accordance with the Inspector General Act of 1978, the Chief 
Postal Inspector may issue subpoenas to persons or entities other than 
Federal agencies for the production of information, documents, reports, 
answers, records, accounts, papers, and other data and documentary 
evidence necessary in the performance of functions assigned by the 
Inspector General Act.
    (3) The Chief Postal Inspector hereby delegates authority to sign 
and issue

[[Page 59]]

administrative subpoenas to the following officials: Deputy Chief 
Inspectors; Managers, Inspection Service Operations Support Group; and 
Inspector in Charge--Internal Affairs.
    (4) Administrative subpoenas may be served by delivering a copy to a 
person or by mailing a copy to his or her last known address. For the 
purposes of this provision, delivery of a copy includes handing it to 
the party or leaving it at the party's office or residence with a person 
of suitable age and discretion employed or residing therein. Service by 
mail is complete upon mailing.
    (d) In conducting any investigation or audit, Postal Inspectors are 
authorized to accept, maintain custody of, and deliver mail.

[36 FR 4762, Mar. 12, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 19124, July 18, 1973. 
Redesignated at 46 FR 34330, July 1, 1981; 52 FR 12901, Apr. 20, 1987; 
56 FR 55823, Oct. 30, 1991; 60 FR 5581, Jan. 30, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 233.2  Circulars and rewards.

    (a) Wanted circulars. The Inspection Service issues wanted circulars 
to assist in locating and arresting fugitive postal offenders. Post 
these circulars in the most conspicuous place in the post office lobby 
and in other prominent places. Post near the Notice of Reward sign. 
Telephone or telegraph immediately to the postal inspector in charge any 
information on the possible location of the person wanted. Remove and 
destroy circulars immediately when notified of their cancellation or 
when the circular is not listed in the periodic Postal Bulletin notices 
of current wanted circulars.
    (b) Rewards. (1) Rewards will be paid in the amounts and under the 
conditions stated in Poster 296, Notice of Reward, for the arrest and 
conviction of persons for the following postal offenses:
    (i) Robbery or attempted robbery.
    (ii) Mailing bombs, explosives, poison, or controlled substances.
    (iii) Post office burglary.
    (iv) Stealing or unlawful possession of mail or money or property of 
the United States under the custody or control of the Postal Service, 
including property of the Postal Service.
    (v) Destroying, obstructing or retarding the passage of mail.
    (vi) Altering, counterfeiting, forging, unlawful uttering or passing 
of postal money orders; or the unlawful use, counterfeiting or forgery 
of postage stamps or other postage; or the use, sale or possession with 
intent to use or sell, any forged or counterfeited postage stamp or 
other postage.
    (vii) Assault on postal employee.
    (viii) Murder or manslaughter of a postal employee.
    (ix) Mailing or receiving through the mail any visual depiction 
involving the use of a minor engaging in sexually explicit conduct.
    (x) Mailing or causing to be mailed any money which has been 
obtained illegally.
    (2) The postmaster or a designated employee should personally 
present reward notices to representatives of firms transporting mail, 
security or detective units of firms, police officers, sheriffs and 
their deputies, if practicable, and encourage their cooperation in 
protecting mail and Postal Service property. (See 273.14 of the 
Administrative Support Manual).

    Note: The text of Poster 296, referred to in paragraph (b)(1) of 
this section, reads as follows:

    The United States Postal Service offers a reward up to the amounts 
shown for information and services leading to the arrest and conviction 
of any person for the following offenses:
    Murder or Manslaughter, $100,000. The unlawful killing of any 
officer or employee of the Postal Service while engaged in or on account 
of the performance of their official duties.
    Assault on Postal Employees, $15,000. Forcibly assaulting any 
officer or employee of the Postal Service while engaged in or on account 
of the performance of their official duties.
    Bombs or Explosives, $50,000. Mailing or causing to be mailed any 
bombs or explosives which may kill or harm another, or injure the mails 
or other property, or the placing of any bomb or explosive in a postal 
facility, vehicle, depository or receptacle established, approved or 
designated by the Postmaster General for the receipt of mail.
    Postage or Meter Tampering, $50,000. The unlawful use, reuse, or 
forgery of postage stamps, postage meter stamps, permit imprints or 
other postage; or the use, sale or possession with intent to use or 
sell, any

[[Page 60]]

used, forged or counterfeited postage stamps or other postage.
    Robbery, $25,000. Robbery or attempted robbery of any custodian of 
any mail, or money or other property of the United States under the 
control and jurisdiction of the United States Postal Service.
    Burglary of Post Office, $10,000. Breaking into, or attempting to 
break into, a post office, station, branch, building used wholly or 
partly as a post office, or any building or area in a building where the 
business of the Postal Service is conducted, with intent to commit a 
larceny or other depredation therein.
    Money Laundering, $10,000. Mailing or causing to be mailed any money 
which has been illegally obtained.
    Offenses Involving Postal Money Orders, $10,000. Theft or possession 
of stolen money orders or any Postal Service equipment used to imprint 
money orders; or altering, counterfeiting, forging, unlawful uttering, 
or passing of postal money orders.
    Theft, Possession, Destruction, or Obstruction of Mail, $10,000. 
Theft or attempted theft of any mail, or the contents thereof, or the 
theft of money or any other property of the United States under the 
custody and control of the United States Postal Service from any 
custodian, postal vehicle, railroad depot, airport, or other transfer 
point, post office or station or receptacle or depository established, 
approved, or designated by the Postmaster General for the receipt of 
mail; or destroying, obstructing, or retarding the passage of mail, or 
any carrier or conveyance carrying the mail.
    Child Pornography, $10,000. The mailing or receiving through the 
mail of any visual depiction involving the use of a minor engaging in 
sexually explicit conduct.
    Poison, Controlled Dangerous Substances, Hazardous Materials, 
Illegal Drugs, or Cash Proceeds from Illegal Drugs, $10,000. Mailing or 
causing to be mailed any poison, controlled substances, hazardous 
materials, illegal drugs, or the proceeds from the sale of illegal 
drugs.

                            Related Offenses

    The United States Postal Service also offers rewards as stated above 
for information and services leading to the arrest and conviction of any 
person: (1) For being an accessory to any of the above crimes; (2) for 
receiving or having unlawful possession of any mail, money or property 
secured through the above crimes; and (3) for conspiracy to commit any 
of the above crimes.

                           General Provisions

    1. The Postal Inspection Service investigates the above described 
crimes. Information concerning the violations, requests for applications 
for rewards, and written claims for rewards should be furnished to the 
nearest Postal Inspector. The written claim for reward payment must be 
submitted within six months from the date of conviction of the offender, 
or the date of formally deferred prosecution or the date of the 
offender's death, if killed in committing a crime or resisting lawful 
arrest for one of the above offenses.
    2. The amount of any reward will be based on the significance of 
services rendered, character of the offender, risks and hazards 
involved, time spent, and expenses incurred. Amounts of rewards shown 
above are the maximum amounts which will be paid.
    3. The term ``custodian'' as used herein includes any person having 
lawful charge, control, or custody of any mail matter, or any money or 
other property of the United States under the control and jurisdiction 
of the United States Postal Service.
    4. The Postal Service reserves the right to reject a claim for 
reward where there has been collusion, criminal involvement, or improper 
methods have been used to effect an arrest or to secure a conviction. It 
has the right to allow only one reward when several persons were 
convicted of the same offense, or one person was convicted of several of 
the above offenses.
    5. Other rewards not specifically referred to in this notice may be 
offered upon the approval of the Chief Postal Inspection (39 U.S.C. 404 
(a)(8).

    (c) The Chief Postal Inspector or his delegate is authorized to pay 
a reward to any person who provides information leading to the detection 
of persons or firms who obtain, or seek to obtain, funds, property, or 
services from the Postal Service based upon false or fraudulent 
activities, statements or claims. The decision as to whether a reward 
shall be paid and the amount thereof shall be solely within the 
discretion of the Chief Postal Inspector or his delegate and the 
submission of information or a claim for a reward shall not establish a 
contractual right to receive any reward. The reward shall not exceed 
one-half of the amount collected by the Postal Service as a result of 
civil or criminal proceedings to recover losses or penalties as a result 
of false or fraudulent claims or statements submitted to the Postal 
Service. Postal employees assigned to the Postal Inspection Service or 
the Law Department are not eligible to receive a reward under this 
section for information obtained while so employed. The Chief Inspector 
may establish such procedures and forms as may be desirable

[[Page 61]]

to give effect to this section including procedures to protect the 
identity of persons claiming rewards under this section.

[36 FR 4673, Mar. 12, 1971, as amended at 42 FR 43836, Aug. 31, 1977. 
Redesignated at 46 FR 34330, July 1, 1981, and amended at 47 FR 26832, 
June 22, 1982; 47 FR 46498, Oct. 19, 1982; 49 FR 15191, Apr. 18, 1984; 
54 FR 37795, Sept. 13, 1989; 55 FR 32251, Aug. 8, 1990; 59 FR 5326, Feb. 
4, 1994; 60 FR 54305, Oct. 23, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 233.3  Mail covers.

    (a) Policy. The U.S. Postal Service maintains rigid control and 
supervision with respect to the use of mail covers as an investigative 
technique for law enforcement or the protection of national security.
    (b) Scope. These regulations constitute the sole authority and 
procedure for initiating a mail cover, and for processing, using and 
disclosing information obtained from mail covers.
    (c) Definitions. For purpose of these regulations, the following 
terms are hereby defined.
    (1) Mail cover is the process by which a nonconsensual record is 
made of any data appearing on the outside cover of any sealed or 
unsealed class of mail matter, or by which a record is made of the 
contents of any unsealed class of mail matter as allowed by law, to 
obtain information in order to:
    (i) Protect national security,
    (ii) Locate a fugitive,
    (iii) Obtain evidence of commission or attempted commission of a 
crime,
    (iv) Obtain evidence of a violation or attempted violation of a 
postal statute, or
    (v) Assist in the identification of property, proceeds or assets 
forfeitable under law.
    (2) For the purposes of Sec. 233.3 record is a transcription, 
photograph, photocopy or any other facsimile of the image of the outside 
cover, envelope, wrapper, or contents of any class of mail.
    (3) Sealed mail is mail on which appropriate postage is paid, and 
which under postal laws and regulations is included within a class of 
mail maintained by the Postal Service for the transmission of mail 
sealed against inspection, including First-Class Mail, Express Mail, 
international letter mail, and mailgram messages.
    (4) Unsealed mail is mail on which appropriate postage for sealed 
mail has not been paid and which under postal laws or regulations is not 
included within a class of mail maintained by the Postal Service for the 
transmission of mail sealed against inspection. Unsealed mail includes 
second-, third-, and fourth-class mail, and international parcel post 
mail.
    (5) Fugitive is any person who has fled from the United States or 
any State, the District of Columbia, territory or possession of the 
United States, to avoid prosecution for a crime, to avoid punishment for 
a crime, or to avoid giving testimony in a criminal proceeding.
    (6) Crime, for the purposes of this section, is any commission of an 
act or the attempted commission of an act that is punishable by law by 
imprisonment for a term exceeding one year.
    (7) Postal statute refers to a statute describing criminal activity, 
regardless of the term of imprisonment, for which the Postal Service has 
investigative authority, or which is directed against the Postal 
Service, its operations, programs, or revenues.
    (8) Law enforcement agency is any authority of the Federal 
Government or any authority of a State or local government, one of whose 
functions is to:
    (i) Investigate the commission or attempted commission of acts 
constituting a crime, or
    (ii) Protect the national security.
    (9) Protection of the national security means to protect the United 
States from any of the following actual or potential threats to its 
security by a foreign power or its agents:
    (i) An attack or other grave, hostile act;
    (ii) Sabotage, or international terrorism; or
    (iii) Clandestine intelligence activities, including commercial 
espionage.
    (10) Emergency situation refers to circumstances which require the 
immediate release of information to prevent the loss of evidence or in 
which there is a potential for immediate physical harm to persons or 
property.
    (d) Authorizations--Chief Postal Inspector. (1) The Chief Postal 
Inspector is the principal officer of the Postal Service in the 
administration of all

[[Page 62]]

matters governing mail covers. The Chief Postal Inspector may delegate 
any or all authority in this regard to not more than two designees at 
Inspection Service Headquarters.
    (2) Except for national security mail covers, the Chief Postal 
Inspector may also delegate any or all authority to the Manager, 
Inspector Service Operations Support Group, and, for emergency 
situations, to Inspectors in Charge. The Manager, Inspection Service 
Operations Support Group, may delegate this authority to no more than 
two designees at each Operations Support Group.
    (3) All such delegations of authority shall be issued through 
official, written directives. Except for delegations at Inspection 
Service Headquarters, such delegations shall only apply to the 
geographic areas served by the Manager, Inspection Service Operation 
Support Group, or designee.
    (e) The Chief Postal Inspector, or his designee, may order mail 
covers under the following circumstances:
    (1) When a written request is received from a postal inspector that 
states reason to believe a mail cover will produce evidence relating to 
the violation of a postal statute.
    (2) When a written request is received from any law enforcement 
agency in which the requesting authority specifies the reasonable 
grounds to demonstrate the mail cover is necessary to:
    (i) Protect the national security,
    (ii) Locate a fugitive,
    (iii) Obtain information regarding the commission or attempted 
commission of a crime, or
    (iv) Assist in the identification of property, proceeds or assets 
forfeitable because of a violation of criminal law.
    (3) When time is of the essence, the Chief Postal Inspector, or 
designee, may act upon an oral request to be confirmed by the requesting 
authority in writing within three calendar days. Information may be 
released by the Chief Postal Inspector or designee, prior to receipt of 
the written request, only when the releasing official is satisfied that 
an emergency situation exists.
    (f)(1) Exceptions. A postal inspector, or a postal employee acting 
at the direction of a postal inspector, may record the information 
appearing on the envelope or outer wrapping, of mail without obtaining a 
mail cover order, only under the circumstances in paragraph (f)(2) of 
this section.
    (2) The mail must be:
    (i) Undelivered mail found abandoned or in the possession of a 
person reasonably believed to have stolen or embezzled such mail,
    (ii) Damaged or rifled, undelivered mail, or
    (iii) An immediate threat to persons or property.
    (g) Limitations. (1) No person in the Postal Service except those 
employed for that purpose in dead-mail offices, may open, or inspect the 
contents of, or permit the opening or inspection of sealed mail without 
a federal search warrant, even though it may contain criminal or 
otherwise nonmailable matter, or furnish evidence of the commission of a 
crime, or the violation of a postal statute.
    (2) No employee of the Postal Service shall open or inspect the 
contents of any unsealed mail, except for the purpose of determining:
    (i) Payment of proper postage, or
    (ii) Mailability.
    (3) No mail cover shall include matter mailed between the mail cover 
subject and the subject's known attorney.
    (4) No officer or employee of the Postal Service other than the 
Chief Postal Inspector, Manager, Inspection Service Operations Support 
Group, and their designees, are authorized to order mail covers. Under 
no circumstances may a postmaster or postal employee furnish information 
as defined in Sec. 233.3(c)(1) to any person, except as authorized by a 
mail cover order issued by the Chief Postal Inspector or designee, or as 
directed by a postal inspector under the circumstances described in 
Sec. 233.3(f).
    (5) Except for mail covers ordered upon fugitives or subjects 
engaged, or suspected to be engaged, in any activity against the 
national security, no mail cover order shall remain in effect for more 
than 30 days, unless adequate justification is provided by the 
requesting authority. At the expiration of the mail cover order period, 
or prior thereto, the requesting authority may be granted additional 30-
day periods under

[[Page 63]]

the same conditions and procedures applicable to the original request. 
The requesting authority must provide a statement of the investigative 
benefit of the mail cover and anticipated benefits to be derived from 
its extension.
    (6) No mail cover shall remain in force longer than 120 continuous 
days unless personally approved for further extension by the Chief 
Postal Inspector or designees at National Headquarters.
    (7) Except for fugitive cases, no mail cover shall remain in force 
when an information has been filed or the subject has been indicted for 
the matter for which the mail cover is requested. If the subject is 
under investigation for further criminal violations, or a mail cover is 
required to assist in the identification of property, proceeds or assets 
forfeitable because of a violation of criminal law, a new mail cover 
order must be requested consistent with these regulations.
    (8) Any national security mail cover request must be approved 
personally by the head of the law enforcement agency requesting the 
cover or one designee at the agency's headquarters level. The head of 
the agency shall notify the Chief Postal Inspector in writing of such 
designation.
    (h) Records. (1) All requests for mail covers, with records of 
action ordered thereon, and all reports issued pursuant thereto, shall 
be deemed within the custody of the Chief Postal Inspector. However, the 
physical storage of this data shall be at the discretion of the Chief 
Postal Inspector.
    (2) If the Chief Postal Inspector, or his designee, determines a 
mail cover was improperly ordered, all data acquired while the cover was 
in force shall be destroyed, and the requesting authority notified of 
the discontinuance of the mail cover and the reasons therefor.
    (3) Any data concerning mail covers shall be made available to any 
mail cover subject in any legal proceeding through appropriate discovery 
procedures.
    (4) The retention period for files and records pertaining to mail 
covers shall be 8 years.
    (i) Reporting to requesting authority. Once a mail cover has been 
duly ordered, authorization may be delegated to any employee in the 
Postal Inspection Service to transmit mail cover reports directly to the 
requesting authority.
    (j) Review. (1) The Chief Postal Inspector, or his designee at 
Inspection Service Headquarters shall periodically review mail cover 
orders issued by the Manager, Inspection Service Operations Support 
Group or their designees to ensure compliance with these regulations and 
procedures.
    (2) The Chief Postal Inspector shall select and appoint a designee 
to conduct a periodic review of national security mail cover orders.
    (3) The Chief Postal Inspector's determination in all matters 
concerning mail covers shall be final and conclusive and not subject to 
further administrative review.
    (k) Military postal system. Section 233.3 does not apply to the 
military postal system overseas or to persons performing military postal 
duties overseas. Information about regulations prescribed by the 
Department of Defense for the military postal system overseas may be 
obtained from the Department of Defense.

[58 FR 36599, July 8, 1993, as amended at 61 FR 42557, Aug. 16, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 233.4  Withdrawal of mail privileges.

    (a) False representation and lottery orders--(1) Issuance. Pursuant 
to 39 U.S.C. 3005, the Judicial Officer of the Postal Service, acting 
upon a satisfactory evidentiary basis, may issue a mail-stop order 
against anyone seeking mailed remittance of money or property by means 
of a false-representation or lottery scheme. Such orders provide for 
return of mail and refund of postal money orders to remitters.
    (2) Enforcement. Notice of these orders, including any necessary 
instructions on enforcement responsibilities and procedures, is 
published in the Postal Bulletin. Generally, an order against a domestic 
enterprise is enforced only by the post office designated in the order. 
All personnel processing mail for dispatch abroad assist in enforcing 
orders against foreign enterprises by forwarding mail addressed to such 
enterprises to designated post offices.

[[Page 64]]

    (b) Fictitious name or address and not residents of the place of 
address orders. (1) Issuance. Pursuant to 39 U.S.C. 3003, 3004, when 
there is satisfactory evidence that mail is addressed to a fictitious 
name, title, or address used for any unlawful business, and no one has 
established a right to have the mail delivered to him, or that mail is 
addressed to places not the residence or regular business address of the 
person for whom they are intended to enable the person to escape 
identification, the Judicial Officer may, pursuant to Part 964, order 
that the mail be returned to the sender.
    (2) Notice. (i) The Chief Postal Inspector or his delegate must give 
notice to the addressee of mail withheld from delivery pursuant to 39 
U.S.C. 3003, 3004 that such action has been taken and advise him that he 
may:
    (A) Obtain such mail upon presenting proof of his identity and right 
to receive such mail, or
    (B) Petition the Judicial Officer for the return of such mail. (ii) 
The notice must be in writing and served by personal service upon the 
addressee or by Certified Mail (Return Receipt Requested) and by First 
Class Mail.
    (3) Enforcement. Notice of any order issued pursuant to 39 U.S.C. 
3003, 3004, and any necessary implementing instructions, are published 
in the Postal Bulletin.

[45 FR 1613, Jan. 8, 1980. Redesignated at 46 FR 34330, July 1, 1981, 
and amended at 53 FR 1780, Jan. 22, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 233.5  Requesting financial records from a financial institution.

    (a) Definitions. The terms used in this section have the same 
meaning as similar terms used in the Right to Financial Privacy Act of 
1978, Title XI of Pub. L. 95-630. Act means the Right to Financial 
Privacy Act of 1978.
    (b) Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is: (1) To authorize 
the Inspection Service Department of the U.S. Postal Service to request 
financial records from a financial institution pursuant to the formal 
written request procedure authorized by section 1108 of the Act and (2) 
to set forth the conditions under which such request may be made.
    (c) Authorization. The Inspection Service Department is authorized 
to request financial records of any customer from a financial 
institution pursuant to a formal written request under the Act only if:
    (1) No administrative summons or subpoena authority reasonably 
appears to be available to the Inspection Service Department to obtain 
financial records for the purpose for which the records are sought;
    (2) There is reason to believe that the records sought are relevant 
to a legitimate law enforcement inquiry and will further that inquiry;
    (3) The request is issued by a supervisory official of a rank 
designated by the Chief Postal Inspector. Officials so designated shall 
not delegate this authority to others;
    (4) The request adheres to the requirements set forth in paragraph 
(d) of this section; and
    (5) The notice requirements set forth in section 1108(4) of the Act, 
or the requirements pertaining to the delay of notice in section 1109 of 
the Act, are satisfied, except in situations (e.g., section 1113(g)) 
where no notice is required.
    (d) Written request. (1) The formal request must be in the form of a 
letter or memorandum to an appropriate official of the financial 
institution and must contain:
    (i) The signature of the issuing official and the official's name, 
title, business address, and business phone number;
    (ii) The identity of the customer or customers to whom the records 
pertain;
    (iii) A reasonable description of the records sought; and
    (iv) Any additional information which may be appropriate--e.g., the 
date when the opportunity for the customer to challenge the formal 
written request expires, the date when the Inspection Service Department 
expects to present a certificate of compliance with the applicable 
provisions of the Act, the name and title of the individual (if known) 
to whom disclosure is to be made.
    (2) In cases where customer notice is delayed by court order, a copy 
of the

[[Page 65]]

court order must be attached to the formal written request.
    (e) Certification. Before obtaining the requested records following 
a formal written request, a supervisory official authorized to issue a 
request must certify in writing to the financial institution that the 
Inspection Service Department has complied with the applicable 
provisions of the Act.

[44 FR 39161, July 5, 1979. Redesignated at 46 FR 34330, July 1, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 233.6  Test purchases under 39 U.S.C. 3005(e).

    (a) Scope. This section, which implements 39 U.S.C. 3005(e), 
supplements any postal regulations or instructions regarding test 
purchases or test purchase procedures. It is limited to test purchases 
conducted according to 39 U.S.C. 3005(e).
    (b) Definitions--(1) Test purchase. The acquisition of any article 
or service, for which money or property are sought through the mails, 
from the person or representative offering the article or service. The 
purpose is to investigate possible violations of postal laws.
    (2) Test Purchase Request. A written document requesting the sale of 
an article or service pursuant to 39 U.S.C. 3005(e) and containing the 
following information:
    (i) The name and address of the person, firm, or corporation to whom 
the request is directed;
    (ii) The name, title, signature, office mailing address, and office 
telephone number of the person making the request;
    (iii) A description of the article or service requested which is 
sufficient to enable the person to whom the request is made to identify 
the article or service being sought;
    (iv) A statement of the nature of the conduct under investigation;
    (v) A statement that the article or service must be tendered at the 
time and place stated in the purchase request, unless the person making 
the request and the person to whom it is made agree otherwise in 
writing;
    (vi) A verbatim statement of 39 U.S.C. 3005, 3007; and
    (vii) A statement that failure to provide the requested article or 
service may be considered in a proceeding under 39 U.S.C. 3007 to 
determine whether probable cause exists to believe that 39 U.S.C. 3005 
is being violated.
    (c) Service of Test Purchase Request.--(1) The original of the Test 
Purchase Request must be delivered to the person, firm, or corporation 
to whom the request is made or to his or its representative. It must be 
accompanied by a check or money order in the amount for which the 
article or service is offered for sale, made payable to the person, firm 
or corporation making the offer.
    (2) The person serving the Test Purchase Request must make and sign 
a record, stating the date and place of service and the name of the 
person served. The person making the request must retain a copy of the 
Test Purchase Request, the record of service, and the money order 
receipt or a photocopy of the issued check or the cancelled check. 
Alternatively, the request may be made by certified mail.
    (d) Authorizations. The Chief Postal Inspector is the principal 
officer of the Postal Service for the administration of all matters 
governing test purchases under this section. The Chief Inspector may 
delegate any or all authority in this regard to any or all postal 
inspectors.

[49 FR 7230, Feb. 28, 1984; 49 FR 8250, Mar. 6, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 233.7  Forfeiture authority and procedures.

    (a) Designation of officials having forfeiture authority. The Chief 
Postal Inspector is authorized to perform all duties and 
responsibilities necessary on behalf of the Postal Service to enforce 18 
U.S.C. 981, 2254, and 21 U.S.C. 881, to delegate all or any part of this 
authority to Deputy Chief Inspectors, Inspectors in Charge, and 
Inspectors of the Postal Inspection Service, and to issue such 
instructions as may be necessary to carry out this authority.
    (b) Administrative forfeiture authority. The Chief Postal Inspector 
is authorized to conduct administrative forfeitures under the statutes 
identified in paragraph (a) of this section, following,

[[Page 66]]

where applicable, the procedures provided by the customs laws of the 
United States (19 U.S.C. 1600 et seq.), and to pay valid liens and 
mortgages against property that has been so forfeited.
    (c) Inventory. An inventory of all property seized for forfeiture 
under the statutes identified in paragraph (a) of this section shall be 
prepared and maintained by the Postal Inspection Service. The inventory 
should occur within seven days of the seizure. The inventory must, at a 
minimum, identify all property seized, state the exact location of the 
property at the time of its seizure, and describe in detail the 
condition of the property. A written receipt containing such information 
and identifying the Postal Inspector who conducted the seizure must be 
provided to the party from whom the property was seized, or the party's 
agent or representative, at the time of the seizure or as soon 
thereafter as is practicable.
    (d) Custody. Custody of all property seized for forfeiture under the 
statutes identified in paragraph (a) of this section is maintained by 
the U.S. Marshals Service, except property held for evidentiary 
purposes; retained for official use upon forfeiture; subject to 
equitable transfer to federal, state or local law enforcement agencies; 
or subject to civil administrative forfeiture.
    (e) Appraisal. The Postal Inspection Service must promptly obtain or 
complete an appraisal of all seized property. The appraisal value is the 
fair market value of the property, which is the highest price, in terms 
of money, which a property will bring in a competitive and open market.
    (f) Quick-release. Property subject to administrative forfeiture 
may, prior to forfeiture, be released by the Postal Inspection Service 
to the owner of the property having an immediate right to possession of 
the property when the Postal Inspection Service concludes that release 
of the property is in the best interest of justice. An agreement to hold 
harmless the United States, the Postal Inspection Service, and all other 
involved entities should be obtained from the owner. A decision for 
quick release of the property should be made within five days of the 
seizure.
    (g) Judicial forfeiture. If the appraised value of property seized 
exceeds $500,000, with the exception of: (1) Monetary instruments within 
the meaning of 31 U.S.C. 5312(a)(3), or (2) any conveyance which was 
used to import, export, transport, or store any controlled substance or 
if a claim and satisfactory bond have been received for property 
appraised at $500,000 or less, or for any monetary instruments within 
the meaning of 31 U.S.C. 5312(a)(3) or any conveyance which was used to 
import, export, transport, or store any controlled substance the Postal 
Inspection Service must transmit the claim and bond to the U.S. Attorney 
for the judicial district in which the seizure was made and request that 
the U.S. Attorney promptly institute a judicial forfeiture proceeding 
against the property. The Postal Inspection Service must provide the 
U.S. Attorney a complete written description of the property, a 
statement of the facts and circumstances leading to the seizure of the 
property, including all facts and documentation leading to the 
conclusion that the seized property is subject to forfeiture, and such 
additional information as the U.S. Attorney may require for the purpose 
of instituting a judicial forfeiture action.
    (h) Notice of seizure for property having a value of $500,000 or 
less, or for monetary instruments or for conveyances which were used to 
transport or store any controlled substance; advertisement; declaration 
of forfeiture. (1) The Postal Inspection Service must cause written 
notice of the seizure of all property subject to civil administrative 
forfeiture to be sent to each known party that may have a possessory or 
ownership interest in the seized property. The notice must describe the 
property seized; state the date, place, and cause for seizure; and 
inform the party of the intent of the Postal Inspection Service to 
forfeit the property. In addition, the notice must state that any person 
desiring a judicial determination of forfeiture must file a claim and 
bond (see paragraph 2 of this subsection) with a designated official of 
the Postal Inspection Service, within twenty days from the date of the 
first publication of the notice of seizure (see paragraph (4) of this 
subsection), or of the date of the letter of personal notice required by 
this paragraph, whichever is later. Any claim

[[Page 67]]

submitted pursuant to this paragraph is invalid unless accompanied by a 
bond meeting the requirements of paragraph (2), or a completed PS Form 
1518, Petition to Proceed in Forma Pauperis.
    (2) A bond in the amount of $5,000 or ten percent of the value of 
the claimed property, whichever is lower, but in no event less than 
$250, must accompany any claim submitted pursuant to paragraph (1). The 
bond may be in the form of a cashier's check, certified check, or money 
order made payable to the United States of America, or satisfactory 
sureties. If a claimant is financially unable to post the bond because 
of indigency, such a person may request a waiver of the bond by 
completion of PS Form 1518, Petition to Proceed in Forma Pauperis.
    (3) Upon receipt of the claim and bond, the Postal Inspection 
Service must, upon determining that the documents are in proper form and 
the sureties satisfactory, transmit the documents to the appropriate 
U.S. Attorney as provided in subsection (g). If the documents are not 
satisfactory, the Postal Inspection Service must notify the party making 
the claim and may allow a reasonable time for correction. If correction 
is not made within the time allowed for that purpose, the administrative 
forfeiture must proceed as though the claim and bond had not been 
tendered.
    (4) Notice of administrative forfeiture proceedings containing the 
information required by subsection (h)(1) must be published once each 
week for at least three successive weeks in a newspaper of general 
circulation in the judicial district in which the property was seized. 
If a claim and satisfactory bond is not filed within the time allowed, 
the Postal Inspection Service may declare the property forfeited.
    (i) Disposition of forfeited property. (1) Whenever property is 
forfeited administratively, the Postal Inspection Service may:
    (i) Retain the property for official use;
    (ii) Transfer ownership of the property to any federal, state or 
local law enforcement agency that participated in the investigation 
leading to the forfeiture;
    (iii) Sell any property which is not required to be destroyed by law 
and which is not harmful to the public;
    (iv) Destroy the property; or
    (v) Dispose of the property as otherwise permitted by law.
    (2) If the laws of a state in which an article of forfeited property 
is located prohibit the sale or possession of such property or if the 
Postal Service and the Marshals Service are of the opinion that it would 
be more advantageous to sell the forfeited property in another district, 
the property may be moved to and sold in such other district.
    (3) If, after an administrative forfeiture of property is completed, 
it appears that the proceeds of sale will not be sufficient to pay the 
costs of sale or the proceeds will be insignificant in relation to the 
expenses involved in the forfeiture, then the Postal Service or the 
Marshals Service may order destruction or other disposition of the 
property including alteration of the property into an article that is 
not prohibited.
    (j) Remission or mitigation of administrative, civil, and criminal 
forfeitures--(1) Authority, purpose, and scope--(i) Purpose. This 
section sets forth the procedures for Postal Inspection Service 
officials to follow when considering remission or mitigation of 
administrative forfeitures under the jurisdiction of the Postal Service. 
The purpose of these regulations is to provide a basis for ameliorating 
the effects of forfeiture through the partial or total remission of 
forfeiture for individuals who have an interest in the forfeited 
property but who did not participate in, or have knowledge of, the 
conduct that resulted in the property being subject to forfeiture and, 
where required, took all reasonable steps under the circumstances to 
ensure that such property would not be used, acquired, or disposed of 
contrary to law. Additionally, these regulations provide for partial or 
total mitigation of the forfeiture and imposition of alternative 
conditions in appropriate circumstances.
    (ii) Authority to grant remission and mitigation. (A) Remission and 
mitigation functions in administrative forfeitures are performed by the 
agency seizing the property. Within the Postal Inspection Service, 
authority to grant

[[Page 68]]

remission and mitigation is delegated to the Independent Counsel, Office 
of the Chief Inspector, Washington, DC.
    (B) Remission and mitigation functions in judicial cases are within 
the jurisdiction of the Criminal Division of the Department of Justice. 
Within the Criminal Division, authority to grant remission and 
mitigation has been delegated to the Chief, Asset Forfeiture and Money 
Laundering Section.
    (C) The powers and responsibilities within these regulations may be 
redelegated to attorneys or managers working under the supervision of 
the designated officials.
    (D) The time periods and internal requirements established in these 
regulations are designed to guide the orderly administration of the 
remission and mitigation process and are not intended to create rights 
or entitlements in favor of individuals seeking remission or mitigation. 
These regulations will apply to all decisions on petitions for remission 
or mitigation made on or after July 1, 1997. These regulations will 
apply to decisions on requests for reconsideration of a denial of a 
petition under paragraphs (j)(3)(x) and (3)(xi) of this section only if 
the initial decision on the petition was made under the provisions of 
this part effective July 1, 1997.
    (E) This section governs any petition for remission or mitigation 
filed with the Chief Postal Inspector and supersedes any Postal Service 
regulation governing petitions for remission or mitigation to the extent 
such regulation is inconsistent with this section.
    (2) Definitions. As used in this part:
    (i) The term administrative forfeiture means the process by which 
property may be forfeited by an investigative agency rather than through 
judicial proceedings.
    (ii) The term appraised value means the estimated market value of an 
asset at the time and place of seizure if such or similar property was 
freely offered for sale between a willing seller and a willing buyer.
    (iii) The term Attorney General means the Attorney General of the 
United States or his or her designee.
    (iv) The term beneficial owner means a person with actual use of, as 
well as an interest in, the property subject to forfeiture.
    (v) The term general creditor means one whose claim or debt is not 
secured by a specific right to obtain satisfaction against the 
particular property subject to forfeiture.
    (vi) The term judgment creditor means one who has obtained a 
judgment against the debtor but has not yet received full satisfaction 
of the judgment.
    (vii) The term judicial forfeiture means either a civil or criminal 
proceeding in a United States District Court that may result in a final 
judgment and order of forfeiture.
    (viii) The term lienholder means a creditor whose claim or debt is 
secured by a specific right to obtain satisfaction against the 
particular property subject to forfeiture. A lien creditor qualifies as 
a lienholder if the lien:
    (A) Was established by operation of law or contract;
    (B) Was created as a result of an exchange of money, goods, or 
services; and
    (C) Is perfected against the specific property forfeited for which 
remission or mitigation is sought (e.g., a real estate mortgage, a 
mechanic's lien).
    (ix) The term net equity means the amount of a lienholder's monetary 
interest in property subject to forfeiture. Net equity shall be computed 
by determining the amount of unpaid principal and unpaid interest at the 
time of seizure, and by adding to that sum unpaid interest calculated 
from the date of seizure through the last full month prior to the date 
of the decision on the petition. Where a rate of interest is set forth 
in a security agreement, the rate of interest to be used in this 
computation will be the annual percentage rate so specified in the 
security agreement that is the basis of the lienholder's interest. In 
this computation, however, there shall be no allowances for attorneys' 
fees, accelerated or enhanced interest charges, amounts set by contract 
as damages, unearned extended warranty fees, insurance, service contract 
charges incurred after the date of seizure, allowances for dealer's 
reserve, or any other similar charges.
    (x) The term owner means the person in whom primary title is vested 
or

[[Page 69]]

whose interest is manifested by the actual and beneficial use of the 
property, even though the title is vested in another. A victim of an 
offense as defined in paragraph (j) (2)(xxi) of this section may also be 
an owner if he or she has a present legally cognizable ownership 
interest in the property forfeited. A nominal owner of property will not 
be treated as its true owner if he or she is not its beneficial owner.
    (xi) The term person means an individual, partnership, corporation, 
joint business enterprise, estate, or other legal entity capable of 
owning property.
    (xii) The term petition means a petition for remission or mitigation 
of forfeiture under these regulations. This definition includes a 
petition for restoration of the proceeds of sale of forfeited property 
and a petition for the value of forfeited property placed into official 
use.
    (xiii) The term petitioner means the person applying for remission, 
mitigation, restoration of the proceeds of sale, or for the appraised 
value of forfeited property under these regulations. A petitioner may be 
an owner of forfeited property as defined in paragraph (j)(2)(x) of this 
section; a lienholder as defined in paragraph (j)(2)(viii) of this 
section; or a victim as defined in paragraph (j)(2)(xxi) of this section 
subject to the limitations of paragraph (j)(8) of this section.
    (xiv) The term Postal Service Fund means the United States Postal 
Fund established under 39 U.S.C. 2003.
    (xv) The term property means real or personal property of any kind 
capable of being owned or possessed.
    (xvi) The term record means a series of arrests for related crimes, 
unless the arrestee was acquitted or the charges were dismissed for lack 
of evidence; a conviction for a related crime or completion of sentence 
within ten years of the acquisition of the property subject to 
forfeiture; or two convictions for a related crime at any time in the 
past.
    (xvii) The term related crime as used in paragraphs (j)(2)(xvi) and 
(6)(v) of this section means any crime similar in nature to that which 
gives rise to the seizure of property for forfeiture. For example, where 
property is seized for a violation of the federal laws dealing with 
drugs, a related crime would be any offense involving a violation of the 
federal laws relating to drugs or the laws of any state or political 
subdivision thereof relating to drugs.
    (xviii) The term related offense as used in paragraph (j)(8) of this 
section means:
    (A) Any predicate offense charged in a Federal Racketeer Influenced 
and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) count for which forfeiture was 
ordered; or
    (B) An offense committed as part of the same scheme or design, or 
pursuant to the same conspiracy, as was involved in the offense for 
which the forfeiture was ordered.
    (xix) The term Ruling Official means any official to whom decision 
making authority has been delegated pursuant to paragraph (j)(1)(ii) of 
this section.
    (xx) The term seizing agency means the federal agency that seized 
the property or adopted the seizure of another agency for federal 
forfeiture.
    (xxi) The term victim means a person who has incurred a pecuniary 
loss as a direct result of the commission of the offense underlying a 
forfeiture. A drug user is not considered a victim of a drug trafficking 
offense under this definition. A victim does not include one who 
acquires a right to sue the perpetrator of the criminal offense for any 
loss by assignment, subrogation, inheritance, or otherwise from the 
actual victim, unless that person has acquired an actual ownership 
interest in the forfeited property.
    (xxii) The term violator means the person whose use or acquisition 
of the property in violation of the law subjected such property to 
seizure for forfeiture.
    (3) Petitions in administrative forfeiture cases--(i) Notice of 
seizure. The notice of seizure and intent to forfeit the property shall 
advise any persons who may have a present ownership interest in the 
property to submit their petitions for remission or mitigation within 
thirty (30) days of the date they receive the notice in order to 
facilitate processing. Petitions shall be considered any time after 
notice until the forfeited property is placed into official

[[Page 70]]

use, sold, or otherwise disposed of according to law, except in cases 
involving petitions to restore the proceeds from the sale of forfeited 
property. A notice of seizure shall include the title of the seizing 
agency, the Ruling Official, the mailing and street address of the 
official to whom petitions should be sent, and an asset identifier 
number.
    (ii) Persons who may file. A petition for remission or mitigation 
must be filed by a petitioner as defined in paragraph (j)(2)(xiii) of 
this section or as prescribed in paragraphs (j)(9) (vii) and (viii) of 
this section.
    (iii) Contents of petition. (A) All petitions must include the 
following information in clear and concise terms:
    (1) The name, address, and social security or other taxpayer 
identification number of the person claiming an interest in the seized 
property who is seeking remission or mitigation;
    (2) The name of the seizing agency, the asset identifier number, and 
the date and place of seizure;
    (3) A complete description of the property including make, model, 
and serial numbers, if any; and
    (4) A description of the petitioner's interest in the property as 
owner, lienholder, or otherwise, supported by original or certified 
bills of sale, contracts, deeds, mortgages, or other documentary 
evidence.
    (B) Any factual recitation or documentation of any type in a 
petition must be supported by a sworn affidavit.
    (iv) Releases. In addition to the contents of the petition for 
remission or mitigation set forth in paragraph (j)(3)(iii) of this 
section, upon request, the petitioner shall also furnish the agency with 
an instrument executed by the titled or registered owner and any other 
known claimant of an interest in the property releasing interest in such 
property.
    (v) Filing petition with agency. (A) A petition for remission or 
mitigation of an administrative forfeiture by the Postal Inspection 
Service shall be sent to the Chief Postal Inspector, United States 
Postal Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza SW, Washington, DC 20260-2100.
    (B) The petition shall be sworn to by the petitioner or by the 
petitioner's attorney upon information and belief, supported by the 
client's sworn notice of representation pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 1746, as 
set out in paragraph (j)(9)(vii) of this section.
    (vi) Agency investigation. Upon receipt of a petition, the Postal 
Inspection Service shall investigate the merits of the petition and 
prepare a written report containing the results of that investigation. 
This report shall be submitted to the Ruling Official for review and 
consideration.
    (vii) Ruling. Upon receipt of the petition and the agency report, 
the Ruling Official shall review the petition and the report, and shall 
rule on the merits of the petition. No hearing shall be held.
    (viii) Petitions granted. If the Ruling Official grants a remission 
or mitigation of the forfeiture, a copy of the decision shall be sent by 
certified mail to the petitioner, or, if represented by an attorney, to 
the petitioner's attorney. A copy of the decision shall also be sent to 
the U.S. Marshals Service or other property custodian. The written 
decision shall include the terms and conditions, if any, upon which the 
remission or mitigation is granted and the procedures the petitioner 
must follow to obtain release of the property or the monetary interest 
therein.
    (ix) Petitions denied. If the Ruling Official denies a petition, a 
copy of the decision shall be sent by certified mail to the petitioner, 
or, if represented by an attorney, to the petitioner's attorney of 
record. A copy of the decision shall also be sent to the U.S. Marshals 
Service or other property custodian. The written decision shall specify 
the reason that the petition was denied. The decision shall advise the 
petitioner that a request for reconsideration of the denial of the 
petition may be submitted to the Ruling Official in accordance with 
paragraph (j)(3)(x) of this section.
    (x) Request for reconsideration. (A) A request for reconsideration 
of the denial of the petition shall be considered if:
    (1) It is postmarked or received by the office of the Ruling 
Official within ten (10) days from the receipt of the notice of the 
denial of the petition by the petitioner; and

[[Page 71]]

    (2) The request is based on information or evidence not previously 
considered that is material to the basis for the denial or presents a 
basis clearly demonstrating that the denial was erroneous.
    (B) In no event shall a request for reconsideration be decided by 
the same Ruling Official who ruled on the original petition.
    (C) Only one request for reconsideration of a denial of a petition 
shall be considered.
    (xi) Restoration of proceeds from sale. (A) A petition for 
restoration of the proceeds from the sale of forfeited property, or for 
the appraised value of forfeited property when the forfeited property 
has been retained by or delivered to a government agency for official 
use, may be submitted by an owner or lienholder in cases in which the 
petitioner:
    (1) Did not know of the seizure prior to the entry of a declaration 
of forfeiture; and
    (2) Could not reasonably have known of the seizure prior to the 
entry of a declaration of forfeiture.
    (B) Such a petition shall be submitted pursuant to paragraphs 
(j)(3)(ii) through (v) of this section within ninety (90) days from the 
date the property is sold or otherwise disposed of.
    (4) Petitions in judicial forfeiture cases--(i) Procedure for filing 
petition. If the forfeiture proceedings are judicial, a petition for 
remission or mitigation of a judicial forfeiture shall be addressed to 
the Attorney General; shall be sworn to by the petitioner or by the 
petitioner's attorney upon information and belief, supported by the 
client's sworn notice of representation pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 1746; and 
shall be submitted to the United States Attorney for the district in 
which the judicial forfeiture proceedings are brought. A petitioner also 
shall submit a copy of the petition to the Chief Postal Inspector if the 
Postal Inspection Service was the seizing agency.
    (ii) Ruling. Department of Justice regulations on petitions for 
remission or mitigation in judicial forfeiture cases are stated in 29 
CFR 9.4.
    (5) Criteria governing administrative remission and mitigation--(i) 
Remission. (A) The Ruling Official shall not grant remission of a 
forfeiture unless the petitioner establishes that:
    (1) The petitioner has a valid, good faith and legally cognizable 
interest in the seized property as owner or lienholder as defined in 
these regulations; and
    (2) The petitioner is innocent within the meaning of the innocent 
owner provisions of the applicable civil forfeiture statute, is a bona 
fide purchaser for value without cause to believe that the property was 
subject to forfeiture at the time of the purchase, or is one who held a 
legally cognizable interest in the seized property at the time of the 
violation underlying the forfeiture superior to that of the defendant 
within the meaning of the applicable criminal forfeiture statute, and is 
thereby entitled to recover his or her interest in the forfeited 
property by statute. (If the applicable civil forfeiture statute 
contains no innocent owner defense, the innocent owner provisions 
applicable to 21 U.S.C. 881(a)(4) shall apply.) Unless otherwise 
provided by statute, in the case of petitioners who acquired their 
interest in the property after the time of the violation underlying the 
forfeiture, the question of whether the petitioner had knowledge of the 
violation shall be determined as of the point in time when the interest 
in the property was acquired.
    (B) The knowledge and responsibilities of petitioner's 
representative, agent, or employee in paragraph (j)(5)(i)(A)(2) of this 
section are imputed to the petitioner where the representative, agent, 
or employee was acting in the course of his or her employment and in 
furtherance of the petitioner's business.
    (C) The petitioner has the burden of establishing the basis for 
granting a petition for remission or mitigation of forfeited property, a 
restoration of proceeds of sale or appraised value of forfeited 
property, or a reconsideration of a denial of such a petition. Failure 
to provide information or documents and to submit to interviews, as 
requested, may result in a denial of the petition.
    (D) The Ruling Official shall presume a valid forfeiture and shall 
not consider whether the evidence is sufficient to support the 
forfeiture.

[[Page 72]]

    (E) Willful, materially false statements or information, made or 
furnished by the petitioner in support of a petition for remission or 
mitigation of forfeited property, the restoration of proceeds or 
appraised value of forfeited property, or the reconsideration of a 
denial of any such petition, shall be grounds for denial of such 
petition and possible prosecution for the filing of false statements.
    (ii) Mitigation. (A) The Ruling Official may grant mitigation to a 
party not involved in the commission of the offense underlying 
forfeiture:
    (1) Where the petitioner has not met the minimum conditions for 
remission, but the Ruling Official finds that some relief should be 
granted to avoid extreme hardship and that return of the property 
combined with imposition of monetary and/or other conditions of 
mitigation in lieu of a complete forfeiture will promote the interest of 
justice and will not diminish the deterrent effect of the law. 
Extenuating circumstances justifying such a finding include those 
circumstances that reduce the responsibility of the petitioner for 
knowledge of the illegal activity, knowledge of the criminal record of a 
user of the property, or failure to take reasonable steps to prevent the 
illegal use or acquisition by another for some reason, such as a 
reasonable fear of reprisal; or
    (2) Where the minimum standards for remission have been satisfied 
but the overall circumstances are such that, in the opinion of the 
Ruling Official, complete relief is not warranted.
    (B) The Ruling Official may in his or her discretion grant 
mitigation to a party involved in the commission of the offense 
underlying the forfeiture where certain mitigating factors exist, 
including, but not limited to: The lack of a prior record or evidence of 
similar criminal conduct; if the violation does not include drug 
distribution, manufacturing, or importation, the fact that the violator 
has taken steps, such as drug treatment, to prevent further criminal 
conduct; the fact that the violation was minimal and was not part of a 
larger criminal scheme; the fact that the violator has cooperated with 
federal, state, or local investigations relating to the criminal conduct 
underlying the forfeiture; or the fact that complete forfeiture of an 
asset is not necessary to achieve the legitimate purposes of forfeiture.
    (C) Mitigation may take the form of a monetary condition or the 
imposition of other conditions relating to the continued use of the 
property, and the return of the property, in addition to the imposition 
of any other costs that would be chargeable as a condition to remission. 
This monetary condition is considered as an item of cost payable by the 
petitioner, and shall be deposited into the Postal Service Fund as an 
amount realized from forfeiture in accordance with the applicable 
statute. If the petitioner fails to accept the Ruling Official's 
mitigation decision or any of its conditions, or fails to pay the 
monetary amount within twenty (20) days of the receipt of the decision, 
the property shall be sold, and the monetary amount imposed and other 
costs chargeable as a condition to mitigation shall be subtracted from 
the proceeds of the sale before transmitting the remainder to the 
petitioner.
    (6) Special rules for specific petitioners--(i) General creditors. A 
general creditor may not be granted remission or mitigation of 
forfeiture unless he or she otherwise qualifies as a petitioner under 
these regulations.
    (ii) Rival claimants. If the beneficial owner of the forfeited 
property and the owner of a security interest in the same property each 
file a petition, and if both petitions are found to be meritorious, the 
claim of the beneficial owner shall take precedence.
    (iii) Voluntary bailments. A petitioner who allows another to use 
his or her property without cost, and who is not in the business of 
lending money secured by property or of leasing or renting property for 
profit, shall be granted remission or mitigation of forfeiture in 
accordance with the provisions of paragraph (j)(5) of this section.
    (iv) Lessors. A person engaged in the business of leasing or renting 
real or personal property on a long-term basis with the right to 
sublease shall not be entitled to remission or mitigation of a 
forfeiture of such property unless the lessor can demonstrate compliance 
with all the requirements of paragraph (j)(5) of this section.

[[Page 73]]

    (v) Straw owners. A petition by any person who has acquired a 
property interest recognizable under these regulations and who knew or 
had reason to believe that the interest was conveyed by the previous 
owner for the purpose of circumventing seizure, forfeiture, or these 
regulations, shall be denied. A petition by a person who purchases or 
owns property for another who has a record for related crimes as defined 
in paragraph (j)(2)(xvii) of this section, or a petition by a lienholder 
who knows or has reason to believe that the purchaser or owner of record 
is not the real purchaser or owner, shall be denied unless both the 
purchaser of record and the real purchaser or owner meet the 
requirements of paragraph (j)(5) of this section.
    (vi) Judgment creditors. (A) A judgment creditor will be recognized 
as a lienholder if:
    (1) The judgment was duly recorded before the seizure of the 
property for forfeiture;
    (2) Under applicable state or other local law, the judgment 
constitutes a valid lien on the property that attached to it before the 
seizure of the property for forfeiture; and
    (3) The petitioner had no knowledge of the commission of any act or 
acts giving rise to the forfeiture at the time the judgment became a 
lien on the forfeited property.
    (B) A judgment creditor will not be recognized as a lienholder if 
the property in question is not property of which the judgment debtor is 
entitled to claim ownership under applicable state or other local law 
(e.g., stolen property). A judgment creditor is entitled under these 
regulations to no more than the amount of the judgment, exclusive of any 
interest, costs, or other fees including attorney's fees associated with 
the action that led to the judgment or its collection.
    (C) A judgment creditor's lien must be registered in the district 
where the property is located if the judgment was obtained outside the 
district.
    (7) Terms and conditions of remission and mitigation--(i) Owners. 
(A) An owner's interest in property that has been forfeited is 
represented by the property itself or by a monetary interest equivalent 
to that interest at the time of seizure. Whether the property or a 
monetary equivalent will be remitted to an owner shall be determined at 
the discretion of the Ruling Official.
    (B) If a civil judicial forfeiture action against the property is 
pending, release of the property must await an appropriate court order.
    (C) Where the government sells or disposes of the property prior to 
the grant of the remission, the owner shall receive the proceeds of that 
sale, less any costs incurred by the government in the sale. The Ruling 
Official, at his or her discretion, may waive the deduction of costs and 
expenses incident to the forfeiture.
    (D) Where the owner does not comply with the conditions imposed upon 
release of the property by the Ruling Official, the property shall be 
sold. Following the sale, the proceeds shall be used to pay all costs of 
the forfeiture and disposition of the property, in addition to any 
monetary conditions imposed. The remaining balance shall be paid to the 
owner.
    (ii) Lienholders. (A) When the forfeited property is to be retained 
for official use or transferred to a state or local law enforcement 
agency or foreign government pursuant to law, and remission or 
mitigation has been granted to a lienholder, the recipient of the 
property shall assure that:
    (1) In the case of remission, the lien is satisfied as determined 
through the petition process; or
    (2) In the case of mitigation, an amount equal to the net equity, 
less any monetary conditions imposed, is paid to the lienholder prior to 
the release of the property to the recipient agency or foreign 
government.
    (B) When the forfeited property is not retained for official use or 
transferred to another agency or foreign country pursuant to law, the 
lienholder shall be notified by the Ruling Official of the right to 
select either of the following alternatives:
    (1) Return of property. The lienholder may obtain possession of the 
property after paying the United States, through the Ruling Official, 
the costs and expenses incident to the forfeiture, the amount, if any, 
by which the appraised value of the property exceeds

[[Page 74]]

the lienholder's net equity in the property, and any amount specified in 
the Ruling Official's decision as a condition to remit the property. The 
Ruling Official, at his or her discretion, may waive costs and expenses 
incident to the forfeiture. The Ruling Official shall forward a copy of 
the decision, a memorandum of disposition, and the original releases to 
the U.S. Marshals Service or other property custodian who shall 
thereafter release the property to the lienholder; or
    (2) Sale of Property and Payment to Lienholder--Subject to the 
provisions of paragraph (j)(9)(i) of this section, upon sale of the 
property, the lienholder may receive the payment of a monetary amount up 
to the sum of the lienholder's net equity, less the expenses and costs 
incident to the forfeiture and sale of the property, and any other 
monetary conditions imposed. The Ruling Official, at his or her 
discretion, may waive costs and expenses incident to the forfeiture.
    (iii) If the lienholder does not notify the Ruling Official of the 
selection of one of the two options set forth above in paragraph 
(j)(7)(ii)(B) of this section within twenty (20) days of the receipt of 
such notification, the Ruling Official shall direct the U.S. Marshal or 
other property custodian to sell the property and pay the lienholder an 
amount up to the net equity, less the costs and expenses incurred 
incident to the forfeiture and sale, and any monetary conditions 
imposed. In the event a lienholder subsequently receives a payment of 
any kind on the debt owed for which he or she has already received 
payment as a result of the granting of remission or mitigation, the 
lienholder shall reimburse the Postal Service Fund to the extent of the 
payment received.
    (iv) Where the lienholder does not comply with the conditions 
imposed upon the release of the property, the property shall be sold 
after forfeiture. From the proceeds of the sale, all costs incident to 
the forfeiture and sale shall first be deducted, and the balance up to 
the net equity, less any monetary conditions, shall be paid to the 
lienholder.
    (8) Provisions applicable to victims.
    The provisions of this section apply to victims of an offense 
underlying the forfeiture of property, or of a related offense, who do 
not have a present ownership interest in the forfeited property (or, in 
the case of multiple victims of an offense, who do not have a present 
ownership interest in the forfeited property that is clearly superior to 
that of other petitioner victims). The provisions of this section apply 
only with respect to property forfeited pursuant to statutes that 
explicitly authorize restoration or remission of forfeited property to 
victims. Victims who have a superior present legally cognizable 
ownership interest in forfeited property may file petitions as other 
owners, subject to the regulations set forth in paragraph (j)(7)(i) of 
this section. The claims of such owner victims, like those of any other 
owners, shall have priority over the claims of any non-owner victims 
whose claims are recognized pursuant to this section.
    (i) Qualifications to file. A victim, as defined in paragraph 
(j)(2)(xxi) of this section, of an offense that was the underlying basis 
for the criminal, civil, or administrative forfeiture of specific 
property, or a victim of a related offense, may be granted remission of 
the forfeiture of that property, if in addition to complying with the 
other applicable provisions of this section, the victim satisfactorily 
demonstrates that:
    (A) A pecuniary loss of a specific amount has been directly caused 
by the criminal offense, or related offense, that resulted in the 
forfeiture, or by a related offense, and that the loss is supported by 
documentary evidence including invoices and receipts;
    (B) The pecuniary loss is the direct result of the illegal acts and 
is not the result of otherwise lawful acts which were committed in the 
course of a criminal offense;
    (C) The victim did not knowingly contribute to, participate in, 
benefit from, or act in a willfully blind manner towards the commission 
of the offense, or related offense, that was the underlying basis of the 
forfeiture;
    (D) The victim has not in fact been compensated for the wrongful 
loss of the property by the perpetrator or others; and
    (E) The victim does not have recourse reasonably available to other

[[Page 75]]

assets from which to obtain compensation for the wrongful loss of the 
property.
    (ii) Pecuniary loss. The amount of the pecuniary loss suffered by a 
victim for which remission may be granted is limited to the fair market 
value of the property of which the petitioner was deprived as of the 
date of the occurrence of the loss. No allowance shall be made for 
interest foregone or for collateral expenses incurred to recover lost 
property or to seek other recompense.
    (iii) Torts. A tort associated with illegal activity that formed the 
basis for the forfeiture shall not be a basis for remission, unless it 
constitutes the illegal activity itself, nor shall remission be granted 
for physical injuries to a petitioner or for damage to a petitioner's 
property.
    (iv) Denial of petition. In the exercise of his or her discretion, 
the Ruling Official may decline to grant remission where:
    (A) There is substantial difficulty in calculating the pecuniary 
loss incurred by the victim or victims;
    (B) The amount of the remission, if granted, would be small compared 
with the amount of expenses incurred by the government in determining 
whether to grant remission; or
    (C) The total number of victims is large and the monetary amount of 
the remission so small as to make its granting impractical.
    (v) Pro rata basis. In granting remission to multiple victims 
pursuant to this section, the Ruling Official should generally grant 
remission on a pro rata basis to recognized victims when petitions 
cannot be granted in full due to the limited value of the forfeited 
property. However, the Ruling Official may consider, among others, the 
following factors in establishing appropriate priorities in individual 
cases:
    (A) The specificity and reliability of the evidence establishing a 
loss;
    (B) The fact that a particular victim is suffering an extreme 
financial hardship;
    (C) The fact that a particular victim has cooperated with the 
government in the investigation related to the forfeiture or to a 
related prosecution or civil action; and
    (D) In the case of petitions filed by multiple victims of related 
offenses, the fact that a particular victim is a victim of the offense 
underlying the forfeiture.
    (vi) Reimbursement. Any petitioner granted remission pursuant to 
this section shall reimburse the Postal Service Fund for the amount 
received to the extent the individual later receives compensation for 
the loss of the property from any other source. The petitioner shall 
surrender the reimbursement upon payment from any secondary source.
    (vii) Claims of financial institution regulatory agencies. In cases 
involving property forfeitable under 18 U.S.C. 981(a)(1)(C) or 
(a)(1)(D), the Ruling Official may decline to grant a petition filed by 
a petitioner in whole or in part due to the lack of sufficient 
forfeitable funds to satisfy both the petition and claims of the 
financial institution regulatory agencies pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 981 
(e)(3) or (7). Generally, claims of financial regulatory agencies 
pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 981(e)(3) or (7) shall take priority over claims 
of victims.
    (9) Miscellaneous Provisions--(i) Priority of payment. Except where 
otherwise provided in this section, costs incurred by the Postal 
Inspection Service and other agencies participating in the forfeiture 
that were incident to the forfeiture, sale, or other disposition of the 
property shall be deducted from the amount available for remission or 
mitigation. Such costs include, but are not limited to, court costs, 
storage costs, brokerage and other sales-related costs, the amount of 
any liens and associated costs paid by the government on the property, 
costs incurred in paying the ordinary and necessary expenses of a 
business seized for forfeiture, awards for information as authorized by 
statute, expenses of trustees or other assistants pursuant to paragraph 
(j)(9)(iii) of this section, investigative or prosecutive costs 
specially incurred incident to the particular forfeiture, and costs 
incurred incident to the processing of the petition(s) for remission or 
mitigation. The remaining balance shall be available for remission or 
mitigation. The Ruling Official shall direct the distribution of the 
remaining balance in the following order of

[[Page 76]]

priority, except that he or she may exercise discretion in determining 
the priority between petitioners belonging to classes described in 
paragraphs (j)(9)(iii) and (9)(iv) of this section in exceptional 
circumstances:
    (A) Owners;
    (B) Lienholders;
    (C) Federal financial institution regulatory agencies (pursuant to 
paragraph (j)(9)(vi) of this section, not constituting owners or 
lienholders); and
    (D) Victims not constituting owners or lienholders (pursuant to 
paragraph (j)(8) of this section).
    (ii) Sale or disposition of property prior to ruling. If forfeited 
property has been sold or otherwise disposed of prior to a ruling, the 
Ruling Official may grant relief in the form of a monetary amount. The 
amount realized by the sale of the property is presumed to be the value 
of the property. Monetary relief shall not be greater than the appraised 
value of the property at the time of seizure and shall not exceed the 
amount realized from the sale or other disposition. The proceeds of the 
sale shall be distributed as follows:
    (A) Payment of the government's expenses incurred incident to the 
forfeiture and sale, including court costs and storage charges, if any;
    (B) Payment to the petitioner of an amount up to his or her interest 
in the property;
    (C) Payment to the Postal Service Fund of all other costs and 
expenses incident to the forfeiture;
    (D) In the case of victims, payment of any amount up to the amount 
of his or her loss; and
    (E) Payment of the balance remaining, if any, to the Postal Service 
Fund.
    (iii) Trustees and other assistants. In the exercise of his or her 
discretion, the Ruling Official may use the services of a trustee, other 
government official, or appointed contractors to notify potential 
petitioners, process petitions, and make recommendations to the Ruling 
Official on the distribution of property to petitioners. The expense for 
such assistance shall be paid out of the forfeited funds.
    (iv) Other agencies of the United States. Where another agency of 
the United States is entitled to remission or mitigation of forfeited 
assets because of an interest that is recognizable under these 
regulations, or is eligible for such transfer pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 
981(e)(6), such agency shall request the transfer in writing, in 
addition to complying with the provisions of paragraphs (j)(3) through 
(5) of this section. The decision to make such transfer shall be made in 
writing by the Ruling Official.
    (v) Financial institution regulatory agencies. A Ruling Official may 
direct the transfer of property under 18 U.S.C. 981(e) to certain 
federal financial institution regulatory agencies or an entity acting in 
their behalf, upon receipt of a written request, in lieu of ruling on a 
petition for remission or mitigation.
    (vi) Transfers to foreign governments. A Ruling Official may decline 
to grant remission to any petitioner other than an owner or lienholder 
so that forfeited assets may be transferred to a foreign government 
pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 981(i)(1), 19 U.S.C. 1616a(c)(2), or 21 U.S.C. 
881(e)(1)(E).
    (vii) Filing by attorneys. (A) A petition for remission or 
mitigation may be filed by a petitioner or by his or her attorney or 
legal guardian. If an attorney files on behalf of the petitioner, the 
petition must include a signed and sworn statement by the client-
petitioner stating that:
    (1) The attorney has the authority to represent the petitioner in 
this proceeding;
    (2) The petitioner has fully reviewed the petition; and
    (3) The petition is truthful and accurate in every respect.
    (B) Verbal notification of representation is not acceptable. 
Responses and notification of rulings shall not be sent to an attorney 
claiming to represent a petitioner unless a written notice of 
representation is filed. No extensions of time shall be granted due to 
delays in submission of the notice of representation.
    (viii) Consolidated petitions. At the discretion of the Ruling 
Official in individual cases, a petition may be filed by one petitioner 
on behalf of other petitioners, provided the petitions are based on 
similar underlying facts, and the petitioner who files the petition has 
written authority to do so on behalf of the other petitioners. This 
authority must be either expressed in

[[Page 77]]

documents giving the petitioner the authority to file petitions for 
remission, or reasonably implied from documents giving the petitioner 
express authority to file claims or lawsuits related to the course of 
conduct in question on behalf of these other petitioners. An insurer or 
an administrator of an employee benefit plan, for example, which itself 
has standing to file a petition as a ``victim'' within the meaning of 
paragraph (j)(2)(xxi) of this section, may also file a petition on 
behalf of all its insured or plan beneficiaries for any claims they may 
have based on co-payments made to the perpetrator of the offense 
underlying the forfeiture or the perpetrator of a ``related offense'' 
within the meaning of paragraph (j)(2)(xviii) of this section, if the 
authority to file claims or lawsuits is contained in the document or 
documents establishing the plan. Where such a petition is filed, any 
amounts granted as a remission must be transferred to the other 
petitioners, not the party filing the petition; although, in his or her 
discretion, the Ruling Official may use the actual petitioner as an 
intermediary for transferring the amounts authorized as a remission to 
the other petitioners.

[52 FR 4497, Feb. 12, 1987; 52 FR 5765, Feb. 26, 1987, as amended at 54 
FR 47520, Nov. 15, 1989; 56 FR 20361, May 3, 1991; 57 FR 32726, July 23, 
1992; 59 FR 31154, June 17, 1994; 59 FR 35852, July 14, 1994; 60 FR 
5581, Jan. 30, 1995; 60 FR 8306, Feb. 14, 1995; 62 FR 31726, June 11, 
1997]


<R05>
Sec. 233.8  Expedited forfeiture proceedings for property seized for administrative forfeiture involving controlled substances in personal use quantities.

    (a) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have 
the meanings specified:
    (1) Appraised Value means the estimated domestic price at the time 
of seizure at which such or similar property is freely offered for sale.
    (2) Controlled Substance has the meaning given in 21 U.S.C. 802.
    (3) Legal and Factual Basis of the Seizure means a statement of the 
applicable law under which the property is seized, and a written 
statement of the circumstances of the seizure sufficiently precise to 
enable an owner or other interested party to identify the date, place, 
and use or acquisition which makes the property subject to forfeiture.
    (4) Owner means one having a legal and possessory interest in the 
property seized for forfeiture. Even though one may hold primary and 
direct title to the property seized, such person may not have sufficient 
actual beneficial interest in the property to support a petition as 
owner if the facts indicate that another person had dominion and control 
over the property.
    (5) Personal Use Quantities means possession of a controlled 
substance in circumstances where there is not other evidence of an 
intent to distribute, or to facilitate the manufacturing, compounding, 
processing, delivering, importing, or exporting of any controlled 
substance. Evidence of personal use quantities does not include 
sweepings or other evidence of possession of quantities of a controlled 
substance for other than personal use.
    (i) Such other evidence includes:
    (A) Evidence, such as drug scales, drug distribution paraphernalia, 
drug records, drug packaging material, method of drug packaging, drug 
``cutting'' agents and other equipment, that indicates an intent to 
process, package or distribute a controlled substance;
    (B) Information from reliable sources indicating possession of a 
controlled substance with intent to distribute;
    (C) The arrest and/or conviction record of the person or persons in 
actual or constructive possession of the controlled substance for 
offenses under Federal, State or local law that indicates an intent to 
distribute a controlled substance;
    (D) Relationship of the controlled substance to large amounts of 
cash or any amount of prerecorded government funds;
    (E) Possession of the controlled substance under circumstances that 
indicate the substance is a sample intended for distribution in 
anticipation of a transaction involving large quantities, or is part of 
a larger delivery; or
    (F) Statements by the possessor, or otherwise attributable to the 
possessor, including statements of conspirators, that indicate 
possession with intent to distribute.

[[Page 78]]

    (ii) Possession of a controlled substance is presumed to be for 
personal use when there are no indicia of illicit drug trafficking or 
distribution such as, but not limited to, the factors listed in 
Sec. 233.8(a)(5)(i), and the amounts do not exceed the following 
quantities:
    (A) One gram of a mixture of substance containing a detectable 
amount of heroin;
    (B) One gram of a mixture or substance containing a detectable 
amount of:
    (1) Coca leaves, except coca leaves and extracts of coca leaves from 
which cocaine, ecgonine, and derivations of ecgonine or their salts have 
been removed;
    (2) Cocaine, its salts, optical and geometric isomers, and salts of 
isomers;
    (3) Ecgonine, its derivatives, their salts, isomers, and salts of 
isomers; or
    (4) Any compound, mixture or preparation which contains any quantity 
of any of the substances referred to in Sec. 233.8(a)(5) (ii)(B)(1)-(3);
    (5) \1/10\th gram of a mixture or substance described in 
Sec. 233.8(a)(5)(ii) which contains cocaine base;
    (6) \1/10\ gram of a mixture or substance containing a detectable 
amount of phencyclidine (PCP);
    (7) 500 micrograms of a mixture or substance containing a detectable 
amount of lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD);
    (8) One ounce of a mixture of substance containing a detectable 
amount of marihuana;
    (9) One gram of methamphetamine, its salts, isomers, and salts of 
its isomers, or one gram of a mixture or substance containing a 
detectable amount of methamphetamine, its salts, isomers, or salts of 
its isomer.
    (iii) The possession of a narcotic, a depressant, a stimulant, a 
hallucinogen or cannabis-controlled substance will be considered in 
excess of personal use quantities if the dosage unit amount possessed 
provides the same or greater equivalent efficacy as described in 
Sec. 233.8(a)(5)(ii).
    (6) Property means property subject to forfeiture under title 21, 
U.S.C., Sections 881(a)(4), (6), and (7).
    (7) Statutory Rights or Defenses to the Forfeiture means all legal 
and equitable rights and remedies available to a claimant of property 
seized for forfeiture.
    (8) Sworn to as used in Sec. 233.8(b)(4)(ii) refers to the oath as 
provided by 28 U.S.C. 1746.
    (b) Petition for expedited release in an administrative forfeiture 
action. (1) Where property is seized for administrative forfeiture 
involving controlled substances in personal use quantities, the owner 
may petition the Postal Inspection Service for expedited release of the 
property.
    (2) The owner filing the petition for expedited release must 
establish the following:
    (i) The owner has a valid, good faith interest in the seized 
property as owner or otherwise;
    (ii) The owner reasonably attempted to ascertain the use of the 
property in a normal and customary manner; and
    (iii) The owner did not know or consent to the illegal use of the 
property, or in the event that the owner knew or should have known of 
the illegal use, the owner did what reasonably could be expected to 
prevent the violation.
    (3) In addition to those factors listed in Sec. 233.8(b)(2), if an 
owner can demonstrate that he has other statutory rights or defenses 
that would cause him to prevail on the issue of forfeiture, such factors 
must also be considered in ruling on the petition for expedited release.
    (4) A petition for expedited release must be:
    (i) Filed in a timely manner to be considered; in order to be filed 
in a timely manner, the petition must be received by the Postal 
Inspection Service within 20 days from the date of the first publication 
of the notice of seizure.
    (ii) Executed and sworn to by the owner and both the envelope and 
the request must be clearly marked ``PETITION FOR EXPEDITED RELEASE'';
    (iii) Filed in accordance with the notice of seizure; and
    (iv) Addressed to the Chief Postal Inspector, Postal Inspection 
Service.
    (5) The petition must include the following:
    (i) A complete description of the property, including identification 
numbers, if any, and the date and place of seizure;

[[Page 79]]

    (ii) The petitioner's interest in the property, which must be 
supported by title documentation, bills of sale, contracts, mortgages, 
or other satisfactory documentary evidence; and
    (iii) A statement of the facts and circumstances, to be established 
by satisfactory proof, relied upon by the petitioner to justify 
expedited release of the seized property.
    (c) Ruling on petition for expedited release in an administrative 
forfeiture action involving personal use quantities of a controlled 
substance. (1) Upon receipt of a petition for expedited release filed 
pursuant to Sec. 233.8(b), the Postal Inspection Service must determine 
first whether a final administrative determination of the case, without 
regard to the provisions of this section, can be made within 21 days of 
the seizure. If such a final administrative determination is made within 
21 days, no further action need be taken under this section.
    (2) If no such final administrative determination is made within 21 
days of the seizure, the following procedure applies:
    (i) The Postal Inspection Service, within 20 days after the receipt 
of the petition for expedited release, determines whether the petition 
filed by the owner has established the factors listed in 
Sec. 233.8(b)(2); and
    (ii) If the Postal Inspection Service determines that those factors 
have been established, it terminates the administrative proceedings and 
returns the property to the owner except where it is evidence of a 
violation of law; or
    (iii) If the Postal Inspection Service determines that those factors 
have not been established, it proceeds with the administrative 
forfeiture.
    (d) Posting of substitute res. (1) Where property is seized for 
administrative forfeiture involving controlled substances in personal 
use quantities, the owner may obtain release of the property by posting 
a substitute res with the Postal Service. The property will be released 
to the owner upon the payment of an amount equal to the appraised value 
of the property if it is not evidence of a violation of law or has 
design or other characteristics that particularly suit it for use in 
illegal activities. This payment must be in the form of a traveler's 
check, a money order, a cashier's check or an irrevocable letter of 
credit made payable to the Postal Service. A bond in the form of a 
cashier's check will be considered as paid once the check has been 
accepted for payment by the financial institution which issued the 
check.
    (2) If a substitute res is posted and the property is 
administratively forfeited, the Postal Inspection Service will forfeit 
the substitute res in lieu of the property.

[54 FR 47520, Nov. 15, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 233.9  Expedited release of conveyances being forfeited in a judicial forfeiture proceeding for a drug-related offense.

    (a) Petition for expedited release of conveyance. Where a conveyance 
has been seized and is being forfeited in a judicial proceeding for a 
drug-related offense, the owner may petition the United States Attorney 
for an expedited release of the conveyance in accordance with the 
regulations of the Department of Justice (21 CFR part 1316).
    (b) Petition filed in timely manner. A petition for expedited 
release must be filed in a timely manner in order to be considered by 
the United States Attorney. To be considered as filed in a timely 
manner, in accordance with 21 CFR part 1316, the petition must be 
received by the appropriate United States Attorney within 20 days from 
the date of the first publication of the notice of the action and arrest 
of the property, or within 30 days after filing of the claim, whichever 
occurs later.
    (c) Obtaining release of the property by filing a substitute res 
bond. Where a conveyance is being forfeited in a judicial proceeding for 
a drug-related offense, the owner may obtain release of the property by 
filing a substitute res bond with the Postal Inspection Service. The 
conveyance will be released to the owner upon the payment of a bond in 
the amount of the appraised value of the conveyance if it is not 
evidence of a violation of law or has design or other characteristics 
that particularly suit it for use in illegal activities. This bond must 
be in the form of a traveler's check, a money order, a cashier's check 
or an irrevocable letter of credit made payable to the United States

[[Page 80]]

Postal Service. A bond in the form of a cashier's check will be 
considered as paid once the check has been accepted for payment by the 
financial institution which issued the check.
    (d) Forfeiture of the bond. If a substitute res bond is filed and 
the conveyance is judicially forfeited, the court will forfeit the bond 
in lieu of the property.

[54 FR 47522, Nov. 15, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 233.10  Notice provisions.

    (a) Special notice provision. At the time of seizure of property 
defined in Sec. 233.8(b) for violations involving the possession of 
personal use quantities of a controlled substance, written notice will 
be provided to the possessor of the property regarding applicable 
statutes and Federal regulations including the procedures established 
for the filing of a petition for expedited release and for the posting 
of a substitute res bond.
    (b) Standard notice provision. The standard notice to the owner as 
required by 19 U.S.C. 1607 will be made at the earliest practicable 
opportunity after determining ownership of the seized property and must 
include the legal and factual basis of the seizure.

[54 FR 47522, Nov. 15, 1989]


<R05>
233.11   Mail reasonably suspected of being dangerous to persons or property.

    (a) Screening of mail. When the Chief Postal Inspector determines 
that there is a credible threat that certain mail may contain a bomb, 
explosives, or other material that would endanger life or property, 
including firearms which are not mailable under Section C024 of the 
Domestic Mail Manual, the Chief Postal Inspector may, without a search 
warrant or the sender's or addressee's consent, authorize the screening 
of such mail by any means capable of identifying explosives, nonmailable 
firearms, or other dangerous contents in the mails. The screening must 
be within the limits of this section and without opening mail that is 
sealed against inspection or revealing the contents of correspondence 
within mail that is sealed against inspection. The screening is 
conducted according to these requirements.
    (1) Screening of mail authorized by paragraph (a) of this section 
must be limited to the least quantity of mail necessary to respond to 
the threat.
    (2) Such screening must be done in a manner that does not avoidably 
delay the screened mail.
    (3) The Chief Postal Inspector may authorize screening of mail by 
postal employees and by persons not employed by the Postal Service under 
such instruction that require compliance with this part and protect the 
security of the mail. No information obtained from such screening may be 
disclosed unless authorized by this part.
    (4) Mail of insufficient weight to pose a hazard to air or surface 
transportation, or to contain firearms which are not mailable under 
Section C024 of the Domestic Mail Manual, and international transit mail 
must be excluded from such screening.
    (5) After screening conducted under paragraph (a) of this section, 
mail that is reasonably suspected of posing an immediate and substantial 
danger to life or limb, or an immediate and substantial danger to 
property, may be treated by postal employees as provided in paragraph 
(b) of this section.
    (6) After screening, mail sealed against inspection that presents 
doubts about whether its contents are hazardous, that cannot be resolved 
without opening, must be reported to the Postal Inspection Service. Such 
mail must be disposed of under instructions promptly furnished by the 
Inspection Service.
    (b) Threatening pieces of mail. Mail, sealed or unsealed, reasonably 
suspected of posing an immediate danger to life or limb or an immediate 
and substantial danger to property may, without a search warrant, be 
detained, opened, removed from postal custody, and processed or treated, 
but only to the extent necessary to determine and eliminate the danger 
and only if a complete written and sworn statement of the detention, 
opening, removal, or treatment, and the circumstances that prompted it, 
signed by the person purporting to act under this section, is promptly 
forwarded to the Chief Postal Inspector.

[[Page 81]]

    (c) Reports. Any person purporting to act under this section who 
does not report his or her action to the Chief Postal Inspector under 
the requirements of this section, or whose action is determined after 
investigation not to have been authorized, is subject to disciplinary 
action or criminal prosecution or both.

[61 FR 28060, June 4, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 233.12  Civil penalties.

    False representation and lottery orders--
    (a) Issuance. Pursuant to 39 U.S.C. 3005, the Judicial Officer of 
the Postal Service, acting upon a satisfactory evidentiary basis, may 
issue a mail return and/or a cease and desist order against anyone 
engaged in conducting a scheme or device for obtaining money or property 
through the mail by means of a false representation, including the 
mailing of matter which is nonmailable, or engaged in conducting a 
lottery, gift enterprise, or scheme for the distribution of money or of 
real or personal property, by lottery, chance, or drawing of any kind.
    (b) Enforcement. Pursuant to 39 U.S.C. 3012, any person:
    (1) Who, through the use of the mail, evades or attempts to evade 
the effect of an order issued under 39 U.S.C. 3005(a)(1) or 3005(a)(2);
    (2) Who fails to comply with an order issued under 39 U.S.C. 
3005(a)(3); or
    (3) Who (other than a publisher described by 39 U.S.C. 3007(b)) has 
actual knowledge of any such order, is in privity with any person 
described by paragraph (b) (1) or (2) of this section, and engages in 
conduct to assist any such person to evade, attempt to evade, or fail to 
comply with such order, as the case may be, through the use of the mail;

Shall be liable to the United States for a civil penalty in an amount 
not to exceed $11,000 for each day that such person engages in conduct 
described by this paragraph (b). A separate penalty may be assessed 
under this paragraph (b) with respect to the conduct described by 
paragraphs (b) (1), (2), or (3) of this section.

[61 FR 56450, Nov. 1, 1996]


<R03>
PART 235--DEFENSE DEPARTMENT LIAISON--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
235.1  Postal Service to the Armed Forces.
235.2  Civil preparedness.


<R05>
Sec. 235.1   Postal Service to the Armed Forces.

    (a) Publication 38, Postal Agreement with the Department of Defense, 
defines the Postal Service's responsibilities for providing postal 
service to the Armed Forces.
    (b) The Chief Inspector is responsible for military liaison.
    (c) Postal inspectors provide liaison between postmasters and 
military commanders, visit military installations as required, and make 
any necessary recommendations.

(39 U.S.C. 401(2), 402, 403, 404, as enacted by Pub. L. 91-375, 84 Stat. 
719)

[38 FR 26193, Sept. 9, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 235.2   Civil preparedness.

    (a) Mission. The prime objective of postal emergency preparedness 
planning is to maintain or restore essential postal service in a 
national emergency, natural disaster, or disruptive domestic crisis.
    (b) Emergency Coordinator. The Chief Inspector is designated 
Emergency Coordinator for the Postal Service. As Emergency Coordinator, 
he provides general direction and coordination of the following 
programs:
    (1) National Civil Preparedness and Defense Mobilization;
    (2) Natural Disaster Preparedness;
    (3) Emergency Response to Disruptive Domestic Crisis.
    (c) Regional Emergency Coordinator. The Chief Inspector may delegate 
authority to Regional Chief Postal Inspectors, or others, for the 
function of Regional Emergency Coordinator and the general direction and 
coordination of all such programs within the Postal Regions, as are 
conducted by him at the National level.
    (d) Postmaster General emergency line of succession. (1) Deputy 
Postmaster General; (2) Senior Assistant Postmaster General, 
Administration; (3) Senior Assistant Postmaster General, Operations.

[[Page 82]]

    (e) Headquarters and field lines of succession. Each Headquarters 
organizational unit shall establish its own internal line of succession 
to provide for continuity under emergency conditions. Each Regional 
Postmaster General, Regional Chief Inspector, Postal Data Center 
Director, Inspector in Charge, and postmaster at first-class post 
offices shall prepare a succession list of officials who will act in his 
stead in the event he is incapacitated or absent in an emergency. Orders 
of succession shall be shown by position titles, except those of the 
Inspection Service may be shown by names.
    (f) Field responsibilities. Postmasters and heads of other 
installations shall:
    (1) Carry out civil preparedness assignments, programs, etc., as 
directed by regional officials.
    (2) Comply with, and cooperate in community civil preparedness plans 
(including exercise) for evacuation, take cover and other survival 
measures prescribed for local populations.
    (3) Designate representatives for continuing liaison with local 
civil preparedness organizations where such activity will not interfere 
with normal duties.
    (4) Endeavor to serve (at their own option) as members on the staff 
of the local civil preparedness director, provided such service will not 
interfere with their primary postal responsibility in an emergency.
    (5) Authorize and encourage their employees to participate 
voluntarily in nonpostal pre-emergency training programs and exercises 
in cooperation with States and localities.

(39 U.S.C. 401(2), 402, 403, 404, as enacted by Pub. L. 91-375, 84 Stat. 
719)

[38 FR 26193, Sept. 9, 1973]


<R03>
Post Office Organization and Administration--Table of Contents

<R05>



<R03>
PART 241--ESTABLISHMENT CLASSIFICATION, AND DISCONTINUANCE--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
241.1  Post offices.
241.2  Stations and branches.
241.3  Discontinuance of post offices.


<R05>
Sec. 241.1   Post offices.

    (a) Establishment. See Sec. 113.1 of this chapter.
    (b) Classification. As of July 1 each year, post offices are 
classified by the Postmaster General based on the allowable postal 
revenue units for the second preceding fiscal year as follows:
    (1) First Class. Post offices having 950 or more revenue units.
    (2) Second Class. Post offices having 190 but less than 950 revenue 
units.
    (3) Third Class. Post offices having 36 but less 190 revenue units.
    (4) Fourth Class. Post offices having less than 36 revenue units.

(39 U.S.C. 401)

[36 FR 4764, Mar. 12, 1971, as amended at 42 FR 59082, Nov. 15, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 241.2   Stations and branches.

    (a) Description. (1) Stations are established within the corporate 
limits or boundary, and branches are established outside the corporate 
limits or boundary of the city, town, or village in which the main post 
office is located. Stations and branches may be designated by number, 
letter or name. As a general rule, branches are named.
    (2) Stations and branches transact registry and money order 
business, sell postage supplies, and accept matter for mailing. Delivery 
service, post office boxes, and other services may be provided when 
directed by the postmaster.
    (3) Stations and branches, except nonpersonnel rural stations and 
branches, are designated as independent when registered and other mail 
is received or dispatched without passing through the main office.
    (b) Classification--(1) Classified. Operated by postal employees in 
quarters provided by the Federal Government.
    (2) Contract. Operated under contract by persons who are not Federal 
Government employees. Persons operating contract stations and branches 
are independent contractors and neither the contractors nor any person 
employed by them to assist in the conduct of contract stations or 
branches shall be employees of the Federal Government for any purpose 
whatsoever.

(39 U.S.C. 401)

[36 FR 4764, Mar. 12, 1971]

[[Page 83]]


<R05>
Sec. 241.3  Discontinuance of post offices.

    (a) Introduction--(1) Coverage. This section establishes the rules 
governing the Postal Service's consideration of whether an existing post 
office should be discontinued. The rules cover any proposal to replace a 
post office with a community post office, station or branch, 
consolidation with another post office, and any proposal to discontinue 
a post office without providing a replacement facility.
    (2) Legal requirements. Under 39 U.S.C. 404(b), any decision to 
close or consolidate a post office must be based on certain criteria. 
These include the effect on the community served; the effect on 
employees of the post office; compliance with government policy 
established by law that the Postal Service must provide a maximum degree 
of effective and regular postal services to rural areas, communities, 
and small towns where post offices are not self-sustaining; the economic 
savings to the Postal Service; and any other factors the Postal Service 
determines necessary. In addition, certain mandatory procedures apply as 
follows:
    (i) The public must be given 60 days' notice of a proposed action to 
enable the persons served by a post office to evaluate the proposal and 
provide comments.
    (ii) After public comments are received and taken into account, any 
final determination to close or consolidate a post office must be made 
in writing and must include findings covering all the required 
considerations.
    (iii) The written determination must be made available to persons 
served by the post office at least 60 days before the discontinuance 
takes effect.
    (iv) Within the first 30 days after the written determination is 
made available, any person regularly served by the affected post office 
may appeal the decision to the Postal Rate Commission.
    (v) The Commission may only affirm the Postal Service determination 
or return the matter for further consideration but may not modify the 
determination.
    (vi) The Commission is required by 39 U.S.C. 404(b)(5) to make a 
determination on the appeal no later than 120 days after receiving the 
appeal.
    (vii) The following is a summary table of the notice and appeal 
periods under the statute for these regulations.


[[Page 84]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09JN94.001



    (3) Additional requirements. This section also includes:
    (i) Rules to ensure that the community's identity as a postal 
address is preserved.
    (ii) Rules for consideration of a proposed discontinuance and for 
its implementation, if approved. These rules are designed to ensure that 
the reasons leading a district manager, Customer Service and Sales, to 
propose the discontinuance of a particular post office are fully 
articulated and disclosed at a stage that enables customer participation 
to make a helpful contribution toward the final decision.
    (b) Preservation of community address--(1) Policy. The Postal 
Service permits the use of a community's separate address to the extent 
practicable.
    (2) ZIP Code assignment. The ZIP Code for each address formerly 
served from the discontinued post office should be the ZIP Code of the 
facility providing replacement service to that address. In some cases, 
the ZIP Code originally assigned to the discontinued post office may be 
kept, if the responsible district manager, Customer Service and Sales, 
submits a request with justification to Address Management, Postal 
Service Headquarters, before the proposal to discontinue the post office 
is posted.
    (i) In a consolidation, the ZIP Code for the replacement community 
post office, station, or branch is either (A) the ZIP Code originally 
assigned to the discontinued post office, or (B) the ZIP Code of the 
replacement facility's parent post office, whichever provides the most 
expeditious distribution and delivery of mail addressed to the customers 
of the replacement facility.
    (ii) If the ZIP Code is changed and the parent post office covers 
several ZIP Codes, the ZIP Code must be that

[[Page 85]]

of the delivery area within which the facility is located.
    (3) Post office name in address. If all the delivery addresses using 
the name of the post office to be discontinued are assigned the same ZIP 
Code, customers may continue to use the discontinued post office name in 
their addresses, instead of the new delivering post office name.
    (4) Name of facility established by consolidation. If a post office 
to be discontinued is consolidated with one or more other post offices 
by establishing in its place a community post office, classified or 
contract station, or branch affiliated with another post office involved 
in the consolidation, the replacement unit is given the same name of the 
discontinued post office.
    (5) List of discontinued post offices. Publication 65, National 
Five-Digit ZIP Code and Post Office Directory, lists all post offices 
discontinued after March 14, 1977, for mailing address purposes only if 
they are used in addresses. The ZIP Codes listed for discontinued 
offices are those assigned under this subsection.
    (c) Initial proposal--(1) In general. If a district manager, 
Customer Service and Sales, believes that the discontinuance of a post 
office within his or her responsibility may be warranted, the manager:
    (i) Must use the standards and procedures in Sec. 241.3 (c) and (d).
    (ii) Must investigate the situation.
    (iii) May propose the post office be discontinued.
    (2) Consolidation. The proposed action may include a consolidation 
of post offices to substitute a community post office or a classified or 
contract station or branch for the discontinued post office if:
    (i) The communities served by two or more post offices are being 
merged into a single incorporated village, town, or city; or
    (ii) A replacement facility is necessary for regular and effective 
service to the area served by the post office considered for 
discontinuance.
    (3) Views of postmasters. Whether the discontinuance under 
consideration involves a consolidation or not, the district manager, 
Customer Service and Sales, must discuss the matter with the postmaster 
(or the officer in charge) of the post office considered for 
discontinuance, and with the postmaster of any other post office 
affected by the change. The manager should make sure that these 
officials submit written comments and suggestions as part of the record 
when the proposal is reviewed.
    (4) Preparation of written proposal. The district manager, Customer 
Service and Sales, must gather and preserve for the record all 
documentation used to assess the proposed change. If the manager thinks 
the proposed action is warranted, he or she must prepare a document 
titled ``Proposal to (Close) (Consolidate) the (Name) Post Office.'' 
This document must describe, analyze, and justify in sufficient detail 
to Postal Service management and affected customers the proposed service 
change. The written proposal must address each of the following matters 
in separate sections:
    (i) Responsiveness to community postal needs. It is the policy of 
the Government, as established by law, that the Postal Service will 
provide a maximum degree of effective and regular postal services to 
rural areas, communities, and small towns where post offices are not 
self-sustaining. The proposal should (A) contrast the services available 
before and after the proposed change; (B) describe how the changes 
respond to the postal needs of the affected customers; and (C) highlight 
particular aspects of customer service that might be less advantageous 
as well as more advantageous.
    (ii) Effect on community. The proposal must include an analysis of 
the effect the proposed discontinuance might have on the community 
served, and discuss the application of the requirements in 
Sec. 241.3(b).
    (iii) Effect on employees. The written proposal must summarize the 
possible effects of the change on the postmaster, supervisors, and other 
employees of the post office considered for discontinuance. (The 
district manager, Customer Service and Sales, must suggest measures to 
comply with personnel regulations related to post office discontinuance 
and consolidation.)

[[Page 86]]

    (iv) Savings. The proposal must include an analysis of the economic 
savings to the Postal Service from the proposed action, including the 
cost or savings expected from each major factor contributing to the 
overall estimate.
    (v) Other factors. The proposal should include an analysis of other 
factors that the district manager, Customer Service and Sales, 
determines are necessary for a complete evaluation of the proposed 
change, whether favorable or unfavorable.
    (vi) Summary. The proposal must include a summary that explains why 
the proposed action is necessary, and assesses how the factors 
supporting the proposed change outweigh any negative factors. In taking 
competing considerations into account, the need to provide regular and 
effective service is paramount.
    (vii) Notice. The proposal must include the following notice: ``This 
Is A Proposal. It Is Not A Final Determination To (Close) (Consolidate) 
This Post Office.''
    (A) If a final determination is made to close or consolidate this 
post office, after public comments on this proposal are received and 
taken into account, a notice of that final determination must be posted 
in this post office.
    (B) The final determination must contain instructions on how 
affected customers may appeal that decision to the Postal Rate 
Commission. Any such appeal must be received by the Commission within 30 
days of the posting of the final determination.
    (d) Notice, public comment, and record--(1) Posting proposal and 
comment notice. A copy of the written proposal and a signed invitation 
for comments must be posted prominently in each affected post office. 
The invitation for comments must:
    (i) Ask interested persons to provide written comments within 60 
days, to a stated address, offering specific opinions and information, 
favorable or unfavorable, on the potential effect of the proposed change 
on postal services and the community.
    (ii) State that copies of the proposal with attached optional 
comment forms are available in the affected post offices.
    (iii) Provide a name and telephone number to call for information.
    (2) Proposal and comment notice. The following is a sample format 
that may be used for the proposal and comment notice.

[[Page 87]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09JN94.002



[[Page 88]]

    (3) Other steps. In addition to providing notice and inviting 
comment, the district manager, Customer Service and Sales, must take any 
other steps necessary to ensure that the persons served by the affected 
post office understand the nature and implications of the proposed 
action (e.g., meeting with community groups and following up on comments 
received that seem to be based on incorrect assumptions or information).
    (i) If oral contacts develop views or information not previously 
documented, whether favorable or unfavorable to the proposal, the 
district manager, Customer Service and Sales, should encourage persons 
offering the views or information to provide written comments to 
preserve them for the record.
    (ii) As a factor in making his or her decision, the district 
manager, Customer Service and Sales, may not rely on communications 
received from anyone unless submitted in writing for the record.
    (4) Record. The district manager, Customer Service and Sales, must 
keep as part of the record for his or her consideration and for review 
by the chief marketing officer/senior vice president all the 
documentation gathered about the proposed change.
    (i) The record must include all information that the district 
manager, Customer Service and Sales, considered, and the decision must 
stand on the record. No information or views submitted by customers may 
be excluded.
    (ii) The docket number assigned to the proposal must be the ZIP Code 
of the office proposed for closing or consolidation.
    (iii) The record must include a chronological index in which each 
document contained is identified and numbered as filed.
    (iv) As written communications are received in response to the 
public notice and invitation for comments, they are included in the 
record.
    (v) A complete copy of the record must be available for public 
inspection during normal office hours at the post office proposed for 
discontinuance or at the post office providing alternative service, if 
the office to be discontinued was temporarily suspended, beginning no 
later than the date on which notice is posted and extending through the 
comment period.
    (vi) Copies of documents in the record (except the proposal and 
comment form) are provided on request and on payment of fees as noted in 
the Administrative Support Manual (ASM) Sec. 352.6.
    (e) Consideration of public comments and final local 
recommendation--(1) Analysis of comments. After waiting not less than 60 
days after notice is posted under Sec. 241.3(d)(1) the district manager, 
Customer Service and Sales, must prepare an analysis of the public 
comments received for consideration and inclusion in the record. If 
possible, comments subsequently received should also be included in the 
analysis. The analysis should list and briefly describe each point 
favorable to the proposal and each point unfavorable to the proposal. 
The analysis should identify to the extent possible how many comments 
support each point listed.
    (2) Re-evaluation of proposal. After completing the analysis, the 
district manager, Customer Service and Sales, must review the proposal 
and re-evaluate all the tentative conclusions previously made in light 
of additional customer information and views in the record.
    (i) Discontinuance not warranted. If the district manager, Customer 
Service and Sales, decides against the proposed discontinuance, he or 
she must post, in the post office considered for discontinuance, a 
notice stating that the proposed closing or consolidation is not 
warranted.
    (ii) Discontinuance warranted. If the district manager, Customer 
Service and Sales, decides that the proposed discontinuance is 
justified, the appropriate sections of the proposal must be revised, 
taking into account the comments received from the public. After making 
necessary revisions, the manager must:
    (A) Forward the revised proposal and the entire record to the chief 
marketing officer/senior vice president for final review.
    (B) Attach a certificate that all documents in the record are 
originals or true and correct copies.

[[Page 89]]

    (f) Postal Service decision--(1) In general. The chief marketing 
officer/senior vice president or a designee must review the proposal of 
the district manager, Customer Service and Sales. This review and the 
decision on the proposal must be based on and supported by the record 
developed by the district manager, Customer Service and Sales. The chief 
marketing officer/senior vice president can instruct the district 
manager to provide more information to supplement the record. Each such 
instruction and the response must be added to the record. The decision 
on the proposal of the district manager, which must also be added to the 
record, may approve or disapprove the proposal, or return it for further 
action as set forth below.
    (2) Approval. The chief marketing officer/senior vice president or a 
designee may approve the proposal of the district manager, Customer 
Service and Sales, with or without further revisions. If approved, the 
term ``Final Determination'' is substituted for ``Proposal'' in the 
title. A copy of the Final Determination must be provided to the 
district manager. The Final Determination constitutes the Postal Service 
determination for the purposes of 39 U.S.C. 404(b). The Final 
Determination must include the following notices:
    (i) Supporting materials. ``Copies of all materials on which this 
Final Determination is based are available for public inspection at the 
(Name) Post Office during normal office hours.''
    (ii) Appeal rights. ``This Final Determination to (close) 
(consolidate) the (name) Post Office may be appealed by any person 
served by that office to the Postal Rate Commission. Any appeal must be 
received by the Commission within 30 days of the date this Final 
Determination was posted. If an appeal is filed, copies of appeal 
documents prepared by the Postal Rate Commission, or the parties to the 
appeal, must be made available for public inspection at the (name) Post 
Office during normal office hours.''
    (3) Disapproval. The chief marketing officer/senior vice president 
or a designee may disapprove the proposal of the district manager, 
Customer Service and Sales, and return it and the record to the manager 
with written reasons for disapproval. The manager must post a notice in 
each affected post office that the proposed closing or consolidation has 
been determined to be unwarranted.
    (4) Return for further action. The chief marketing officer/senior 
vice president or a designee may return the proposal of the district 
manager, Customer Service and Sales, with written instructions to give 
additional consideration to matters in the record, or to obtain 
additional information. Such instructions must be placed in the record.
    (5) Public file. Copies of each Final Determination and each 
disapproval of a proposal by the chief marketing officer/senior vice 
president, must be placed on file in the Postal Service Headquarters 
Library.
    (g) Implementation of final determination--(1) Notice of final 
determination to discontinue post office. The district manager, Customer 
Service and Sales, must:
    (i) Provide notice of the Final Determination by posting a copy 
prominently in the affected post office or offices. The date of posting 
must be noted on the first page of the posted copy as follows:

                          ``Date of posting:''

    The district manager, Customer Service and Sales, must notify the 
chief marketing officer/senior vice president in writing of the date of 
posting.

    (ii) Ensure that a copy of the completed record is available for 
public inspection during normal business hours at each post office where 
the Final Determination is posted for 30 days from the posting date.
    (iii) Provide copies of documents in the record on request and 
payment of fees as noted in the ASM 352.6.
    (2) Implementation of determinations not appealed. If no appeal is 
filed pursuant to 39 U.S.C. 404(b)(5), the official closing date of the 
office must be published in the Postal Bulletin, effective the first 
Saturday 90 days after the Final Determination was posted. A district 
manager, Customer Service and Sales, may request a different date for 
official discontinuance in the Post Office Change Announcement document

[[Page 90]]

submitted to the chief marketing officer/senior vice president. However, 
the post office may not be discontinued sooner than 60 days after the 
posting of the notice required by Sec. 241.3(g)(1).
    (3) Actions during appeal--(i) Implementation of discontinuance. If 
an appeal is filed, only the chief marketing officer/senior vice 
president may direct a discontinuance before disposition of the appeal. 
However, the post office may not be discontinued sooner than 60 days 
after the posting of notice required by Sec. 241.3(g)(1).
    (ii) Display of appeal documents. Classification and Customer 
Service, Postal Service General Counsel, must provide the district 
manager, Customer Service and Sales, with copies of all pleadings, 
notices, orders, briefs, and opinions filed in the appeal proceeding.
    (A) The district manager must ensure that copies of all these 
documents are prominently displayed and available for public inspection 
in the post office to be discontinued. If the operation of that post 
office has been suspended, the manager must display copies in the 
affected post offices.
    (B) All documents except the Postal Rate Commission's final order 
and opinion must be displayed until the final order and opinion are 
issued. The final order and opinion must be displayed for 30 days.
    (4) Actions following appeal decision--(i) Determination affirmed. 
If the Commission dismisses the appeal or affirms the Postal Service's 
determination, the official closing date of the office must be published 
in the Postal Bulletin, effective the first Saturday 90 days after the 
Commission renders its opinion, if not previously implemented under 
Sec. 241.3(g)(3)(i). However, the post office may not be discontinued 
sooner than 60 days after the posting of the notice required under 
Sec. 241.3(g)(1).
    (ii) Determination returned for further consideration. If the 
Commission returns the matter for further consideration, the chief 
marketing officer/senior vice president must direct that either (A) 
notice be provided under Sec. 241.3(f)(3) that the proposed 
discontinuance is determined not to be warranted or (B) the matter be 
returned to an appropriate stage under these regulations for further 
consideration following such instructions as the chief marketing 
officer/senior vice president may provide.

[59 FR 29725, June 9, 1994, as amended at 60 FR 32273, June 21, 1995]


<R03>
PART 242--CHANGE OF SITE--Table of Contents

<R05>



<R05>
Sec. 242.2   Change of site--fourth-class offices.

    Report by memorandum to chief, organization and management branch, 
when change in site is necessary. Complete Form 1021 when furnished. 
Retain one copy in files. If new location is one-fourth of a mile or 
more from existing location, furnish a statement signed by majority of 
customers approving change. When a change involves moving a post office 
from one county to another, notify the Deputy Postmaster General, of the 
circumstances (including a sketch showing present and proposed sites), 
and await approval of that Division.

(39 U.S.C. 401)

[36 FR 4765, Mar. 12, 1971]


<R03>
PART 243--CONDUCT OF OFFICES--Table of Contents

<R05>



<R05>
Sec. 243.2   Quarters.

    (a) Employee bulletin boards. Bulletin boards may be placed in 
workrooms and employees' lunchrooms for displaying notices as prescribed 
in this manual and Management Labor Organization Agreements.
    (b) Location of offices. Postal units may not be located in, or 
directly connected to, a room in which intoxicating liquor is sold to be 
consumed on the premises.
    (c) Lost articles. When articles are turned in to employees, the 
name and address of the finder shall be recorded so the article may be 
returned to him if not claimed by the loser. If the name of the finder 
cannot be obtained, and the article is not claimed within 30 days, it 
must be disposed of in the same manner as unidentified material found 
loose in the mail. Do not return postal money orders to the finder. Mail 
to Money Order Branch, Accounting Division, U.S. Postal Service, General

[[Page 91]]

Accounting Office Building, Washington, DC 20260, with a memorandum of 
explanation.
    (d) Public use of restrooms. Restrooms off public corridors shall 
normally be kept open during regular hours of business for the benefit 
of the public. Where vandalism or loitering cannot be controlled, 
postmasters may lock restrooms, furnishing those agencies served by the 
restrooms, keys for employee use. This shall not be construed to permit 
access by nonpostal personnel to restrooms in restricted postal areas.
    (e) Letter drops. At all except fourth-class post offices, provide a 
regulation letterbox for depositing mail in front of or next to the post 
office. Show collection time schedules on letterboxes. At fourth-class 
offices, if a letterbox is not supplied, provide a slot in the outer 
post office door. When messengers or star route carriers have access to 
lobbies, door slot deposits must lead to a locked box.
    (f) Hour signs. Display hours of window service prominently at all 
first-, second-, and third-class post offices, classified stations and 
branches, and annexes. Use Sign 41, Hours decal set, available in supply 
centers.
    (g) Service of process on postal premises. Postmasters or other 
installation heads shall permit service on postal premises of civil and 
criminal process affecting employees in personal matters, when such 
service of process will not interfere with postal operations. Process 
servers should be directed to the postmaster's or installation head's 
office, where the employee will be called in and service made. Section 
265.10 of this chapter contains rules regarding compliance with subpoena 
duces tecum, court orders, and summonses where official business or 
official records are involved.
    (h) Public service areas--prohibited items. Photographs of an 
incumbent or former President or Postmaster General are not to be 
displayed in post office lobbies or in common use public service areas 
such as elevator lobbies and corridors in facilities owned by or leased 
to the Postal Service. Further, such photographs are not to be 
requisitioned or purchased by postal installations at Postal Service 
expense.

(39 U.S.C. 501)

[36 FR 4765, Mar. 12, 1971, as amended at 39 FR 38376, Oct. 31, 1974; 40 
FR 8820, Mar. 3, 1975; 42 FR 33722, July 1, 1977; 44 FR 39854, July 6, 
1979]


<R03>
General Postal Administration--Table of Contents

<R05>



<R03>
PART 255--ACCESS OF HANDICAPPED PERSONS TO POSTAL SERVICES, PROGRAMS, FACILITIES, AND EMPLOYMENT--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
255.1  Discrimination against handicapped persons prohibited.
255.2  Special arrangements for postal services.
255.3  Access to postal facilities.
255.4  Other postal regulations; authority of postal officials and 
          employees.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 101, 401, 403, 1001, 1003, 3403, 3404; 29 
U.S.C. 791, 794.

    Source: 50 FR 14102, Apr. 10, 1985, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 255.1  Discrimination against handicapped persons prohibited.

    (a) Policy. Postal Service policy is to comply fully with sections 
501 and 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, and other applicable 
laws. Accordingly, no otherwise qualified handicapped individual shall, 
solely by reason of his or her handicap, be excluded from participation 
in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under, 
any program or activity operated by the Postal Service, or in 
employment.
    (b) Definition. For purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, the 
term handicapped applies to a person who has, has a record of, or is 
regarded as having, a physical or mental impairment which substantially 
limits one or more of such person's major life activities.
    (c) Customer Service Complaints--(1) How made. Complaints by or on 
behalf of otherwise qualified handicapped customers who believe that 
they have been discriminated against in the provision of postal services 
solely by reason of their handicap may be made in accordance with 
Domestic Mail Manual 114.1. The customer should provide, or

[[Page 92]]

be willing to provide upon request, sufficient information regarding the 
matter to permit a complete examination of all of the relevant 
circumstances concerning the complaint.
    (2) Exhaustion of Administrative Remedies. See Domestic Mail Manual 
114.14.
    (3) Resolution. A local official receiving a complaint of unlawful 
discrimination against a handicapped person, such as a refusal to serve 
an otherwise qualified customer solely because of the customer's 
handicap, must handle it in accordance with existing regulations and 
procedures for resolution of customer complaints, including the time 
limits prescribed in or under Sec. 255.1(c)(4). The steps taken by the 
official should include an initial review of the complaint to determine 
whether further investigation is necessary to resolve the complaint, or 
whether immediate action can be taken to remedy any illegal 
discrimination that may be occurring. Such corrective action as is 
determined to be necessary to resolve the complaint should be taken as 
soon as possible. The complainant should be notified promptly of the 
action taken; if the matter cannot be resolved quickly, appropriate 
interim reports, including an acknowledgment of receipt of the 
complaint, should be furnished to the complainant. Replies to written 
complaints must be in writing; replies to nonwritten complaints may be 
in writing or any other appropriate medium. If a complaint claims that 
discrimination has resulted from the lack of special arrangements for 
handicapped persons, the complaint should be handled in accordance with 
Sec. 255.2(b) or Sec. 255.3(b), as appropriate. Legal advice on whether 
a particular complaint seeks to end unlawful discrimination or to 
request special arrangements may be sought from the Regional Counsel.
    (4) Time Limits. If a complaint cannot be resolved within fifteen 
(15) days the customer must be sent a written acknowledgment of the 
receipt of the complaint. If the complaint cannot be resolved within 
thirty (30) days of its receipt, the customer must be sent an interim 
report in writing, including a statement of when the matter is expected 
to be resolved. Whenever it appears that a complaint cannot be resolved 
within sixty (60) days of its receipt, a written report and explanation 
must be submitted to the appropriate Regional Office, and to the 
Consumer Advocate, U.S. Postal Service, Washington, DC 20260-6320. Local 
managers may prescribe shorter time limits for complaint responses 
within their area of responsibility by memorandum or other appropriate 
written directive.
    (5) Automatic Review. If an associate office postmaster or 
management sectional center manager proposes to deny a request by a 
handicapped customer for a special arrangement or the alteration of a 
facility, the proposed decision shall be submitted to the next higher 
level of management (if the request is for a special arrangement) or to 
the appropriate Field Real Estate and Buildings Office (if the request 
is for the alteration of a facility). The customer shall be notified of 
the approved decision. No review under this provision limits the 
customer's right of appeal to the Consumer Advocate under Domestic Mail 
Manual 114.14.
    (6) Appeal. See Domestic Mail Manual 114.14.
    (d) Postal Employment. Discrimination against otherwise qualified 
handicapped postal employees or job applicants is prohibited, under 
section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. 791, and by 
implementing regulations promulgated by the Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission and the Postal Service. Complaints of discrimination against 
handicapped applicants or employees may be made in accordance with the 
procedures prescribed in the Employee and Labor Relations Manual (ELM) 
concerning Equal Employment Opportunity, which apply to discrimination 
against handicapped persons.


<R05>
Sec. 255.2  Special arrangements for postal services.

    (a) Policy. The Postal Service offers all of its services to all of 
its customers without discrimination. Customers who would have 
difficulty using or be unable to use certain services may be eligible 
under postal regulations for special arrangements. Some of the special 
arrangements that the Postal Service has authorized are listed below.

[[Page 93]]

No customer is required to use any special arrangement offered by the 
Postal Service, but a customer's refusal to make use of such special 
arrangement does not require the Postal Service to offer other special 
arrangements to that customer.
    (1) Carrier Delivery Services and Programs. See Domestic Mail Manual 
155.262.
    (2) Postal Retail Services and Programs--(i) Stamps by Mail. See 
Postal Operations Manual 145.
    (ii) Retail Service from Rural Carriers. See Domestic Mail Manual 
156.41.
    (iii) Self-Service Postal Centers. Self-Service Postal Centers 
(SSPCs) contain vending equipment for the sale of stamps and stamp 
items, and parcel and letter deposit boxes. See Postal Operations Manual 
154. Many SSPCs are accessible to individuals in wheelchairs. Customers 
may obtain information concerning the nearest such SSPC from their local 
post office.
    (iv) Postage-Free Mailing for Certain Mailings. See Domestic Mail 
Manual parts 135 and 115.24, and International Mail Manual 225.
    (b) Inquiries and Requests--(1) How made: Customers wishing further 
information about special arrangements for particular postal services 
may contact the postmaster or other local postal official responsible 
for such service.
    (2) Response. A local official receiving a request for special 
arrangements must provide the customer with any such arrangements as are 
required by postal regulations and must notify the customer of the 
special arrangements. If no such special arrangements are required, the 
responsible official may take such actions to accommodate the customer 
as are within his or her authority to provide under postal regulations, 
if he or she determines that doing so would be reasonable, practical, 
and consistent with the economical and proper operation of the program 
or activity for which he or she has budgetary responsibility. Every 
customer who requests special arrangements shall be notified promptly of 
the determination made and the reasons therefor. If a determination 
cannot be made quickly, appropriate interim reports, including an 
acknowledgment of receipt of the request, must be furnished to the 
customer. Replies to written requests must be in writing; replies to 
nonwritten requests may be in writing or any other appropriate medium.
    (c) Exhaustion of Administrative Remedies and Appeal. See Domestic 
Mail Manual 114.14.


<R05>
Sec. 255.3  Access to postal facilities.

    (a) Policy--(1) Legal and Policy Requirements. It is Postal Service 
policy to comply fully with the physical access requirements of the 
Architectural Barriers Act of 1968, as amended. Pursuant to that Act, 
the Postal Service designs, constructs, and alters its facilities in 
accordance with its published standards for access to postal facilities. 
Such standards are contained in Handbook RE-4, Standards for Facility 
Accessibility by the Physically Handicapped, single copies of which may 
be obtained free of charge by writing to the Real Estate and Buildings 
Department, U.S Postal Service Headquarters, Washington, DC 20260-6400. 
In general, the Postal Service's access standards apply prospectively to 
all newly constructed facilities, and to all new alterations of certain 
features of existing facilities, regardless of whether the facilities 
are owned or leased, and regardless of whether the alteration is 
required or discretionary. In addition, the Postal Service remodels 
facilities for handicapped access whenever such remodeling is legally 
required under section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 as a 
``reasonable accommodation'' to handicapped employees or applicants. 
Moreover, where handicapped persons are employed or are to be employed, 
their work areas are required by postal policy to be altered in 
accordance with Postal Service access standards to make them accessible 
to the handicapped employees. At every available opportunity, accessible 
facilities must be selected for lease or purchase, where cost is at an 
acceptable level, and such facilities provide desirable working 
conditions, a maximum degree of convenient and efficient postal 
services, proper access to existing and future air and surface 
transportation facilities, and control of postal costs (see 39 U.S.C. 
101(g) and 403(b)(3)). For purposes of the preceding

[[Page 94]]

sentence, a facility and its elements are considered ``accessible'' if 
they comply with any handicapped access code which has been adopted by 
any government agency or recommended by the American National Standards 
Institute, and if any needed off-street parking is provided.
    (2) Discretionary Modifications. The Postal Service may also modify 
facilities not legally required to conform to the Barriers Act's 
standards when it determines that doing so would be consistent with 
efficient postal operations. Not all facilities are required to conform 
to the standards adopted under the Act. In determining whether 
modifications not legally required should be made, due regard is given 
to:
    (i) The cost of the discretionary modification;
    (ii) The number of customers to be benefited by the modification;
    (iii) The inconvenience, if any, to the general public;
    (iv) The anticipated useful life of the modification to the Postal 
Service;
    (v) If the facility is leased, whether the lease would require the 
Postal Service to restore the premises to their original condition at 
the expiration of the lease, and, if so, the possible cost of such 
restoration;
    (vi) The historic or architectural significance of the property in 
accordance with paragraph (a)(4) of this section;
    (vii) The availability of other options to foster service 
accessibility; and
    (viii) Any other factor that may be relevant and appropriate to the 
decision.
    (3) Handicapped Parking. Handicapped parking restrictions must be 
rigorously enforced by the installation's Security Control Officer. 
Where members of the U.S. Postal Security Force are not available to 
exercise the powers of special policemen under 40 U.S.C. 318, local 
postmasters and installation heads must, pursuant to 40 U.S.C. 318b and 
with the approval of the chief postal inspector or his designee, seek 
the assistance of state and local enforcement agencies to insure that 
these restrictions are enforced. See 39 CFR 232.1(q).
    (4) Historic Preservation. Postal Service policy is to comply with 
the requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, 
Executive Order 11593, and the procedures prescribed by the Advisory 
Council on Historic Preservation in 36 CFR Part 800 (1984) as they 
pertain to the modification of historic and architecturally significant 
properties.
    (5) Blind Vendor Facilities. See Employee & Labor Relations Manual 
614 (Issue 6, 5-20-81).
    (b) Inquiries and Requests--(1) How made. Inquiries concerning 
access to postal facilities, and requests for discretionary alterations 
of postal facilities not covered by the access standards, may be made to 
the local postmaster or to the manager of the facility involved.
    (2) Response. The official contacted, if authorized to do so, must 
determine, in consultation with appropriate supervisors, whether the 
facility is required to be modified to conform to access standards, and 
if it is not, whether discretionary alterations should be made. If the 
facility is required to be modified, arrangements for the required 
alterations must be made as soon as practicable. If modifications are 
not required, discretionary alterations may be made, on a case-by-case 
basis, in accordance with the criteria listed in paragraph (a)(2) of 
this section. Every customer who requests modifications must be notified 
promptly of the determination made and the reasons therefor. If a 
determination cannot be made quickly, appropriate interim reports, 
including an acknowledgement of the request, must be furnished to the 
customer. Replies to written requests must be in writing; replies to 
nonwritten requests must be in writing or any other appropriate medium.
    (c) Exhaustion of Administrative Remedies and Appeal. See Domestic 
Mail Manual 114.14.


<R05>
Sec. 255.4  Other postal regulations; authority of postal officials and employees.

    This part 255 supplements all other postal regulations. Nothing in 
this part is intended either to repeal, modify, or amend any other 
postal regulation, to authorize any postal official or employee to 
violate or exceed any regulatory limit, or to confer any budgetary 
authority on any postal official

[[Page 95]]

or employee outside normal budgetary procedures. Officials or employees 
receiving complaints which they lack authority to resolve must promptly 
refer any such complaint to a higher-level or more appropriate official 
or employee, and at the same time must notify the customer of the name 
of the person who is handling the complaint.


<R03>
PART 259--SERVICES PERFORMED FOR OTHER AGENCIES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
259.1  Government.
259.2  Red Cross.


<R05>
Sec. 259.1   Government.

    (a) Policy. The Postal Service cooperates with Federal Agencies 
whenever the overall costs to Government will be reduced. Assistance in 
a number of special projects and programs is provided when the knowledge 
and abilities of postal employees are helpful.
    (b) Reimbursement. The Postal Service establishes reasonable fees 
and charges for nonpostal services performed for agencies of the Federal 
as well as State governments. In establishing such fees and charges, the 
Postal Service considers the value of time of the personnel directly 
involved in the performance of the service, including direct supervision 
and supporting functions, plus the cost of materials and supplies 
specifically sold, used or consumed. Also included is an element 
representing a reasonable share of Postal Service general overhead costs 
which are not attributable or assignable specifically to any product or 
service. The establishment of such fees and charges shall be reasonably 
consistent with the methods employed in establishing rates and fees for 
postal services then in effect.
    (c) Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, 
arrangements for Postal Service participation in special surveys, 
censuses, and other activities must be made between the national 
headquarters of the requesting agencies and the Customer Services 
Department, U.S. Postal Service, Washington, DC 20260. Refer all 
requests to the Regional Postmaster General for forwarding to 
Headquarters. Authority to perform services for Government agencies is 
announced in the Postal Bulletin or by individual letters to the offices 
involved.
    (d) Housing Vacancy Surveys--(1) General. An interagency agreement 
between the U.S. Postal Service (USPS) and the Federal Home Loan Bank 
Board (FHLBB) establishes the terms and conditions and reimbursement 
rates under which USPS will conduct Housing Vacancy Surveys in City 
Delivery offices when requested by FHLBB.
    (2) Restrictions. The Agreement only authorizes the disclosure of 
aggregate statistical data. Postal managers must not permit the name or 
address of any past or present postal patron, or any other person to be 
disclosed unless such disclosure is authorized in writing by USPS 
Regions or Headquarters and is not in violation of 39 U.S.C. 412.
    (3) Postmaster's Responsibility. (i) A postmaster will receive 
notification from FHLBB when his office has been selected to conduct a 
Housing Vacancy Survey. Normally, written notification will be mailed to 
the postmaster 30 days in advance of the date FHLBB would like USPS to 
conduct the survey, since USPS is under no obligation to use overtime or 
auxiliary assistance to conduct these surveys. The postmaster or his 
designee will schedule the survey on or near the date requested and will 
promptly reply to FHLBB so that the necessary forms will be provided on 
time.
    (ii) All necessary forms and instructions will be supplied directly 
to each post office to be surveyed. Postmasters will designate a manager 
in each delivery unit to coordinate the survey within the unit and to 
review completed survey forms for accuracy.
    (iii) FHLBB may request USPS to perform special or emergency surveys 
with less than 30 days advance notice. Since FHLBB has agreed to 
reimburse USPS at twice the normal rates for promptly performing such 
surveys, every reasonable effort should be made to accommodate such 
requests in a timely manner.
    (iv) Housing Vacancy Surveys will not be conducted during the month 
of December of any year.
    (v) Postmasters will notify the Office of Delivery and Collection, 
Washington, DC 20260, of the number of each

[[Page 96]]

type survey form completed for FHLBB. FHLBB will then remit payment 
directly to Headquarters, USPS.
    (vi) USPS will not release or publish any survey results except in 
response to a court order, subpoena, or as required by the Freedom of 
Information Act.
    (e) Unauthorized projects prohibited. Do not conduct special surveys 
or otherwise participate in any cooperative projects without the 
authorization in paragraph (c) of this section.

(39 U.S.C. 401, 411)

[36 FR 4773, Mar. 12, 1971, as amended at 40 FR 26511, June 24, 1975; 41 
FR 56196, Dec. 27, 1976; 42 FR 58170, Nov. 8, 1977; 42 FR 63170, Dec. 
15, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 259.2   Red Cross.

    (a) General. The Postal Service and the Red Cross cooperate to 
maintain communication between the individual and the community during 
times of disaster. This applies only to natural disasters such as those 
caused by floods, tornados, hurricanes, earthquakes, fires, explosions, 
etc., and not to those caused by enemy action.
    (b) Role of Postal Service. The Postal Service and the Red Cross 
will share information on the whereabouts of persons displaced by 
disasters, and otherwise cooperate with each other, as follows:
    (1) The Red Cross will use Form 3575, Change of Address Order, as a 
standard item in Red Cross disaster relief. It will urge disaster 
victims displaced from their homes to obtain and complete the forms, it 
will distribute the forms to disaster victims who need them, and it will 
collect from the victims and turn over to the Postal Service any 
completed forms received.
    (2) The Postal Service will provide the Red Cross the blank forms 
needed.
    (3) During each disaster and subsequent disaster relief efforts, the 
Postal Service will establish a separate file of change of address forms 
completed by disaster victims, and will make available to the Red Cross 
information in the file. This information will be used by the Red Cross 
only to locate individuals and families, to answer inquiries from 
relatives and friends concerning the whereabouts and welfare of the 
disaster victims, or to make contact with disaster victims who have 
applied for assistance from the Red Cross but who cannot be located 
because of a change of address.
    (4) The Postal Service and the Red Cross will encourage appropriate 
local postal officials and Red Cross chapters to maintain contact with 
each other and to participate in local and community planning for 
disasters.
    (5) When appropriate, the Postal Service and the Red Cross will meet 
and exchange information at the national headquarters level concerning 
the effectiveness of their joint efforts for disaster relief.
    (6) Regional Postmasters General and Postal Inspectors in Charge are 
responsible for seeing that post offices implement these cooperative 
arrangements in disaster situations.
    (7) The instructions in Sec. 259.2 serve as a broad framework within 
which field officials of both agencies may coordinate their facilities 
and resources. However, postal officials shall cooperate with Red Cross 
officials to the maximum feasible degree during times of natural 
disasters.

(39 U.S.C. 401, 411)

[36 FR 4773, Mar. 12, 1971, as amended at 40 FR 26511, June 24, 1975]


<R03>
Records and Information--Table of Contents

<R05>



<R03>
PART 261--RECORDS AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
261.1  Purpose and scope.
261.2  Authority.
261.3  Policy.
261.4  Responsibility.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401.


<R05>
Sec. 261.1   Purpose and scope.

    As a result of the Postal Reorganization Act, 39 U.S.C. 410, the 
U.S. Postal Service is no longer subject to the provisions of the 
Federal Records Act of 1950, or any of its supporting regulations which 
provide for the conduct of records management in Federal agencies. The 
objective of Parts 261 through 268 is to provide the basis for a Postal 
Service-wide records and information management program affecting all 
organizational components having the

[[Page 97]]

custody of any form of information and records.

[40 FR 45721, Oct. 2, 1975; 40 FR 48511, Oct. 16, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 261.2   Authority.

    (a) 39 U.S.C. 401(5) states that the Postal Service has the power to 
acquire property it deems necessary or convenient in the transaction of 
its business and to hold, maintain, sell, lease or otherwise dispose of 
such property.
    (b) 39 CFR 224.1(f) assigns to the Postal Service Records Office, 
located under Finance responsibility for the retention security and 
privacy of Postal Service records and the power to authorize the 
disclosure of such records and to order their disposal by destruction or 
transfer. Included is the authority to issue records management policy 
and to delegate or take appropriate action if that policy is not adhered 
to or if questions of interpretation of procedure arise.

[40 FR 45721, Oct. 2, 1975, as amended at 44 FR 51223, Aug. 31, 1979; 60 
FR 57344, Nov. 15, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 261.3   Policy.

    It is the policy of the Postal Service:
    (a) To, as appropriate, create, preserve, protect and disclose 
records which contain adequate and proper documentation of the 
organization, functions, policies, decisions, operations, procedures, 
activities and transactions of the Postal Service,
    (b) To reduce to an absolute minimum the records holdings of the 
Postal Service by strict adherence to established records retention 
schedules.

[40 FR 45721, Oct. 2, 1975, as amended at 44 FR 51223, Aug. 31, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 261.4   Responsibility.

    (a) The Manager, Payroll Accounting and Records, administers the 
Postal Service records and information management program through a 
Headquarters organizational component and records office coordinators in 
the finance function of area and district offices.
    (b) Postal Service managers are responsible for administering 
records and information management policies and for complying with all 
handbooks, directives, and instructions in support of this policy.

[40 FR 45721, Oct. 2, 1975, as amended at 44 FR 51223, Aug. 31, 1979; 60 
FR 57344, Nov. 15, 1995]


<R03>
PART 262--RECORDS AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT DEFINITIONS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
262.1 Purpose and scope.
262.2 Officials.
262.3 Information.
262.4 Records.
262.5 Systems (Privacy).
262.6 Retention and disposal.
262.7 Non-records.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401; 5 U.S.C. 552a.

    Source: 49 FR 30693, Aug. 1, 1984, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 262.1  Purpose and scope.

    This part contains the official definition of those basic records 
and information management terms that are frequently used throughout 
Postal Service regulations and directives.


<R05>
Sec. 262.2  Officials.

    (a) Records Custodian. The postmaster or other head of a facility 
such as a postal data center, mailbag depository, management sectional 
center, district office, or regional headquarters who maintains USPS 
records. Department heads are the custodians of records maintained at 
Headquarters. Senior medical personnel are the custodians of restricted 
medical records maintained within Postal facilities. EAP counselors are 
the custodians of records pertaining to program participants.
    (b) Manager, Payroll Accounting and Records. The official 
responsible for the retention, security, and privacy of Postal Service 
records with the power to authorize the disclosure of such records and 
to order their disposal by destruction or transfer; included is the 
authority to issue records management policy and to delegate or take 
appropriate action if that policy is not adhered to or if questions of 
interpretation or procedure arise.
    (c) Information System Executive. The Postal Service official who 
prescribes the existence of and the policies for an

[[Page 98]]

information system; usually this is a Vice President.

[49 FR 30693, Aug. 1, 1984, as amended at 51 FR 26385, July 23, 1986; 60 
FR 57344, Nov. 15, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 262.3  Information.

    Data combined with the knowledge of its context and having the 
potential to serve a Postal Service use.
    (a) Sensitive information. Information which has been identified by 
the USPS as restricted  or critical.
    (1) Critical information. Information that must be available in 
order that the Postal Service effectively perform its mission and meet 
legally assigned responsibilities; and for which special precautions are 
taken to ensure its accuracy, relevance, timeliness and completeness. 
This information, if lost, would cause significant financial loss, 
inconvenience or delay in performance of the USPS mission.
    (2) Restricted information. Information that has limitations placed 
upon both its access within the Postal Service and disclosure outside 
the Postal Service consistent with the Privacy and Freedom of 
Information Acts.
    (i) Restricted mandatory. Information that has limitations upon its 
internal access and that may be disclosed only in accordance with an 
Executive Order, public law, or other Federal statute and their 
supporting postal regulations.
    (ii) Restricted discretionary. Information that has limitations upon 
its internal access and that may be withheld from external disclosure 
solely in accordance with postal regulations, consistent with the 
Freedom of Information Act.
    (b) Classified information (National Security). Information about 
the national defense and foreign relations of the United States that has 
been determined under Executive Order 12356 to require protection 
against unauthorized disclosure and has been so designated.


<R05>
Sec. 262.4  Records.

    Recorded information, regardless of media or physical 
characteristics, developed or received by the U.S. Postal Service in 
connection with the transaction of its business and retained in its 
custody; for machine-readable records, a collection of logically related 
data treated as a unit.
    (a) Permanent record. A record determined by the USPS Records Office 
or the National Archives and Records Administration as having sufficient 
historical or other value to warrant continued preservation. (All other 
records are considered temporary and must be scheduled for disposal.)
    (b) Corporate records. Those records series that are designated by 
the Records Office as containing information of legal, audit, obligatory 
or archival value about events and transactions of interest to the 
entire corporate body of the Postal Service. Corporate records are 
distinguished from operational records, which have value only in their 
day-to-day use, and from precedential files, which have value only as 
examples.
    (c) Active record. A record that contains information used for 
conducting current business.
    (d) Inactive record. A record that contains information which is not 
used for conducting current business, but for which the retention period 
has not yet expired.
    (e) Vital records. Certain records which must be available in the 
event of a national emergency in order to ensure the continuity of 
Postal Service operations and the preservation of the rights and 
interests of the Postal Service, its employees, contractors and 
customers. There are two types of vital records: Emergency Operating 
Records and Rights and Interests Records.
    (1) Emergency operating records. Certain vital records necessary to 
support essential functions of the Postal Service during and immediately 
following a national emergency.
    (2) Rights and interest records. Certain vital records maintained to 
ensure the preservation of the rights and interests of the Postal 
Service, its employees, contractors and customers.

[49 FR 30693, Aug. 1, 1984, as amended at 51 FR 26385, July 23, 1986; 60 
FR 57344, Nov. 15, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 262.5  Systems (Privacy).

    (a) Privacy Act system of records. A Postal Service system 
containing information about individuals, including

[[Page 99]]

mailing lists, from which information is retrieved by the name of an 
individual or by some identifying number or symbol assigned to the 
individual, such as a Social Security Account Number.
    (b) Individual (record subject). A living person. Does not include 
sole proprietorships, partnerships or corporations. A business firm 
identified by the name of one or more persons is not an individual.
    (c) Computer matching program. A ``matching program,'' as defined in 
the Privacy Act, 5 U.S.C. 552a(a)(8), is subject to the matching 
provisions of the Act, published guidance of the Office of Management 
and Budget, and these regulations. The term ``matching program'' 
includes any computerized comparison of:
    (1) A Postal Service automated system of records with an automated 
system of records of another Federal agency, or with non-Federal 
records, for the purpose of:
    (i) Establishing or verifying the eligibility of, or continuing 
compliance with statutory and regulatory requirements by, applicants 
for, recipients or beneficiaries of, participants in, or providers of 
services with respect to, cash or in-kind assistance or payments under 
Federal benefit programs, or
    (ii) Recouping payments or delinquent debts under such Federal 
benefit programs;
    (2) A Postal Service automated personnel or payroll system of 
records with another automated personnel or payroll system of records of 
the Postal Service or other Federal Agency or with non-Federal records.
    (d) Other computer matching activities. (1) The following kinds of 
computer matches are specifically excluded from the term ``matching 
program'':
    (i) Statistical matches whose purpose is solely to produce aggregate 
data stripped of personal identifiers.
    (ii) Statistical matches whose purpose is in support of any research 
or statistical project.
    (iii) Law enforcement investigative matches whose purpose is to 
gather evidence against a named person or persons in an existing 
investigation.
    (iv) Tax administration matches.
    (v) Routine administrative matches using Federal personnel records, 
provided that the purpose is not to take any adverse action against an 
individual.
    (vi) Internal matches using only records from Postal Service systems 
of records, provided that the purpose is not to take any adverse action 
against any individual.
    (vii) Matches performed for security clearance background checks or 
for foreign counterintelligence.
    (2) Although these and other matching activities that fall outside 
the definition of ``matching program'' are not subject to the matching 
provisions of the Privacy Act or OMB guidance, other provisions of the 
Act and of these regulations may be applicable. No matching program or 
other matching activity may be conducted without the prior approval of 
the Records Office.

[49 FR 30693, Aug. 1, 1984, as amended at 59 FR 37160, July 21, 1994; 60 
FR 57344, Nov. 15, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 262.6  Retention and disposal.

    (a) Records control schedule. A directive describing records series 
that are maintained by components of the Postal Service; it provides 
maintenance, retention, transfer, and disposal instructions for each 
series listed, and serves as the authority for Postal officials to 
implement such instructions.
    (b) Disposal (records). The permanent removal of records or 
information from Postal Service custody; included are:
    (1) Transfer to the National Archives.
    (2) Donation to the Smithsonian Institution, local museums or 
historical societies.
    (3) Sale as waste material.
    (4) Discarding.
    (5) Physical destruction.
    (c) Retention period. The authorized length of time that a records 
series must be kept before its disposal, usually stated in terms of 
months or years, but sometimes expressed as contingent upon the 
occurrence of an event; usually the retention period refers to the 
period of time between the creation of a series and its authorized 
disposal date; however, in some cases it refers to the length of time 
between the cutoff point and the disposal date.

[[Page 100]]


<R05>
Sec. 262.7  Non-records.

    (a) Non-record material. Includes blank forms and surplus 
publications, handbooks, circulars, bulletins, announcements, and other 
directives as well as any material not directly associated with the 
transaction of Postal Service business.
    (b) Personal papers. Those materials created or received during an 
individual's period of employment with the Postal Service which are of a 
purely private or nonofficial character, or which were neither created 
nor received in connection with Postal Service business.


<R03>
PART 263--RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSITION--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
263.1  Purpose and scope.
263.2  Policy.
263.3  Responsibility.
263.4  Records retention schedules.
263.5  Records disposal.
263.6  Inquiries.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401.

    Source: 40 FR 45722, Oct. 2, 1975, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 263.1   Purpose and scope.

    This part contains the policy and general regulations pertaining to 
the retention and disposition of records and information throughout all 
organizational levels and components.


<R05>
Sec. 263.2   Policy.

    It is the policy of the U.S. Postal Service to establish and 
maintain schedules specifying the retention periods required for all 
official and duplicate record copies. Furthermore, it is the policy that 
all duplicate record copies and non-record material will be disposed of 
as soon as they have served their purpose.


<R05>
Sec. 263.3   Responsibility.

    (a) Records Office. The Records Office has the responsibility for 
providing for the establishment of retention schedules and has the 
authority to approve them. Furthermore, that office has the authority to 
dispose of Postal Service records by transfer or destruction.
    (b) Custodians. Custodians are responsible for the retention and 
prompt disposal of records in their custody and for delegating in 
writing, persons to perform these duties.

[40 FR 45722, Oct. 2, 1975, as amended at 60 FR 57344, Nov. 15, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 263.4   Records retention schedules.

    The following retention schedules will be maintained within the 
Postal Service:
    (a) General schedule.
    (b) Headquarters schedule.
    (c) Regional schedule.
    (d) District schedule.
    (e) Inspection service schedule.
    (f) Postal data centers schedule.
    (g) Automatic data processing centers schedule.
    (h) Post Office schedule.
    (i) Other facility schedules.


<R05>
Sec. 263.5   Records disposal.

    All disposals of records containing sensitive information, i.e. 
transfers to records storage centers, destruction, transfers external to 
the USPS, and maintenance of accounting records regarding such disposal, 
must be accomplished in accordance with procedures issued by the Records 
Office.

[40 FR 45722, Oct. 2, 1975, as amended at 60 FR 57344, Nov. 15, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 263.6  Inquiries.

    Inquiries regarding records retention and disposal should be 
directed to the Manager, Payroll Accounting and Records, U.S. Postal 
Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza SW, Washington, DC 20260-5243, or, by 
telephone, to the Records Specialist, telephone number (202) 268-4869.

[60 FR 57344, Nov. 15, 1995]


<R03>
PART 264--VITAL RECORDS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
264.1  Purpose and scope.
264.2  Policy.
264.3  Responsibility.
264.4  Vital Records Program.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401.

    Source: 44 FR 51224, Aug. 31, 1979, unless otherwise noted.

[[Page 101]]


<R05>
Sec. 264.1  Purpose and scope.

    Certain records are critical to the continuity of Postal Service 
operations or to the preservation of the rights and interests of the 
Postal Service, its employees, contractors or customers. To ensure that 
these records are available when needed, specific controls are required 
which affect all organizational components having the custody of records 
defined as being ``vital.''


<R05>
Sec. 264.2  Policy.

    It is the policy of the U.S. Postal Service to ensure the 
availability of all records considered critical to the continuity of its 
operations and the preservation of the rights and interests of the 
Postal Service, its employees, contractors, and customers. Vital records 
shall be routinely maintained at predesignated off-site locations to 
ensure their availability when needed by management and operating 
personnel.


<R05>
Sec. 264.3  Responsibility.

    (a) Manager, Payroll Accounting and Records. The Manager, Payroll 
Accounting and Records, is responsible for categorizing records as vital 
and shall establish and maintain the vital records program, insofar as 
rights and interests records are concerned, and ensure compliance with 
supportive procedures.
    (b) Chief Postal Inspector. As the Postal Service's Emergency 
Coordinator, the Chief Postal Inspector (with the assistance of 
Headquarters and Regional Emergency Coordinating Committees and the 
advice of the Records Office) shall establish and maintain a program to 
ensure that emergency operating records are available at predesignated 
off-site locations for use during a national emergency.
    (c) Custodians. Custodians are responsible for following vital 
records program procedures including the forwarding of vital records to 
predesignated off-site locations.

[44 FR 51224, Aug. 31, 1979, as amended at 60 FR 57344, Nov. 15, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 264.4  Vital Records Program.

    Complete procedures concerning the identification, categorization, 
processing, protection, and transfer of vital records are provided by 
the USPS Records Office or the USPS Emergency Coordinator, as 
appropriate.

[44 FR 51224, Aug. 31, 1979, as amended at 60 FR 57344, Nov. 15, 1995]


<R03>
PART 265--RELEASE OF INFORMATION--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
265.1  Purpose and scope.
265.2  Policy.
265.3  Responsibility.
265.4  Inquiries.
265.5  Public reading room.
265.6  Availability of records.
265.7  Procedure for inspection and copying of records.
265.8  Business information; procedures for predisclosure notification 
          to submitters.
265.9  Schedule of fees.
265.10  Annual reports.
265.11  Compliance with subpoena duces tecum, court orders, and 
          summonses.
265.12  Demands for testimony or records in certain legal proceedings.
265.13  Compliance with subpoenas, summonses, and court orders by postal 
          employees within the Inspection Service where the Postal 
          Service, the United States, or any other federal agency is not 
          a party.

Appendix A to Part 265--Information Services Price List

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 552; 5 U.S.C. App. 3; 39 U.S.C. 401, 403, 410, 
1001, 2601.


<R05>
Sec. 265.1   Purpose and scope.

    (a) This part contains the regulations of the Postal Service 
relating to the availability to the public of Postal Service records. 
Included in this part are the regulations which implement section 552 of 
title 5, U.S.C., the ``Freedom of Information Act,'' insofar as it 
applies to the Postal Service.
    (b) Official records of the Postal Service made available pursuant 
to the requirements of the Act shall be furnished to members of the 
public as prescribed by this part.

[40 FR 7331, Feb. 19, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 265.2   Policy.

    (a) It is the policy of the Postal Service to make its official 
records available to the public to the maximum extent consistent with 
the public interest. This policy requires a practice of

[[Page 102]]

full disclosure subject only to the specific exemptions required or 
authorized by law.
    (b) The exemptions from mandatory disclosure provided by section 
552(b) of title 5, and section 410(c) of title 39, U.S.C., for various 
types of records, reflect the fact that under some circumstances the 
public interest may be better served by leaving the disclosure of 
particular records to the discretion of the Postal Service than by 
requiring their disclosure. As to those records the disclosure of which 
is not prohibited by statute, Executive Order, or regulation, the 
discretion vested in the Postal Service is exercised after giving 
consideration to the following: The effect of non-disclosure on the 
public's right to know about a particular matter; the effect of 
disclosure on the right of privacy of any affected individuals; the 
effect of disclosure on the public interest in the economical, 
efficient, and orderly operation of the nation's mail system; and any 
other factors that may be relevant under the circumstances.

[40 FR 7331, Feb. 19, 1975, as amended at 45 FR 44270, July 1, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 265.3   Responsibility.

    (a) Custodian. Official records are in the custody of the postmaster 
or other head of the facility, such as a postal data center, mail bag 
depository, sectional center facility, district office or regional 
headquarters, or of a group or department or headquarters, at which they 
are maintained. These custodians are responsible for responding in the 
first instance to requests from members of the public for Postal Service 
records.
    (b) Freedom of Information/Privacy Acts Officer. The USPS Freedom of 
Information/Privacy Acts Officer, under the Manager, Payroll Accounting 
and Records, is responsible for the overall administration of this part, 
including the issuance of detailed instructions to custodians.
    (c) General Counsel. The General Counsel decides timely appeals 
authorized by this part.

[40 FR 7331, Feb. 19, 1975, as amended at 45 FR 44270, July 1, 1980; 60 
FR 57344, Nov. 15, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 265.4  Inquiries.

    Inquiries regarding the availability of Postal Service records 
should be directed to the appropriate records custodian. If the 
appropriate records custodian is not known, inquiries should be directed 
to the USPS Freedom of Information/Privacy Acts Officer, U.S. Postal 
Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza SW, Washington, DC 20260-5243, telephone 
number (202) 268-2608.

[60 FR 57345, Nov. 15, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 265.5   Public reading room.

    The Library of the Postal Service Headquarters, 475 L'Enfant Plaza 
West, SW., Washington, DC 20260-1641, serves as public reading room for 
the materials which are listed in paragraphs (a) (2) and (3) of 
Sec. 265.6 as available for public inspection and copying.

[40 FR 7331, Feb. 19, 1975, as amended at 45 FR 44270, July 1, 1980; 51 
FR 26386, July 23, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 265.6   Availability of records.

    (a) Records available to the public upon request--(1) General. 
Postal Service records are available for inspection or copying at the 
request of any person, in accordance with the provisions of this part, 
except as otherwise provided by law or regulations, including but not 
limited to, Sec. 265.6(b) through (g). Certain categories of records of 
particular interest are available on a continuing basis as provided in 
paragraphs (a) (2) and (3) of this section and are listed in a public 
index as provided in paragraph (a)(4) of this section. Access to other 
records may be requested on an individual basis in accordance with the 
procedures provided in Sec. 265.7. Official records which are maintained 
on an electronic storage medium will normally be made available, in 
accordance with this part, as an exact duplicate of the requested 
original in a form readable by the human eye, such as a computer print-
out.
    (2) Opinions. All final opinions and orders made in the adjudication 
of cases by the Judicial Officer, Administrative Law Judges, and Board 
of Contract Appeals, all final determinations pursuant to section 
113.263 of the Domestic Mail Manual, to close or consolidate a post 
office, or to disapprove

[[Page 103]]

a proposed closing or consolidation, and all advisory opinions 
concerning the private express statutes issued pursuant to Sec. 310.6 of 
title 39, CFR, all bid protest decisions and all decisions on appeals 
pursuant to this part, rendered by the General Counsel are on file and 
available for inspection and copying in the Headquarters Library, U.S. 
Postal Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza West, SW., Washington, DC 20260-1641.
    (3) Administrative Manuals and Instructions to Staff. The manuals, 
instructions, and other publications of the Postal Service that affect 
members of the public are available through the Headquarters Library, 
U.S. Postal Service, Washington, DC 20260, and at many post offices and 
other postal facilities. Those which are available to the public but are 
not listed for sale may be inspected in the Library or at any postal 
facility which maintains a copy. Copies of publications which are not 
listed as for sale or as available free of charge may be obtained by 
paying a fee in accordance with Sec. 265.8.
    (4) Public index. (i) A public index is maintained in the 
Headquarters Library of all final opinions and orders made by the Postal 
Service in the adjudication of cases, Postal Service policy statements 
which may be relied on as precedents in the disposition of cases, 
administrative staff manuals and instructions that affect the public, 
and other materials which the Postal Service elects to index and make 
available to the public upon request in the manner set forth in 
paragraph (a) of this section.
    (ii) The index contains references to matters issued after July 4, 
1967 and may reference matters issued prior to that date.
    (iii) Any person may arrange for the inspection of any matter in the 
public index in accordance with the procedures of Sec. 265.7.
    (iv) Copies of the public index and of matters listed in the public 
index may be purchased through the Headquarters Library upon payment of 
fees as listed in the index or as provided in Sec. 265.8.
    (5) Listings of Employees' Names. Upon written request, the Postal 
Service will, to the extent required by law, provide a listing of postal 
employees working at a particular postal facility.
    (b) Records not subject to mandatory public disclosure. Certain 
classes of records are exempt from mandatory disclosure under exemptions 
contained in the Freedom of Information Act and in section 410(c) of 
title 39, U.S.C. The Postal Service will exercise its discretion, in 
accordance with the policy stated in Sec. 265.2, as implemented by 
instructions issued by the Records Office with the approval of the 
General Counsel in determining whether the public interest is served by 
the inspection or copying of records that are:
    (1) Related solely to the internal personnel rules and practices of 
the Postal Service.
    (2) Trade secrets, or privileged or confidential commercial or 
financial information, obtained from any person.
    (3) Information of a commercial nature, including trade secrets, 
whether or not obtained from a person outside the Postal Service, which 
under good business practice would not be publicly disclosed. This class 
includes, but is not limited to:
    (i) Information pertaining to methods of handling valuable 
registered mail.
    (ii) Records of money orders, except as provided in 940 of the 
Domestic Mail Manual (DMM).
    (iii) Technical information concerning postage meters and prototypes 
submitted for Postal Service approval prior to leasing to mailers.
    (iv) Reports of market surveys conducted by or under contract in 
behalf of the Postal Service.
    (v) Records indicating rural carrier lines of travel.
    (vi) Records compiled within the Postal Service which would be of 
potential benefit to persons or firms in economic competition with the 
Postal Service.
    (vii) Information which, if publicly disclosed, could materially 
increase procurement costs.
    (viii) Information which, if publicly disclosed, could compromise 
testing or examination materials.
    (4) Interagency or internal memoranda or letters that would not be 
available by law to a private party in litigation with the Postal 
Service.
    (5) Reports and memoranda of consultants or independent contractors,

[[Page 104]]

except to the extent they would be required to be disclosed if prepared 
within the Postal Service.
    (6) Files personal in nature, including medical and personnel files, 
the disclosure of which would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion 
of personal privacy.
    (7) Information prepared for use in connection with proceedings 
under chapter 36 of title 39, U.S.C., relating to rate, classification, 
and service changes.
    (8) Information prepared for use in connection with the negotiation 
of collective bargaining agreements under chapter 12 of title 39, 
U.S.C., or minutes of, or notes kept during, negotiating sessions 
conducted under such chapter.
    (9) Other matter specifically exempted from disclosure by statute.
    (c) Records or information compiled for law enforcement purposes. 
(1) Investigatory files compiled for law enforcement purposes, whether 
or not considered closed, are exempt by statute from mandatory 
disclosure except to the extent otherwise available by law to a party 
other than the Postal Service, 39 U.S.C. 410(c)(6). As a matter of 
policy, however, the Postal Service will normally make records or 
information compiled for law enforcement purposes available upon request 
unless the production of these records:
    (i) Could reasonably be expected to interfere with enforcement 
proceedings;
    (ii) Would deprive a person of a right to a fair trial or an 
impartial adjudication;
    (iii) Could reasonably be expected to constitute an unwarranted 
invasion of personal privacy;
    (iv) Could reasonably be expected to disclose the identity of a 
confidential source, including a State, local, or foreign agency or 
authority or any private institution which furnished information on a 
confidential basis, and, in the case of a record or information compiled 
by a criminal law enforcement authority (such as the Postal Inspection 
Service) in the course of a criminal investigation, or by an agency 
conducting a lawful national security intelligence investigation, 
information furnished by a confidential source;
    (v) Would disclose techniques and procedures for law enforcement 
investigations or prosecutions, or would disclose guidelines for law 
enforcement investigations or prosecutions if such disclosure could 
reasonably be expected to risk circumvention of the law; or
    (vi) Could reasonably be expected to endanger the life or physical 
safety of any individual.
    (2) Whenever a request is made which involves access to records 
described in Sec. 265.6(c)(1)(i), and
    (i) The investigation or proceeding involves a possible violation of 
criminal law; and
    (ii) There is reason to believe that,
    (A) The subject of the investigation or proceeding is not aware of 
its pendency, and
    (B) Disclosure of the existence of the records could reasonably be 
expected to interfere with enforcement proceedings, the Postal Service 
may, during only such time as that circumstance continues, treat the 
records as not subject to the requirements of the Freedom of Information 
Act.
    (3) Whenever informant records maintained by a criminal law 
enforcement agency (such as the Postal Inspection Service) under an 
informant's name or personal identifier are requested by a third party 
according to the informant's name or personal identifier, the records 
may be treated as not subject to the requirements of the Freedom of 
Information Act unless the informant's status as an informant has been 
officially confirmed.
    (4) Authority to disclose records or information compiled for law 
enforcement purposes to persons outside the Postal Service must be 
obtained from the Chief Postal Inspector, U.S. Postal Serivce, 
Washington, DC 20260-2100, or designee.
    (d) Disclosure of names and addresses of customers. Upon request, 
the addresses of specifically identified postal customers will be made 
available only as follows:
    (1) Change of address. The new address of any specific customer who 
has filed a permanent or temporary change of address order (by 
submitting PS Form 3575, a hand-written order, or an electronically 
communicated order) will be

[[Page 105]]

furnished to any person upon payment of the fee prescribed in Sec. 265.9 
(e)(3) and (g)(5), except that the new address of a specific customer 
who has indicated on the order that the address change is for an 
individual or an entire family will be furnished only in those 
circumstances stated at paragraph (d)(4) of this section. Disclosure 
will be limited to the address of the specifically identified individual 
about whom the information is requested (not other family members or 
individuals whose names may also appear on the change of address order). 
The Postal Service reserves the right not to disclose the address of an 
individual for the protection of the individual's personal safety. Other 
information on PS Form 3575 or copies of the form will not be furnished 
except in those circumstances stated at paragraphs (d)(4)(i), 
(d)(4(iii), or (d)(4)(iv) of this section. The fee is waived for 
providing information under the circumstances listed at paragraph (d)(4) 
of this section. See Sec. 265.9(g)(5).
    (2) Name and address of permit holder. The name and address of the 
holder of a particular bulk mail permit, permit imprint or similar 
permit, or postage meter permit, and the name of any person applying for 
a permit in behalf of a holder, will be furnished to any person upon the 
payment of any fees authorized by paragraph (b) of Sec. 265.9. (Lists of 
permit holders may not be disclosed to members of the public. See 
paragraph (e)(1) of this section.)
    (3) Post office boxholder information. Information from Form 1093, 
Application for Post Office Box or Caller Number, will be provided only 
as follows:
    (i) Business use--The recorded name, address, and telephone number 
of the holder of a post office box being used for the purpose of doing 
or soliciting business with the public, and any person applying for a 
box in behalf of a holder, will be furnished to any person without 
charge. The postmaster may furnish this information from Form 1093 when 
he is satisfied from the entries appearing on it, or from evidence 
furnished by the requester (such as an advertising circular), that the 
box is being used for such a business purpose. When the postmaster is 
unable to determine whether a business use is involved, he shall refer 
the request to Chief Field Counsel for advice.
    (ii) Non-business use--Information from Form 1093 about the holder 
of a post office box which is not being used for the purpose of doing or 
soliciting business with the public will not be furnished except in 
those circumstances stated at paragraphs (d)(4)(i) through (d)(4)(iv) of 
this section.
    (iii) Copies of Form 1093--Copies of Form 1093 will not be furnished 
except in those circumstances stated at paragraphs (d)(4)(i), 
(d)(4)(iii), or (d)(4)(iv) of this section.
    (4) Exceptions. Except as otherwise provided in these regulations, 
names or addresses of postal customers will be furnished only as 
follows:
    (i) To a federal, state or local government agency upon prior 
written certification that the information is required for the 
performance of its duties.
    (ii) To a person empowered by law to serve legal process, or the 
attorney for a party in whose behalf service will be made, or a party 
who is acting pro se, upon receipt of written information that 
specifically includes all of the following: (A) A certification that the 
name or address is needed and will be used solely for service of legal 
process in connection with actual or prospective litigation; (B) a 
citation to the statute or regulation that empowers the requester to 
serve process, if the requester is other than the attorney for a party 
in whose behalf service will be made, or a party who is acting pro se; 
(C) the names of all known parties to the litigation; (D) the court in 
which the case has been or will be commenced; (E) the docket or other 
identifying number, if one has been issued; and (F) the capacity in 
which the boxholder is to be served, e.g., defendant or witness. By 
submitting such information, the requester certifies that it is true. 
The address of an individual who files with the postmaster a copy of a 
protective court order will not be disclosed except as provided under 
paragraphs (d)(4)(i), (d)(4)(iii), or (d)(4)(iv) of this section.
    The Postal Service suggests use of the standard format appearing at 
the end of this section when requesting information under this 
paragraph. When

[[Page 106]]

using the standard format on the submitter's own letterhead, the 
standard format must be used in its entirety. The warning statement and 
certification specifically must be included immediately before the 
signature block. If the request lacks any of the required information or 
a proper signature, the postmaster will return it to the requester 
specifying the deficiency.

    Note: The term pro se means that a party is not represented by an 
attorney but by himself or herself.

    (iii) In compliance with a subpoena or court order, except that 
change of address or boxholder information which is not otherwise 
subject to disclosure under these regulations may be disclosed only 
pursuant to a court order.
    (iv) To a law enforcement agency, for oral requests made through the 
Inspection Service, but only after the Inspection Service has confirmed 
that the information is needed in the course of a criminal 
investigation. (All other requests from law enforcement agencies should 
be submitted in writing to the postmaster as in paragraph (d)(4)(i) of 
this section.)
    (5) Jury service. The mailing address of any customer sought in 
connection with jury service, if known, will be furnished without charge 
upon prior written request to a court official, such as a judge, court 
clerk or jury commissioner.
    (6) Address verification. The address of a postal customer will be 
verified at the request of a Federal, State, or local government agency 
upon written certification that the information is required for the 
performance of the agency's duties. ``Verification'' means advising such 
an agency whether or not its address for a postal customer is one at 
which mail for that customer is currently being delivered. 
``Verification'' neither means nor implies knowledge on the part of the 
Postal Service as to the actual residence of the customer or as to the 
actual receipt by the customer of mail delivered to that address. The 
Postal Service requires government agencies to use the format appearing 
at the end of this section when requesting the verification of a 
customer's current address or a customer's new mailing address. If the 
request lacks any of the required information or a proper signature, or 
if the request has been sent to the wrong post office, the postmaster 
will return the request to the agency, specifying the deficiency in the 
space marked ``OTHER''.
    (7) Business/Residence location. If the location of a residence or a 
place of business is known to a Postal Service employee, whether as a 
result of official duties or otherwise, the employee may, but need not, 
disclose the location or give directions to it. No fee is charged for 
such information.
    (8) Form 1583, Application for Delivery of Mail Through Agent. 
Except as provided by this paragraph, information contained in Form 1583 
may not be disclosed to the public. Information contained in Form 1583 
may be disclosed to the public only for the purpose of identifying a 
particular address as an address of an agent to whom mail is delivered 
on behalf of other persons. No other information, including, but not 
limited to, the identities of persons on whose behalf agents receive 
mail, may be disclosed from Form 1583.
    (e) Information not available for public disclosure. (1) Except as 
provided by paragraph (a)(5) of this section, the Postal Service and its 
officers and employees shall not make available to the public by any 
means or for any purpose any mailing list or other list of names or 
addresses (past or present) of postal patrons or other persons.
    (2) Records or other documents which are classified or otherwise 
specifically authorized by Executive Order 12356 and implementing 
regulations to be kept secret in the interest of the national defense or 
foreign policy are not subject to disclosure pursuant to this part.
    (3) Records consisting of trade secrets or confidential financial 
data, the disclosure of which is prohibited by section 1905 of title 18, 
U.S.C., are not subject to disclosure pursuant to this part.
    (4) Other records, the disclosure of which is prohibited by statute, 
are not subject to disclosure pursuant to this part.
    (f) Protection of the right of privacy. If any record required or 
permitted by this part to be disclosed contains the

[[Page 107]]

name of, or other identifying details concerning, any person, including 
an employee of the Postal Service, the disclosure of which would 
constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy, the name 
or other identifying details shall be deleted before the record is 
disclosed and the requester so informed.
    (g) Disclosure in part of otherwise exempt record. Any reasonably 
segregable portion of a record shall be provided after deleting the 
information which is neither subject to mandatory disclosure nor 
available as a matter of discretion.

[[Page 108]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR29DE94.003



[[Page 109]]

          (Required Format Referenced at Paragraph 265.6(d)(6))

                           (AGENCY LETTERHEAD)

To: Postmaster
_______________________________________________________________________
Agency Control No.______________________________________________________
Date:___________________________________________________________________

                       ADDRESS INFORMATION REQUEST

    Please furnish this agency with the new address, if available, for 
the following individual or verify whether or not the address given 
below is one at which mail for this individual is currently being 
delivered. If the following address is a post office box, please furnish 
the street address as recorded on the boxholder's application form.

Name:___________________________________________________________________
Last Known Address:_____________________________________________________

    I certify that the address information for this individual is 
required for the performance of this agency's official duties.
_______________________________________________________________________
(Signature of Agency Official)
_______________________________________________________________________
(Title)
_______________________________________________________________________

                        FOR POST OFFICE USE ONLY                        
[ ]..  MAIL IS DELIVERED TO ADDRESS                NEW ADDRESS          
        GIVEN                                                           
[ ]..  NOT KNOWN AT ADDRESS GIVEN        ------------------             
[ ]..  MOVED, LEFT NO FORWARDING         ------------------             
        ADDRESS                                                         
                                            BOXHOLDER'S STREET ADDRESS  
[ ]..  NO SUCH ADDRESS                                                  
[ ]..  OTHER (SPECIFY):                  ------------------             
                                                                        
       ------------------                ------------------             
                                                                        
       ------------------                                               
                                                                        


                                                                        
-------Agency return address--------         Postmark/Date Stamp        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        


[40 FR 7331, Feb. 19, 1975, as amended at 41 FR 52052, Nov. 26, 1976; 42 
FR 59085, Nov. 15, 1977; 45 FR 44270, July 1, 1980; 47 FR 20304, May 12, 
1982; 47 FR 21248, May 18, 1982; 48 FR 1969, Jan. 17, 1983; 51 FR 8825, 
Mar. 14, 1986; 51 FR 26386, July 23, 1986; 52 FR 13668, Apr. 24, 1987; 
52 FR 22778, June 16, 1987; 53 FR 49983, Dec. 13, 1988; 54 FR 3558, Jan. 
24, 1989; 59 FR 11550, Mar. 11, 1994; 59 FR 22757, May 3, 1994; 59 FR 
62324, Dec. 5, 1994; 59 FR 67225, 67226, 67227, Dec. 29, 1994; 60 FR 
57345, Nov. 15, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 265.7   Procedure for inspection and copying of records.

    (a) Submission of requests--(1) Form and content of request. To 
permit expeditious handling and timely response in accordance with the 
provisions of this part, a request to inspect or to obtain a copy of an 
identifiable Postal Service record shall be in writing and bear the 
caption ``Freedom of Information Act Request'' or otherwise be clearly 
and prominently identified as a request for records pursuant to the 
Freedom of Information Act. A request shall be clearly and prominently 
identified as such on the envelope or other cover. Other requests for 
information will be considered informal requests and will be handled as 
expeditiously as practicable but not necessarily within the time 
limitations set forth in Sec. 265.7(b). An informal request will be 
granted or denied according to the substantive rules in Sec. 265.6, if 
found to be a request for a record. A Freedom of Information Act request 
shall identify the record sought as completely as possible, by name, 
description, or subject matter, and be sufficient to permit the 
custodian to locate it with a reasonable amount of effort. The request 
may state the maximum amount of fees for which the requester is willing 
to accept liability without prior notice. See paragraph (f)(2) of 
Sec. 265.8. If no amount is stated, the requester will be deemed willing 
to accept liability for fees not to exceed $25.
    (2) To whom submitted. A request shall be submitted to the custodian 
of the requested record. If the location of the record is not known, 
inquiry should be directed to the USPS Records Officer, USPS Freedom of 
Information/Privacy Acts Officer, U.S. Postal Service, 475 L'Enfant 
Plaza SW., Washington, DC 20260-5243, telephone (202) 268-2608. If a 
request is submitted to a facility other than that at which the record 
is maintained, it shall be promptly transmitted to the appropriate 
custodian with a copy of the transmittal furnished to the requester. A 
request which is not initially submitted to the appropriate custodian 
shall be deemed to have been received by the Postal Service for purposes 
of computing the time for response is accordance with Sec. 265.7(b) at 
the time that it is actually received by

[[Page 110]]

the appropriate custodian. If a request seeks records maintained at two 
or more facilities, the custodian shall be deemed to be the next senior 
common supervisor of the heads of the facilities, e.g., district 
manager, area vice president. The USPS Records Office is deemed to be 
the custodian, for purposes of this part, in all instances in which a 
request is for a listing of postal employees. See Sec. 265.6(a)(5).
    (3) Reasons for request. In view of the possibility that some or all 
of the records may be exempt from mandatory disclosure, the requester 
may state any reasons why the record should nevertheless be made 
available to him even if exempt.
    (4) Request for waiver of fees. The requester may ask that fees or 
the advance payment of fees be waived in whole or in part. A fee waiver 
request shall indicate how the information will be used; to whom it will 
be provided; whether the requester intends to use the information for 
resale at a fee above actual cost; any personal or commercial benefit 
that the requester expects as a result of disclosure; in what manner the 
general public will benefit from disclosure; and information as to the 
intended user's identity, qualifications, expertise in the subject area, 
and ability and intention to disseminate the information to the public. 
(See Sec. 265.8(g)(3).)
    (5) Categorical requests. A request for all or substantially all of 
the records within a specific category will be deemed a reasonable 
description of those records only if it is possible, without further 
information, to determine which particular records are sought. See 
paragraph (b)(3) of this section concerning the providing of additional 
information.
    (6) Request for records located at numerous facilities. A request 
for records which are, or may be, located at all or a substantial number 
of post offices or other postal facilities will be deemed to be a 
reasonable description only of such of those records as are maintained 
at the post office or other facility to which the request is submitted, 
and of those records maintained at any other post offices or facilities 
specifically identified in the request. See paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section concerning the custodian of records of two or more facilities.
    (b) Responsibilities of the custodian. (1) The custodian of the 
requested record is the person responsible for determining whether to 
comply with or to deny the request. A custodian who is not an Officer as 
defined in Sec. 221.7, however, should not deny a request, until he has 
obtained the advice of Chief Field Counsel. If denial of a request 
appears necessary, the custodian should seek advice as soon as possible 
after receipt of the request so as to provide adequate time for legal 
review.
    (2) The custodian shall make his determination within ten working 
days, i.e., exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, of receiving 
the request, and more rapidly if feasible. The custodian and the 
requester may, by mutual agreement, preferably in writing, establish a 
different response period.
    (3) If a requested record cannot be located from the information 
supplied, the requester should be given an opportunity to supply 
additional information and, if feasible, to confer with the custodian or 
his representative, in an attempt to provide a reasonable description of 
the records sought. If additional information is furnished, the request 
will be deemed to have been received by the custodian when sufficient 
additional information to identify and locate the record with a 
reasonable amount of effort has been received.
    (4) The ten working day response period allowed above may be 
extended by the custodian, after consultation with Chief Field Counsel 
or with the General Counsel if the custodian is at Headquarters, for a 
period not to exceed an additional ten working days when, and to the 
extent, reasonably necessary to permit the proper processing of a 
particular request, under one or more of the following unusual 
circumstances:
    (i) The request requires a search for and collection of records from 
a facility other than that processing the request;
    (ii) The request requires the search for, and collection and 
appropriate examination of, a voluminous amount of separate and distinct 
records; or
    (iii) The request requires consultation (A) with another agency 
having a

[[Page 111]]

substantial interest in the determination of whether to comply with the 
request or (B) among two or more components of the Postal Service having 
substantial subject matter interest in the determination of whether to 
comply with the request.
    (5) When the custodian finds that the additional time is required, 
he shall acknowledge the request in writing within the initial ten day 
response period, state the reason for the delay, and indicate the date 
on which a decision as to disclosure is expected.
    (6) If the custodian has been unable to comply with the applicable 
time limit provisions of this section, in spite of the exercise of due 
diligence, he shall nonetheless make a determination as promptly as 
possible. He shall notify the requester of the exceptional circumstances 
preventing timely compliance and of the date by which it is expected 
that the determination will be made. A copy of this notification shall 
be sent to the General Counsel, U.S. Postal Service, Washington, DC 
20260-1100.
    (7) If a requested record is known to have been destroyed, disposed 
of, or otherwise not to exist, the requester shall be so notified.
    (c) Compliance with request upon affirmative determination by 
custodian. (1) When a requested record has been identified and is to be 
disclosed in whole or in part, the custodian shall ensure that the 
record is made available promptly and shall immediately notify the 
requester where and when and upon what reasonable conditions, if any, 
including the payment of fees, the record will be available for 
inspection or copies will be available. Postal Service records will 
normally be available for inspection and copying during regular business 
hours at the postal facilities at which they are maintained. The 
custodian may, however, designate other reasonable locations and times 
for inspection and copying of some or all of the records within his 
custody.
    (2) Any fees authorized or required to be paid in advance by 
Sec. 265.(f)(3) shall be paid by the requester before the record is made 
available or a copy is furnished unless payment is waived or deferred 
pursuant to Sec. 265.8(g).
    (3) A custodian complying with a request may designate a 
representative to monitor any inspection or copying.
    (d) Denial of request. (1) A reply denying a request in whole or in 
part shall be in writing, signed by the custodian or his designee, and 
shall include:
    (i) A statement of the reason for, or justification of, the denial, 
e.g., records personal in nature, including, if applicable, a reference 
to the provision or provisions of Sec. 265.6 authorizing the withholding 
of the record and a brief explanation of how each provision applies to 
the records requested;
    (ii) The name and title or position of the person responsible for 
the denial of the request (see paragraph (d)(2) of this section); and
    (iii) A statement of the right to appeal and of the appeal procedure 
within the Postal Service (described in paragraph (e) of this section).
    (2) The custodian is ordinarily the person responsible for the 
denial of the request. If the denial of a particular request has been 
directed by higher authority, however, the name and title or position of 
the person directing the denial shall be given in the reply to the 
requester in place of the custodian as the person responsible for the 
denial, and a copy of the denial shall be sent to that person.
    (e) Appeal procedure. (1) If a request to inspect or to copy a 
record is denied, in whole or in part, if no determination is made 
within the period prescribed by this section, or if a request for waiver 
of fees is not granted, the requester may appeal to the General Counsel, 
U.S. Postal Service, Washington, DC 20260-1100.
    (2) The requester shall submit his appeal in writing within 30 days 
of the date of the denial or of the other action complained of, or 
within a reasonable time if the appeal is from a failure of the 
custodian to act. The General Counsel may, in his discretion, consider 
late appeals.
    (3) In the event of the denial of a request or of other action or 
failure to act on the part of a custodian from which no appeal is taken, 
the General Counsel may, if he considers that there is doubt as to the 
correctness of the custodian's action or failure to act, review the 
action or failure to act as

[[Page 112]]

though an appeal pursuant to this section had been taken.
    (4) A letter of appeal should include, as applicable:
    (i) A copy of the request, of any notification of denial or other 
action, and of any other related correspondence;
    (ii) A statement of the action, or failure to act, from which the 
appeal is taken;
    (iii) A statement of the reasons why the requester believes the 
action or failure to act is erroneous; and
    (iv) A statement of the relief sought.
    (f) Action on appeals. (1) The decision of the General Counsel or 
his designee constitutes the final decision of the Postal Service on the 
right of the requester to inspect or copy a record. The decision will 
normally be made within twenty working days from the time of the receipt 
by the General Counsel. The 20 day response period may be extended by 
the General Counsel or his designee for a period not to exceed an 
additional ten working days when reasonably necessary to permit the 
proper consideration of an appeal, under one or more of the unusual 
circumstances set forth in paragraph (b)(4) of this section. The 
aggregate number of additional working days utilized pursuant to this 
paragraph (f)(1) and paragraph (b) of this section, however, may not 
exceed ten.
    (2) The decision on the appeal shall be in writing. If the decision 
sustains a denial of a record, in whole or in part, it shall state the 
justification therefor and shall specify any exemption or exemptions 
relied on and the manner in which they apply to the record withheld, and 
shall inform the requester of his right to judicial review. An indexed 
file of decisions on appeals shall be maintained by the Headquarters 
Library and be made available to the public.
    (3) If not prohibited by or under law, the General Counsel or his 
designee may direct the disclosure of a record even though its 
disclosure is not required by law or regulation.

[40 FR 7331, Feb. 19, 1975, as amended at 45 FR 44271, July 1, 1980; 47 
FR 20304, May 12, 1982; 51 FR 26386, July 23, 1986; 52 FR 13668, Apr. 
24, 1987; 60 FR 57345, Nov. 15, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 265.8  Business information; procedures for predisclosure notification to submitters.

    (a) In general. This section provides a procedure by which persons 
submitting business information to the Postal Service can request that 
the information not be disclosed pursuant to a request under the Freedom 
of Information Act. This section does not affect the Postal Service's 
right, authority, or obligation to disclose information in any other 
context, nor is it intended to create any right or benefit, substantive 
or procedural, enforceable at law by a party against the Postal Service, 
its officers, or any person. Existing rights of submitters are also 
unaffected. For purposes of this section, the following definitions 
apply:
    (1) Business information means commercial or financial information 
provided directly or indirectly to the Postal Service by a submitter 
that arguably is protected from disclosure under Exemption 4 of the 
Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(4), which is restated in 
Sec. 265.6(b)(2).
    (2) Submitter means any person or entity who provides business 
information, directly or indirectly, to the Postal Service. The term 
includes, but is not limited to, corporations, state governments, and 
foreign governments.
    (b) Notice to submitters. (1) The custodian shall, to the extent 
permitted by law, provide a submitter with prompt written notice of a 
Freedom of Information Act request for the submitter's business 
information whenever required under paragraph (c) of this section, 
except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, in order to afford 
the submitter an opportunity to object to disclosure pursuant to 
paragraph (f) of this section. Such written notice shall either describe 
the exact nature of the business information requested or provide copies 
of the records or portions of records containing the business 
information. In the case of an administrative appeal, the General 
Counsel shall be responsible for providing such notification as may be 
appropriate under this section.
    (2) When notice is given to a submitter under paragraph (b)(1) of 
this section, the requester also shall be notified that notice and an 
opportunity to

[[Page 113]]

object are being provided to the submitter pursuant to this section.
    (c) When notice is required. Notice shall be given to a submitter 
whenever:
    (1) The submitter has in good faith designated the information as 
information deemed protected from disclosure under Exemption 4, in 
accordance with the procedure described in paragraph (e) of this 
section; or
    (2) In the opinion of the custodian, or of the General Counsel in 
the case of an administrative appeal, it is likely that disclosure of 
the information would result in competitive harm to the submitter.
    (d) Exceptions to notice requirements. The notice requirements of 
paragraph (b) of this section shall not apply if:
    (1) The Postal Service determines without reference to the submitter 
that the information will not be disclosed;
    (2) The information lawfully has been published or has been 
officially made available to the public;
    (3) Disclosure of the information is required by law (other than the 
Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552); or
    (4) Disclosure of the particular kind of information is required by 
a Postal Service regulation, except that, in such case, advance written 
notice of a decision to disclose shall be provided to the submitter if 
the submitter had provided written justification for protection of the 
information under Exemption 4 at the time of submission or a reasonable 
time thereafter.
    (e) Procedure for designating business information at the time of 
its submission. (1) Submitters of business information shall use good-
faith efforts to designate, by appropriate markings, either at the time 
of submission or at a reasonable time thereafter, those portions of 
their submissions which they deem to be protected from disclosure under 
Exemption 4. Each record, or portion thereof, to be so designated, shall 
be clearly marked with a suitable legend such as Privileged Business 
Information--Do Not Release. When the designated records contain some 
information for which an exemption is not claimed, the submitter shall 
clearly indicate the portions for which protection is sought.
    (2) At the time a designation is made pursuant to paragraph (e)(1) 
of this section, the submitter shall furnish the Postal Service with the 
name, title, address and telephone number of the person or persons to be 
contacted for the purpose of the notification described in paragraph (b) 
of this section.
    (3) Submitters who provide to a postal facility business information 
on a recurring basis and in substantially identical form may use the 
following simplified process: The first submission will provide in full 
the information required in paragraphs (e)(1) and (2) of this section; 
shall identify the type of information, e.g., PS Form 3602, to which it 
is intended to apply; and shall state that it is intended to serve as a 
designation for all of the information of this type that is submitted to 
the particular facility. Thereafter when providing this type of 
information, the submitter need only mark a submission with a reference 
to the designation, e.g., Privileged: see letter of 4-1-91. By written 
agreement with the head of the facility, even this marking may be 
dispensed with if it is not necessary to alert postal employees at that 
facility of the claim of exemption.
    (4) A designation made pursuant to paragraph (e) of this section 
shall be deemed to have expired ten years after the date the records 
were submitted unless the submitter requests, and provides reasonable 
justification for, a designation period of greater duration.
    (5) The Postal Service will not determine the validity of any 
request for confidential treatment until a request for disclosure of the 
information is received.
    (f) Opportunity to object to disclosure. Through the notice 
described in paragraph (b) of this section, the submitter shall be 
afforded a reasonable period of time within which to provide the Postal 
Service with a detailed written statement of any objection to 
disclosure. Such statement shall specify all grounds for withholding any 
of the information under any exemption of the Freedom of Information Act 
and, in the case of Exemption 4, shall demonstrate why the information 
is contended to be a trade secret or commercial or financial information 
that is privileged or confidential. Whenever possible, the

[[Page 114]]

submitter's claim of confidentiality should be supported by a statement 
or certification by an officer or authorized representative of the 
submitter that the information in question is in fact confidential, has 
not been disclosed to the public by the submitter, and is not routinely 
available to the public from other sources. Information provided by a 
submitter pursuant to this paragraph may itself be subject to disclosure 
under the FOIA.
    (g) Determination that confidential treatment is warranted. If the 
custodian determines that confidential treatment is warranted for any 
part of the requested records, he shall inform the requester in writing 
in accordance with the procedures set out in Sec. 265.7(d) of this 
chapter, and shall advise the requester of the right to appeal. A copy 
of the letter of denial shall also be provided to the submitter of the 
records in any case in which the submitter had been notified of the 
request pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section.
    (h) Notice of intent to disclose. The custodian, in the case of an 
initial request, or the General Counsel, in the case of an appeal, shall 
consider carefully a submitter's objections and specific grounds for 
nondisclosure prior to determining whether to disclose business 
information. In the event of a decision to disclose business information 
over the objection of the submitter, the submitter shall be furnished a 
written notice which shall include:
    (1) A description of the business information to be disclosed;
    (2) A statement of the reasons for which the submitter's disclosure 
objections were not sustained; and
    (3) The specific date upon which disclosure will occur. Such notice 
of intent to disclose shall be forwarded to the submitter a reasonable 
number of days prior to the specified disclosure date and the requester 
shall be notified likewise.
    (i) Notice of FOIA lawsuit. Whenever a requester brings suit seeking 
to compel disclosure of business information, the General Counsel shall 
promptly notify the submitter.

[56 FR 56934, Nov. 7, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 265.9  Schedule of fees.

    (a) Policy. The purpose of this section is to establish fair and 
equitable fees to permit the furnishing of records to members of the 
public while recovering the full allowable direct costs incurred by the 
Postal Service. The Postal Service will use the most efficient and least 
costly methods available to it when complying with requests for records.
    (b) Standard rates--(1) Record retrieval. Searches may be done 
manually or by computer using existing programming.
    (i) Manual search. The fee for each quarter hour spent by clerical 
personnel in searching for records is $4.40. When a search cannot be 
performed by clerical personnel and must be performed by professional or 
managerial personnel, the fee for each quarter hour in searching for 
records is $5.35.
    (ii) Computer search. The fee for retrieving data by computer is the 
actual direct cost of the retrieval, including computer search time, 
runs and operator salary, as calculated in accordance with the 
Information Services Price List in effect at the time that the retrieval 
services are performed. The list is subject to periodic revision. A copy 
of the list is included within the public index. (See appendix A.)
    (2) Duplication. (i) Except where otherwise specifically provided in 
postal regulations, the fee for duplicating any record or publication is 
$.15 per page.
    (ii) The Postal Service may at its discretion make coin-operated 
copy machines available at any location or otherwise give the requester 
the opportunity to make copies of Postal Service records at his own 
expense. Unless authorized by the Records Office, however, no off-site 
copying shall be permitted of records which, if lost, could not be 
replaced without inconvenience to the Postal Service.
    (iii) The Postal Service will normally furnish only one copy of any 
record. If duplicate copies are furnished at the request of the 
requester, the per-page fee shall be charged for each copy of each 
duplicate page without regard to whether the requester is eligible for 
free copies pursuant to paragraph (c) or (g) of this section. At his 
discretion, when it is reasonably necessary because of a lack of 
adequate copying facilities or other circumstances, the

[[Page 115]]

custodian may make the requested record available to the requester for 
inspection under reasonable conditions and need not furnish a copy 
thereof.
    (3) Review. The fee for each quarter hour spent by clerical 
personnel in reviewing records located in response to a commercial use 
request is $4.40. When review cannot be performed by clerical personnel 
and must be performed by professional or managerial personnel, the fee 
for each quarter hour is $5.35. Only requesters who are seeking 
documents for commercial use may be charged for review. ``Review'' is 
defined in paragraph (h)(4) of this section; ``commercial use'' is 
defined in paragraph (h)(5) of this section.
    (4) Micrographics. Paragraphs (b) (1), (2) and (3) of this section 
also apply to information stored within micrographic systems.
    (c) Four categories of fees to be charged. For the purpose of 
assessing fees under this section, a requester shall be classified into 
one of four categories: commercial use requesters; educational and 
noncommercial scientific institutions; representatives of the news 
media; and all other requesters. Requesters in each category must 
reasonably describe the records sought. Fees shall be charged requesters 
in each category in accordance with the following.
    (1) Commercial use requesters. Fees shall be charged to recover the 
full direct costs of search, review and duplication in accordance with 
the rates prescribed in paragraphs (b) (1) through (3) of this section, 
subject only to the general waiver set out in paragraph (g)(1) of this 
section. The term ``commercial use request'' is defined in paragraph 
(h)(5).
    (2) Educational and noncommercial scientific institutions. Fees 
shall be charged only for duplication in accordance with paragraph 
(b)(2) of this section, except that the first 100 pages furnished in 
response to a particular request shall be furnished without charge. (See 
also the general waiver provision in paragraph (g)(1) of this section.) 
To be eligible for the reduction of fees applicable to this category, 
the requester must show that the request is being made as authorized by 
and under the auspices of a qualifying institution and that the records 
are not sought for a commercial use, but are sought in furtherance of 
scholarly or scientific research. These institutions are defined in 
paragraphs (h)(6) and (h)(7) of this section, respectively.
    (3) Representatives of the news media. Fees shall be charged only 
for duplication in accordance with paragraph (b)(2) of this section, 
except that the first 100 pages furnished in response to a particular 
request shall be furnished without charge. (See also the general waiver 
provision in paragraph (g)(1) of this section.) To be eligible for the 
reduction of fees applicable to this category, the requester must meet 
the criteria in paragraph (h)(8) of this section, and the request must 
not be made for a commercial use.
    (4) All other requesters. Fees shall be charged for search and 
duplication in accordance with paragraphs (b) (1) and (2) of this 
section, except that the first 100 pages of duplication and the first 
two hours of search time shall be furnished without charge. (See also 
paragraphs (g)(1) and (g)(2) of this section.)
    (d) Aggregating requests. When the custodian reasonably believes 
that a requester is attempting to break a request down into a series of 
requests in order to evade the assessment of fees, the custodian may 
aggregate the requests and charge accordingly. The custodian shall not 
aggregate multiple requests when the requests pertain to unrelated 
subject matter. Requests made by more than one requester may be 
aggregated only when the custodian has a concrete basis on which to 
conclude that the requesters are acting in concert specifically to avoid 
payment of fees.
    (e) Other costs--(1) Publications. Publications and other printed 
materials may, to the extent that they are available in sufficient 
quantity, be made available at the established price, if any, or at cost 
to the Postal Service. Fees established for printed materials pursuant 
to laws, other than the Freedom of Information Act, that specifically 
provide for the setting of fees for particular types of records are not 
subject to waiver or reduction under this section.
    (2) Other charges. When a response to a request requires services or 
materials other than the common one listed in

[[Page 116]]

paragraph (b) of this section, the direct cost of such services or 
materials to the Postal Service may be charged, but only if the 
requester has been notified of the nature and estimated amount of such 
cost before it is incurred.
    (3) Change of address orders. Although change of address information 
is not required by the Freedom of Information Act to be made available 
to the public, the fee for obtaining this information in accordance with 
paragraph (d)(1) of Sec. 265.6 is included in this section as a matter 
of convenience. The fee for searching for a change of address order is 
$3.00. This fee is charged regardless of whether a permanent change of 
address is found on file. (See paragraph (g)(5) of this section.)
    (f) Advance notice and payment of fees--(1) Liability and payment. 
The requester is responsible, subject to limitations on liability 
provided by this section, for the payment of all fees for services 
resulting from his request, even if responsive records are not located 
or are determined to be exempt from disclosure. Checks in payment of 
fees should be made payable to ``U.S. Postal Service.''
    (2) Advance notice. To protect members of the public from 
unwittingly incurring liability for unexpectedly large fees, the 
custodian shall notify the requester if the estimated cost is expected 
to exceed $25. When search fees are expected to exceed $25, but it 
cannot be determined in advance whether any records will be located or 
made available, the custodian shall notify the requester of the 
estimated amount and of the responsibility to pay search fees even 
through records are not located or are determined to be exempt from 
disclosure. The notification shall be transmitted as soon as possible 
after physical receipt of the request, giving the best estimate then 
available. It shall include a brief explanatory statement of the nature 
and extent of the services upon which the estimate is based and shall 
offer the requester an opportunity to confer with the custodian or his 
representative in an attempt to reformulate the request so as to meet 
his needs at lower cost. The time period for responding to the request 
shall not run during the interval between the date such notification is 
transmitted and the date of receipt of the requester's agreement to bear 
the cost. No notification is required if the request specifically states 
that whatever cost is involved is acceptable or is acceptable up to a 
specified amount that covers estimated costs or if payment of all fees 
in excess of $25 has been waived.
    (3) Advance payment. Advance payment of fees shall not be required, 
except: (i) When it is estimated that the fees chargeable under this 
section are likely to exceed $250. If the requester has a history of 
prompt payment of FOIA fees, the custodian shall notify the requester of 
the likely cost and obtain satisfactory assurance of full payment before 
commencing work on the request. If the requester has no history of 
payment, the custodian may require an advance payment of an amount up to 
the full estimated charge before commencing work on the request.
    (ii) When a requester has previously failed to pay a fee in a timely 
fashion (i.e., within 30 days of the date of the billing), the requester 
shall be required to pay the full amount owed, and to make an advance 
payment of the full amount of the estimated fee before processing will 
begin on a new or pending request.
    (iii) When advance payment is required under paragraphs (f)(3)(i) or 
(ii) of this section, the time periods for responding to the initial 
request or to an appeal shall not run during the interval between the 
date that notice of the requirement is transmitted and the date that the 
required payment or assurance of payment is received.
    (g) Restrictions on assessing fees--(1) General waiver. Fees shall 
not be charged to any requester if they would amount, in the aggregate, 
for a request or a series of related requests, to $10 or less. When the 
fees for the first 100 pages or the first two hours of search time are 
excludable under paragraph (c) of this section, additional costs will 
not be assessed unless they exceed $10. This general waiver does not 
apply to the fee for providing change of address information.
    (2) Certain fees not charged--(i) All requests except those for 
commercial use. Fees shall not be charged for the first 100 pages of 
duplication and the first

[[Page 117]]

two hours of search time except when the request is for a commercial use 
as defined in paragraph (h)(5) of this section. When search is done by 
computer, the fees to be excluded for the first two hours of search time 
shall be determined on the basis of the standard rates set out in the 
Information Services Price List then in effect. (See appendix A.) 
Assessment of search fees will begin at the point when the cost of the 
search (including the cost of equipment use and operator's time) reaches 
the equivalent dollar amount of the operator's basic rate for two hours 
plus a factor to cover benefits.
    (ii) Requests of educational and noncommercial scientific 
institutions, and representatives of the news media. Fees shall not be 
charged for time spent searching for records in response to requests 
submitted by educational and noncommercial scientific institutions or 
representatives of the news media.
    (3) Public interest waiver. The custodian shall waive a fee, in 
whole or in part, and any requirement for advance payment of such a fee, 
when he determines that furnishing the records is deemed to be in the 
public interest because it is likely to contribute significantly to 
public understanding of the operations or activities of the federal 
government, and is not primarily in the commercial interest of the 
requester. This waiver may be granted notwithstanding the applicability 
of other fee reductions prescribed by this section for requesters in 
certain categories. In determining whether disclosure is in the public 
interest for the purposes of this waiver, the following factors may be 
considered:
    (i) The relation of the records to the operations or activities of 
the Postal Services;
    (ii) The informative value of the information to be disclosed;
    (iii) Any contribution to an understanding of the subject by the 
general public likely to result from disclosure;
    (iv) The significance of that contribution to the public 
understanding of the subject;
    (v) The nature of the requester's personal interest, if any, in the 
disclosure requested; and
    (vi) Whether the disclosure would be primarily in the requester's 
commercial interest.
    (4) Waiver by officer. Any officer of the Postal Service, as defined 
in Sec. 221.8, his designee, or the USPS Records Office may waive in 
whole or in part any fee required by this part or the requirement for 
advance payment of any fee.
    (5) Waiver of fee for changes of address. The fee prescribed by 
paragraph (e)(3) of this section is waived when change of address 
information is provided:
    (i) To a Federal, state or local government agency upon prior 
written certification that the information is required for the 
performance of its duties.
    (ii) To persons requesting the information for the purpose of 
serving legal process in accordance with paragraph (d)(4)(ii) of 
Sec. 265.6.
    (iii) In compliance with a subpoena or other court order.
    (iv) To a law enforcement agency, for oral requests made through the 
Inspection Service in accordance with paragraph (d)(4)(iv) of 
Sec. 265.6.
    (v) To postage meter manufacturers when they are attempting to 
locate a missing meter.

This waiver does not apply to fees for services performed in accordance 
with section 945 of the Domestic Mail Manual.
    (h) Definitions. As used in this section, the term:
    (1) Direct costs include expenditures actually incurred in searching 
for and duplicating (and in the case of commercial requesters, 
reviewing) documents to respond to a FOIA request. Direct costs include, 
for example, the salary of the employee performing work (the basic rate 
of pay for the employee plus a factor to cover benefits) and the cost of 
operating duplicating machinery. Not included in direct costs are 
overhead expenses such as costs of space, and heating or lighting the 
facility in which the records are stored.
    (2) Search includes all time spent looking for material that is 
responsive to a request, including page-by-page or line-by-line 
identification of material within documents. Searches may be done 
manually or by computer using existing programming. A line-by-line 
search will be conducted only when

[[Page 118]]

necessary to determine whether the document contains responsive 
information and will not be employed in those instances in which 
duplication of the entire document would be the less expensive and 
quicker method of complying with a request. Search does not include 
review of material to determine whether the material is exempt from 
disclosure (see paragraph (h)(4) of this section).
    (3) Duplication refers to the process of making a copy of a document 
necessary to respond to a FOIA request. Such copies can take the form of 
paper copy, microform, audio-visual materials, or machine readable 
documentation (e.g., magnetic tape or disk), among others. The copy 
provided must be in a form that is reasonably usable by requesters.
    (4) Review refers to the process of examining documents located in 
response to a request that is for a commercial use (see paragraph (h)(5) 
of this section) to determine whether any portion of any document 
located is exempt from mandatory disclosure. It also includes processing 
any documents for disclosure, e.g., doing all that is necessary to 
excise them and otherwise prepare them for release. Review does not 
include time spent resolving general legal or policy issues regarding 
the application of exemptions. Charges may be assessed only for the 
initial review, i.e., the first time the applicability of a specific 
exemption is analyzed. Costs for a subsequent review are properly 
assessable only when a record or portion of a record withheld solely on 
the basis of an exemption later determined not to apply must be reviewed 
again to determine the applicability of other exemptions not previously 
considered.
    (5) Commercial use request refers to a request from or on behalf of 
one who seeks information for a use or purpose that furthers the 
commercial, trade, or profit interests of the requester or the person on 
whose behalf the request is made. In determining whether a request 
properly belongs in this category, the Postal Service will look to the 
use to which the requester will put the documents requested. If the use 
is not clear from the request itself, or if there is reasonable cause to 
doubt the requester's stated use, the custodian shall seek additional 
clarification from the requester before assigning the request to this 
category.
    (6) Educational institution refers to a pre-school, a public or 
private elementary or secondary school, an institution of graduate 
higher education, an institution of undergraduate higher education, an 
institution of professional education, and an institution of vocational 
education, which operates a program or programs of scholarly research.
    (7) Noncommercial scientific institution refers to an institution 
that is not operated on a ``commercial'' basis as that term is defined 
in paragraph (h)(5) of this section, and which is operated solely for 
the purpose of conducting scientific research the resutls of which are 
not intended to promote any particular product or industry.
    (8) Representative of the news media refers to any person actively 
gathering news for an entity that is organized and operated to publish 
or broadcast news to the public. The term ``news'' means information 
that is about current events or that would be of current interest to the 
public. Requests by news organizations for information that will be used 
for the furtherance of the organization's commercial interests, rather 
than for the dissemination of news to the public, shall be considered 
commercial use requests. Examples of news media entities include 
television or radio stations broadcasting to the public at large, and 
publishers of periodicals (but only in those instances when they can 
qualify as disseminators of ``news'') who make their products available 
for purchase or subscription by the general public. These examples are 
not intended to be all-inclusive. A ``freelance'' journalist will be 
regarded as a representative of the news media if he can demonstrate a 
solid basis for expecting publication through a news organization, even 
though not actually employed by it. This may be demonstrated either by a 
publication contract with the news organization or by

[[Page 119]]

the past publication record of the requester.

[52 FR 13668, Apr. 24, 1987, as amended at 53 FR 49983, Dec. 13, 1988; 
54 FR 7417, Feb. 21, 1989. Redesignated at 56 FR 56934, Nov. 7, 1991, 
and amended at 56 FR 57805, Nov. 14, 1991; 59 FR 11550, Mar. 11, 1994; 
60 FR 57345, Nov. 15, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 265.10   Annual reports.

    A report concerning the administration of the Freedom of Information 
Act and this part for the preceding calendar year is submitted to the 
Congress by March 1 of each year. The Records Office shall prescribe the 
form and content of the report.

[45 FR 44271, July 1, 1980. Redesignated at 56 FR 56934, Nov. 7, 1991, 
as amended at 60 FR 57345, Nov. 15, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 265.11   Compliance with subpoena duces tecum, court orders, and summonses.

    (a) Compliance with subpoena duces tecum. (1) Except as required by 
Part 262, produce other records of the Postal Service only in compliance 
with a subpoena duces tecum or appropriate court order.
    (2) Time, leave, and payroll records of postal employees are subject 
to production when a subpoena duces tecum or appropriate court order has 
been properly served. The custodian of the records may designate a 
postal employee to present the records. The presentation by a designee 
rather than the employee named in the subpoena or court order must meet 
with the approval of the attorneys for each side. In addition, such 
records may be released if authorized in writing by the employee.
    (3) If the subpoena involves a job-connected injury, the records are 
under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Office of Workers' Compensation 
Programs, Department of Labor. Requests for authorization to produce 
these records shall be addressed to: Office of Workers' Compensation 
Programs, U.S. Department of Labor, Washington, DC 20210-0001. Also 
notify the attorney responsible for the issuance of the subpoena or 
court order.
    (4) Employee medical records are primarily under the exclusive 
jurisdiction of the U.S. Civil Service Commission. The Commission has 
delegated authority to the Postal Service and to the Commission's 
Regional Directors to release medical information, in response to proper 
requests and upon competent medical advice, in accordance with the 
following criteria:
    (i) Except in response to a subpoena or court order, do not release 
any medical information about an employee to any non-Federal entity or 
individual without authorization from the employee.
    (ii) With authorization from the employee, the Area, Information 
Systems Service Center, or Chief Field Counsel will respond as follows 
to a request from a non-Federal source for medical information:
    (a) If, in the opinion of a Federal medical officer, the medical 
information indicates the existence of a malignancy, a mental condition, 
or other condition about which a prudent physician would hesitate to 
inform a person suffering from such a condition as to its exact nature 
and probable outcome, do not release the medical information to the 
employee or to any individual designated by him, except to a physician, 
designated by the employee in writing. If a subpoena or court order was 
issued, the responding official shall caution the moving party as to the 
possible dangers involved if the medical information is divulged.
    (b) If, in the opinion of a Federal medical officer, the medical 
information does not indicate the presence of any condition which would 
cause a prudent physician to hesitate to inform a person of the exact 
nature and probable outcome of his condition, release it in response to 
a subpoena or court order, or to the employee or to any person, firm, or 
organization he authorizes in writing.
    (c) If a Federal medical officer is not available, refer the request 
to the Civil Service Commission regional office with the medical 
certificates or other medical reports concerned.
    (5) Do not release any records containing information as to the 
employee's security or loyalty.
    (6) Honor subpoenas or court orders only when disclosure is 
authorized.

[[Page 120]]

    (7) When authorized to comply with a subpoena duces tecum, do not 
leave the original records with the court.
    (b) [Reserved]

[40 FR 7331, Feb. 19, 1975, as amended at 51 FR 26386, July 23, 1986; 56 
FR 55824, Oct. 30, 1991. Redesignated at 56 FR 56934, Nov. 7, 1991; 60 
FR 36712, July 18, 1995; 60 FR 57345, Nov. 15, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 265.12  Demands for testimony or records in certain legal proceedings.

    (a) Scope and applicability of this section. (1) This section 
establishes procedures to be followed if the Postal Service or any 
Postal Service employee receives a demand for testimony concerning or 
disclosure of:
    (i) Records contained in the files of the Postal Service;
    (ii) Information relating to records contained in the files of the 
Postal Service; or
    (iii) Information or records acquired or produced by the employee in 
the course of his or her official duties or because of the employee's 
official status.
    (2) This section does not create any right or benefit, substantive 
or procedural, enforceable by any person against the Postal Service.
    (3) This section does not apply to any of the following:
    (i) Any legal proceeding in which the United States is a party;
    (ii) A demand for testimony or records made by either House of 
Congress or, to the extent of matter within its jurisdiction, any 
committee or subcommittee of Congress;
    (iii) An appearance by an employee in his or her private capacity in 
a legal proceeding in which the employee's testimony does not relate to 
the employee's official duties or the functions of the Postal Service; 
or
    (iv) A demand for testimony or records submitted to the Postal 
Inspection Service (a demand for Inspection Service records or testimony 
will be handled in accordance with rules in Sec. 265.11).
    (4) This section does not exempt a request from applicable 
confidentiality requirements, including the requirements of the Privacy 
Act. 5 U.S.C. 552a.
    (b) Definitions. The following definitions apply to this section:
    (1) Adjudicative authority includes, but is not limited to, the 
following:
    (i) A court of law or other judicial forums, whether local, state, 
or federal; and
    (ii) Mediation, arbitration, or other forums for dispute resolution.
    (2) Demand includes a subpoena, subpoena duces tecum, request, 
order, or other notice for testimony or records arising in a legal 
proceeding.
    (3) Employee means a current employee or official of the Postal 
Service.
    (4) General Counsel means the General Counsel of the United States 
Postal Service, the Chief Field Counsels, or an employee of the Postal 
Service acting for the General Counsel under a delegation of authority.
    (5) Legal proceeding means:
    (i) A proceeding before an adjudicative authority;
    (ii) A legislative proceeding, except for a proceeding before either 
House of Congress or before any committee or subcommittee of Congress; 
or
    (iii) An administrative proceeding.
    (6) Private litigation means a legal proceeding to which the United 
States is not a party.
    (7) Records custodian means the employee who maintains a requested 
record. For assistance in identifying the custodian of a specific 
record, contact the Records Office, U.S. Postal Service, 475 L'Enfant 
Plaza, SW., Washington, DC 20260-5243, telephone (202) 268-2608.
    (8) Testimony means statements made in connection with a legal 
proceeding, including but not limited to statements in court or other 
forums, depositions, declarations, affidavits, or responses to 
interrogatories.
    (9) United States means the federal government of the United States 
and any of its agencies, establishments, or instrumentalities, including 
the United States Postal Service.
    (c) Requirements for submitting a demand for testimony or records. 
(1) Ordinarily, a party seeking to obtain records from the Postal 
Service should submit a request in accordance with the provisions of the 
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), 5 U.S.C. 552, and

[[Page 121]]

the Postal Service's regulations implementing the FOIA at 39 CFR 265.1 
through 265.9 or the Privacy Act, 5 U.S.C. 552a and the Postal Service's 
regulations implementing the Privacy Act at 39 CFR 266.1 through 266.9.
    (2) A demand for testimony or records issued pursuant to the rules 
governing the legal proceeding in which the demand arises must:
    (i) Be in writing;
    (ii) Identify the requested record and/or state the nature of the 
requested testimony, describe the relevance of the record or testimony 
to the proceeding, and why the information sought is unavailable by any 
other means; and
    (iii) If testimony is requested, contain a summary of the requested 
testimony and a showing that no document could be provided and used in 
lieu of testimony.
    (3) Procedures for service of demand are made as follows:
    (i) Service of a demand for testimony or records (including, but not 
limited to, personnel or payroll information) relating to a current or 
former employee must be made in accordance with the applicable rules of 
civil procedure on the employee whose testimony is requested or the 
records custodian. The requester also shall deliver a copy of the demand 
to the District Manager, Customer Services and Sales, for all current 
employees whose work location is within the geographic boundaries of the 
manager's district, and any former employee whose last position was 
within the geographic boundaries of the manager's district. A demand for 
testimony or records must be received by the employee whose testimony is 
requested and the appropriate District Manager, Customer Services and 
Sales, at least ten (10) working days before the date the testimony or 
records are needed.
    (ii) Service of a demand for testimony or records other than those 
described in paragraph (c)(3)(i) of this section must be made in 
accordance with the applicable rules of civil procedure on the employee 
whose testimony is requested or the records custodian. The requester 
also shall deliver a copy of the demand to the General Counsel, United 
States Postal Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza, SW, Washington DC 20260-1100, 
or the Chief Field Counsel. A demand for testimony or records must be 
received by the employee and the General Counsel or Chief Field Counsel 
at least ten (10) working days before the date testimony or records are 
needed.
    (d) Procedures followed in response to a demand for testimony or 
records. (1) After an employee receives a demand for testimony or 
records, the employee shall immediately notify the General Counsel or 
Chief Field Counsel and request instructions.
    (2) An employee may not give testimony or produce records without 
the prior authorization of the General Counsel.
    (3)(i) The General Counsel may allow an employee to testify or 
produce records if the General Counsel determines that granting 
permission:
    (A) Would be appropriate under the rules of procedure governing the 
matter in which the demand arises and other applicable laws, privileges, 
rules, authority, and regulations; and
    (B) Would not be contrary to the interest of the United States. The 
interest of the United States includes, but is not limited to, 
furthering a public interest of the Postal Service and protecting the 
human and financial resources of the United States.
    (ii) An employee's testimony shall be limited to the information set 
forth in the statement described at paragraph (c)(2) of this section or 
to such portions thereof as the General Counsel determines are not 
subject to objection. An employee's testimony shall be limited to facts 
within the personal knowledge of the employee. A Postal Service employee 
authorized to give testimony under this rule is prohibited from giving 
expert or opinion testimony, answering hypothetical or speculative 
questions, or giving testimony with respect to privileged subject 
matter. The General Counsel may waive the prohibition of expert 
testimony under this paragraph only upon application and showing of 
exceptional circumstances and the request substantially meets the 
requirements of this section.
    (4) The General Counsel may establish conditions under which the 
employee may testify. If the General Counsel authorizes the testimony of 
an

[[Page 122]]

employee, the party seeking testimony shall make arrangements for the 
taking of testimony by those methods that, in the General Counsel's 
view, will least disrupt the employee's official duties. For example, at 
the General Counsel's discretion, testimony may be provided by 
affidavits, answers to interrogatories, written depositions, or 
depositions transcribed, recorded, or preserved by any other means 
allowable by law.
    (5) If a response to a demand for testimony or records is required 
before the General Counsel determines whether to allow an employee to 
testify, the employee or counsel for the employee shall do the 
following:
    (i) Inform the court or other authority of the regulations in this 
section; and
    (ii) Request that the demand be stayed pending the employee's 
receipt of the General Counsel's instructions.
    (6) If the court or other authority declines the request for a stay, 
or rules that the employee must comply with the demand regardless of the 
General Counsel's instructions, the employee or counsel for the employee 
shall respectfully decline to comply with the demand, citing United 
States ex rel. Touhy v. Ragen, 340 U.S. 462 (1951), and the regulations 
in this section.
    (7) The General Counsel may request the assistance of the Department 
of Justice or a U.S. Attorney where necessary to represent the interests 
of the Postal Service and the employee.
    (8) At his or her discretion, the General Counsel may grant a waiver 
of any procedure described by this section, where waiver is considered 
necessary to promote a significant interest of the United States or for 
other good cause.
    (9) If it otherwise is permissible, the records custodian may 
authenticate, upon the request of the party seeking disclosure, copies 
of the records. No employee of the Postal Service shall respond in 
strict compliance with the terms of a subpoena duces tecum unless 
specifically authorized by the General Counsel.
    (e) Postal Service employees as expert witnesses. No Postal Service 
employee may testify as an expert or opinion witness, with regard to any 
matter arising out of the employee's official duties or the functions of 
the Postal Service, for any party other than the United States, except 
that in extraordinary circumstances, the General Counsel may approve 
such expert testimony in private litigation. A Postal Service employee 
may not testify as such an expert witness without the express 
authorization of the General Counsel. A litigant must obtain 
authorization of the General Counsel before designating a Postal Service 
employee as an expert witness.

    (f) Substitution of Postal Service employees. Although a demand for 
testimony may be directed to a named Postal Service employee, the 
General Counsel, where appropriate, may designate another Postal Service 
employee to give testimony. Upon request and for good cause shown (for 
example, when a particular Postal Service employee has direct knowledge 
of a material fact not known to the substitute employee designated by 
the Postal Service), the General Counsel may permit testimony by a named 
Postal Service employee.

    (g) Fees and costs. (1) The Postal Service may charge fees, not to 
exceed actual costs, to private litigants seeking testimony or records 
by request or demand. The fees, which are to be calculated to reimburse 
fully the Postal Service for processing the demand and providing the 
witness or records, may include, among others:

    (i) Costs of time spent by employees, including attorneys, of the 
Postal Service to process and respond to the demand;

    (ii) Costs of attendance of the employee and agency attorney at any 
deposition, hearing, or trial;

    (iii) Travel costs of the employee and agency attorney;

    (iv) Costs of materials and equipment used to search for, process, 
and make available information.

    (2) All costs for employee time shall be calculated on the hourly 
pay of the employee (including all pay, allowance, and benefits) and 
shall include the hourly fee for each hour, or portion of each hour, 
when the employee is in travel, in attendance at a deposition, hearing, 
or trial, or is processing or responding to a request or demand.


[[Page 123]]


    (3) At the discretion of the Postal Service, where appropriate, 
costs may be estimated and collected before testimony is given.

    (h) Acceptance of service. This section does not in any way abrogate 
or modify the requirements of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (28 
U.S.C. Appendix) regarding service of process.

[60 FR 17224, Apr. 5, 1995, as amended at 60 FR 57345, Nov. 15, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 265.13  Compliance with subpoenas, summonses, and court orders by postal employees within the Inspection Service where the Postal Service, the United 
          States, or any other federal agency is not a party.

    (a) Applicability of this section. The rules in this section apply 
to all federal, state, and local court proceedings, as well as 
administrative and legislative proceedings, other than:
    (1) Proceedings where the United States, the Postal Service, or any 
other federal agency is a party;
    (2) Congressional requests or subpoenas for testimony or documents;
    (3) Consultative services and technical assistance rendered by the 
Inspection Service in executing its normal functions;
    (4) Employees serving as expert witnesses in connection with 
professional and consultative services under Sec. 447.23 of this chapter 
and under title 5, Code of Federal Regulations, part 7001, provided that 
employees acting in this capacity must state for the record that their 
testimony reflects their personal opinions and should not be viewed as 
the official position of the Postal Service;
    (5) Employees making appearances in their private capacities in 
proceedings that do not relate to the Postal Service (e.g., cases 
arising from traffic accidents, domestic relations) and do not involve 
professional or consultative services; and
    (6) When in the opinion of the Counsel or the Counsel's designee, 
Office of the Chief Postal Inspector, it has been determined that it is 
in the best interest of the Inspection Service or in the public 
interest.
    (b) Purpose and scope. The provisions in this section limit the 
participation of postal employees within or assigned to the Inspection 
Service, in private litigation, and other proceedings in which the 
Postal Service, the United States, or any other federal agency is not a 
party. The rules are intended to promote the careful supervision of 
Inspection Service resources and to reduce the risk of inappropriate 
disclosures that might affect postal operations.
    (c) Definitions. For the purposes of this section:
    (1) Authorizing official is the person responsible for giving the 
authorization for release of documents or permission to testify.
    (2) Case or matter means any civil proceeding before a court of law, 
administrative board, hearing officer, or other body conducting a 
judicial or administrative proceeding in which the United States, the 
Postal Service, or another federal agency is not a named party.
    (3) Demand includes any request, order, or subpoena for testimony or 
the production of documents.
    (4) Document means all records, papers, or official files, 
including, but not limited to, official letters, telegrams, memoranda, 
reports, studies, calendar and diary entries, graphs, notes, charts, 
tabulations, data analyses, statistical or information accumulations, 
records of meetings and conversations, film impressions, magnetic tapes, 
computer discs, and sound or mechanical reproductions;
    (5) Employee or Inspection Service employee, for the purpose of this 
section only, refers to a Postal Service employee currently or formerly 
assigned to the Postal Inspection Service, student interns, contractors 
and employees of contractors who have access to Inspection Service 
information and records.
    (6) Inspection Service means the organizational unit within the 
Postal Service as outlined in Sec. 224.3 of this chapter.
    (7) Inspection Service Legal Counsel is an attorney authorized by 
the Chief Postal Inspector to give legal advice to members of the 
Inspection Service.
    (8) Inspection Service Manual is the directive containing the 
standard operating procedures for Postal Inspectors and certain 
Inspection Service employees.

[[Page 124]]

    (9) Nonpublic includes any material or information not subject to 
mandatory public disclosure under Sec. 265.6(b).
    (10) Official case file means official documents that relate to a 
particular case or investigation. These documents may be kept at any 
location and do not necessarily have to be in the same location in order 
to constitute the file.
    (11) Postal Inspector reports include all written reports, letters, 
recordings, or other memorializations made in conjunction with the 
duties of a Postal Inspector.
    (12) Testify or testimony includes both in-person oral statements 
before any body conducting a judicial or administrative proceeding and 
statements made in depositions, answers to interrogatories, 
declarations, affidavits, or other similar documents.
    (13) Third-party action means an action, judicial or administrative, 
in which the United States, the Postal Service, or any other federal 
agency is not a named party.
    (d) Policy. (1) No current or former employee within the Inspection 
Service may testify or produce documents concerning information acquired 
in the course of employment or as a result of his or her relationship 
with the Postal Service in any proceeding to which this section applies 
(see paragraph (a) of this section), unless authorized to do so. 
Authorization will be provided by:
    (i) The Postal Inspector in Charge of the affected field Division, 
or designee, for Division personnel and records, after that official has 
determined through consultation with Inspection Service legal counsel 
that no legal objection, privilege, or exemption applies to such 
testimony or production of documents.
    (ii) The Chief Postal Inspector or designee for Headquarters 
employees and records, after that official has determined through 
consultation with Inspection Service legal counsel, that no legal 
objection, privilege, or exemption applies to such testimony or 
production of documents.
    (2) Consideration shall be given to:
    (i) Statutory restrictions, as well as any legal objection, 
exemption, or privilege that may apply;
    (ii) Relevant legal standards for disclosure of nonpublic 
information and documents;
    (iii) Inspection Service rules and regulations and the public 
interest;
    (iv) Conservation of employee time; and
    (v) Prevention of the expenditure of Postal Service resources for 
private purposes.
    (3) If additional information is necessary before a determination 
can be made, the authorizing official may, in coordination with 
Inspection Service legal counsel, request assistance from the Department 
of Justice.
    (e) Compliance with subpoena duces tecum. (1) Except as required by 
part 262 of this chapter, produce any other record of the Postal Service 
only in compliance with a subpoena duces tecum or appropriate court 
order.
    (2) Do not release any record containing information relating to an 
employee's security or loyalty.
    (3) Honor subpoenas and court orders only when disclosure is 
authorized.
    (4) When authorized to comply with a subpoena duces tecum or court 
order, do not leave the originals with the court.
    (5) Postal Inspector reports are considered to be confidential 
internal documents and shall not be released unless there is specific 
authorization by the Chief Postal Inspector or the Inspector in Charge 
of the affected field Division, after consulting with Inspection Service 
legal counsel.
    (6) The Inspection Service Manual and other operating instructions 
issued to Inspection Service employees are considered to be confidential 
and shall not be released unless there is specific authorization, after 
consultation with Inspection Service legal counsel. If the requested 
information relates to confidential investigative techniques, or release 
of the information would adversely affect the law enforcement mission of 
the Inspection Service, the subpoenaed official, through Inspection 
Service legal counsel, may request an in camera, ex parte conference to 
determine the necessity for the release of the information. The entire 
Manual should not be given to any party.
    (7) Notes, memoranda, reports, transcriptions, whether written or 
recorded

[[Page 125]]

and made pursuant to an official investigation conducted by a member of 
the Inspection Service, are the property of the Inspection Service and 
are part of the official case file, whether stored with the official 
file.
    (f) Compliance with summonses and subpoenas ad testificandum. (1) If 
an Inspection Service employee is served with a third-party summons or a 
subpoena requiring an appearance in court, contact should be made with 
Inspection Service legal counsel to determine whether and which 
exemptions or restrictions apply to proposed testimony. Inspection 
Service employees are directed to comply with summonses, subpoenas, and 
court orders, as to appearance, but may not testify without 
authorization.
    (2) Postal Inspector reports or records will not be presented during 
testimony, in either state or federal courts in which the United States, 
the Postal Service, or another federal agency is not a party in 
interest, unless authorized by the Chief Postal Inspector or the Postal 
Inspector in Charge of the affected field Division, who will make the 
decision after consulting with Inspection Service legal counsel. If an 
attempt is made to compel production, through testimony, the employee is 
directed to decline to produce the information or matter and to state 
that it may be exempted and may not be disclosed or produced without the 
specific approval of the Chief Postal Inspector or the Postal Inspector 
in Charge of the affected field Division. The Postal Service will offer 
all possible assistance to the courts, but the question of disclosing 
information for which an exemption may be claimed is a matter of 
discretion that rests with the appropriate official. Paragraph (e) of 
this section covers the release of Inspection Service documents in cases 
where the Postal Service or the United States is not a party.
    (g) General procedures for obtaining Inspection Service documents 
and testimony from Inspection Service employees. (1) To facilitate the 
orderly response to demands for the testimony of Inspection Service 
employees and production of documents in cases where the United States, 
the Postal Service, or another federal agency is not a party, all 
demands for the production of nonpublic documents or testimony of 
Inspection Service employees concerning matters relating to their 
official duties and not subject to the exemptions set forth in paragraph 
(a) of this section shall be in writing and conform to the requirements 
outlined in paragraphs (g)(2) and (g)(3) of this section.
    (2) Before or simultaneously with service of a demand described in 
paragraph (g)(1) of this section, the requesting party shall serve on 
the Counsel, Office of the Chief Postal Inspector, 475 L'Enfant Plaza 
SW., Washington, DC 20260-2181, an affidavit or declaration containing 
the following information:
    (i) The title of the case and the forum where it will be heard;
    (ii) The party's interest in the case;
    (iii) The reasons for the demand';
    (iv) A showing that the requested information is available, by law, 
to a party outside the Postal Service;
    (v) If testimony is sought, a summary of the anticipated testimony;
    (vi) If testimony is sought, a showing that Inspection Service 
records could not be provided and used in place of the requested 
testimony;
    (vii) The intended use of the documents or testimony; and
    (viii) An affirmative statement that the documents or testimony is 
necessary for defending or prosecuting the case at issue.
    (3) The Counsel, Office of the Chief Postal Inspector, shall act as 
agent for the receipt of legal process for demands for production of 
records or testimony of Inspection Service employees where the United 
States, the Postal Service, or any other federal agency is not a party. 
A subpoena for testimony or for the production of documents from an 
Inspection Service employee concerning official matters shall be served 
in accordance with the applicable rules of civil procedure. A copy of 
the subpoena and affidavit or declaration, if not previously furnished, 
shall also be sent to the Chief Postal Inspector or the appropriate 
Postal Inspector in Charge.
    (4) Any Inspection Service employee who is served with a demand 
shall promptly inform the Chief Postal Inspector, or the appropriate 
Postal Inspector in Charge, of the nature of the

[[Page 126]]

documents or testimony sought and all relevant facts and circumstances.
    (h) Authorization of testimony or production of documents. (1) The 
Chief Postal Inspector or the Postal Inspector in Charge of the affected 
field Division, after consulting with Inspection Service legal counsel, 
shall determine whether testimony or the production of documents will be 
authorized.
    (2) Before authorizing the requested testimony or the production of 
documents, the Chief Postal Inspector or the Postal Inspector in Charge 
of the affected field Division shall consider the following factors:
    (i) Statutory restrictions, as well as any legal objection, 
exemption, or privilege that may apply;
    (ii) Relevant legal standards for disclosure of nonpublic 
information and documents;
    (iii) Inspection Service rules and regulations and the public 
interest;
    (iv) Conservation of employee time; and
    (v) Prevention of expenditures of government time and resources 
solely for private purposes.
    (3) If, in the opinion of the authorizing official, the documents 
should not be released or testimony should not be furnished, that 
official's decision is final.
    (4) Inspection Service legal counsel may consult or negotiate with 
the party or the party's counsel seeking testimony or documents to 
refine and limit the demand, so that compliance is less burdensome, or 
obtain information necessary to make the determination whether the 
documents or testimony will be authorized. If the party or party's 
counsel seeking the documents or testimony fails to cooperate in good 
faith, preventing Inspection Service legal counsel from making an 
informed recommendation to the authorizing official, that failure may be 
presented to the court or other body conducting the proceeding as a 
basis for objection.
    (5) Permission to testify or to release documents in all cases will 
be limited to matters outlined in the affidavit or declaration described 
in paragraph (g)(2) of this section or to such parts as deemed 
appropriate by the authorizing official.
    (6) If the authorizing official allows the release of documents or 
testimony to be given by an employee, arrangements shall be made for the 
taking of testimony or receipt of documents by the least disruptive 
methods to the employee's official duties. Testimony may, for example, 
be provided by affidavits, answers to interrogatories, written 
depositions, or depositions transcribed, recorded, or preserved by any 
other means allowable by law.
    (i) While giving a deposition, the employee may, at the option of 
the authorizing official, be represented by Inspection Service legal 
counsel.
    (ii) While completing affidavits, or other written reports or at any 
time during the process of preparing for testimony or releasing 
documents, the employee may seek the assistance of Inspection Service 
legal counsel.
    (7) Absent written authorization from the authorizing official, the 
employee shall respectfully decline to produce the requested documents, 
testify, or, otherwise, disclose the requested information.
    (8) If the authorization is denied or not received by the return 
date, the employee, together with counsel, where appropriate, shall 
appear at the stated time and place, produce a copy of this section, and 
respectfully decline to testify or produce any document on the basis of 
the regulations in this section.
    (9) The employee shall appear as ordered by the subpoena, summons, 
or other appropriate court order, unless:
    (i) Legal counsel has advised the employee that an appearance is 
inappropriate, as in cases where the subpoena, summons, or other court 
order was not properly issued or served, has been withdrawn, discovery 
has been stayed; or
    (ii) Where the Postal Service will present a legal objection to 
furnishing the requested information or testimony.
    (i) Inspection Service employees as expert or opinion witnesses. No 
Inspection Service employee may testify as an expert or opinion witness, 
with regard to any matter arising out of the employee's duties or 
functions at the Postal Service, for any party other than the

[[Page 127]]

United States, except that in extraordinary circumstances, the Counsel, 
Office of the Chief Postal Inspector, may approve such testimony in 
private litigation. An Inspection Service employee may not testify as 
such an expert or opinion witness without the express authorization of 
the Counsel, Office of the Chief Postal Inspector. A litigant must first 
obtain authorization of the Counsel, Office of the Chief Postal 
Inspector, before designating an Inspection Service employee as an 
expert or opinion witness.
    (j) Postal liability. This section is intended to provide 
instructions to Inspection Service employees and does not create any 
right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable by any party 
against the Postal Service.
    (k) Fees. (1) Unless determined by 28 U.S.C. 1821 or other 
applicable statute, the costs of providing testimony, including 
transcripts, shall be borne by the requesting party.
    (2) Unless limited by statute, such costs shall also include 
reimbursement to the Postal Service for the usual and ordinary expenses 
attendant upon the employee's absence from his or her official duties in 
connection with the case or matter, including the employee's salary and 
applicable overhead charges, and any necessary travel expenses as 
follows:
    (i) The Inspection Service is authorized to charge reasonable fees 
to parties demanding documents or information. Such fees, calculated to 
reimburse the Postal Service for the cost of responding to a demand, may 
include the costs of time expended by Inspection Service employees, 
including attorneys, to process and respond to the demand; attorney time 
for reviewing the demand and for legal work in connection with the 
demand; expenses generated by equipment used to search for, produce, and 
copy the requested information; travel costs of the employee and the 
agency attorney, including lodging and per diem where appropriate. Such 
fees shall be assessed at the rates and in the manner specified in 
Sec. 265.9.
    (ii) At the discretion of the Inspection Service where appropriate, 
fees and costs may be estimated and collected before testimony is given.
    (iii) The provisions in this section do not affect rights and 
procedures governing public access to official documents pursuant to the 
Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C 552a.
    (l) Acceptance of service. The rules in this section in no way 
modify the requirements of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (28 
U.S.C. Appendix) regarding service of process.

[60 FR 36712, July 18, 1995]

         Appendix A to Part 265--Information Services Price List

    When information is requested that must be retrieved by computer, 
the requester is charged for the resources required to furnish the 
information. Estimates are provided to the requester in advance and are 
based on the following price list.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Description of services                   Rate      Unit 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A. Central Processing Unit Utilization based upon                       
 IMB 3090-200 Performance Standard:                                     
    Batch Processing Services.......................  $3,600.00     Hour
    On-Line Services................................  $4,000.00     Hour
    Channel Utilization:                                                
        Direct access Storage Devices...............        .54  \1\ 1,0
                                                                      00
        Tape Channel................................        .96  \1\ 1,0
                                                                      00
        (*execution of channel program)                                 
    Local Printing..................................       1.20  \2\1,00
                                                                       0
B. Personnel Charges:                                                   
    Programming Services............................      53.00     Hour
    Manual Unit Services............................      37.00    Hour 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ EXCPs.                                                              
\2\ Print lines.                                                        


[56 FR 57984, Nov. 15, 1991]


<R03>
PART 266--PRIVACY OF INFORMATION--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
266.1  Purpose and scope.
266.2  Policy.
266.3  Responsibility.
266.4  Collection and disclosure of information about individuals.
266.5  Notification.
266.6  Procedures for requesting inspection, copying, or amendment of 
          records.
266.7  Appeal procedure.
266.8  Schedule of fees.
266.9  Exemptions.
266.10  Computer matching.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401; 5 U.S.C. 552a.

[[Page 128]]


<R05>
Sec. 266.1   Purpose and scope.

    This part is intended to protect individual privacy and affects all 
personal information collection and usage activities of the entire U.S. 
Postal Service. This includes the information interface of Postal 
Service employees to other employees, to individuals from the public at 
large, and to any private organization or governmental agency.

[40 FR 45723, Oct. 2, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 266.2   Policy.

    It is the policy of the U.S. Postal Service to ensure that any 
record within its custody that identifies or describes any 
characteristic or provides historical information about an individual or 
that affords a basis for inferring personal characteristics, or things 
done by or to such individual, including the record of any affiliation 
with an organization or activity, or admission to an institution, is 
accurate, complete, timely, relevant, and reasonably secure from 
unauthorized access. Additionally, it is the policy to provide the means 
for individuals to know: (a) Of the existence of all Postal Service 
Privacy Act systems of records, (b) the recipients and usage made of 
such information, (c) what information is optional or mandatory to 
provide to the Postal Service, (d) the procedures for individuals to 
review and request update to all information maintained about 
themselves, (e) the reproduction fees for releasing records, (f) the 
procedures for individual legal appeal in cases of dissatisfaction; and 
(g) of the establishment or revision of a computer matching program.

[45 FR 44272, July 1, 1980, as amended at 59 FR 37160, July 21, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 266.3   Responsibility.

    (a) Freedom of Information/Privacy Acts Officer. The USPS Freedom of 
Information/Privacy Acts Officer, under the Manager, Payroll Accounting 
and Records, will ensure Postal Service-wide compliance with this 
policy.
    (b) Custodian. Custodians are responsible for adherence to this part 
within their respective units and in particular for affording 
individuals their rights to inspect and obtain copies of records 
concerning them.
    (c) Information System Executive. These managers are responsible for 
reporting to the Records Office the existence or proposed development of 
Privacy Act systems of records. They also must report any change that 
would alter the systems description as published in the Federal 
Register. They establish the relevancy of the information within those 
systems.
    (d) Data Integrity Board--(1) Responsibilities. The Data Integrity 
Board oversees Postal Service computer matching activities. Its 
principal function is to review, approve, and maintain all written 
agreements for use of Postal Service records in matching programs to 
ensure compliance with the Privacy Act and all relevant statutes, 
regulations, and guidelines. In addition, the Board annually reviews 
matching programs and other matching activities in which the Postal 
Service has participated during the preceding year to determine 
compliance with applicable laws, regulations, and agreements; compiles a 
biennial matching report of matching activities; and performs review and 
advisement functions relating to records accuracy, recordkeeping and 
disposal practices, and other computer matching activities.
    (2) Composition. The Privacy Act requires that the senior official 
responsible for implementation of agency Privacy Act policy and the 
Inspector General serve on the Board. The Records Officer, as 
administrator of Postal Service Privacy Act policy, serves as Secretary 
of the Board and performs the administrative functions of the Board. The 
Board is composed of these and other members designated by the 
Postmaster General, as follows:
    (i) Vice President/Controller (Chairman).
    (ii) Chief Postal Inspector in his or her capacity as Inspector 
General.
    (iii) Vice President, Employee Relations.
    (iv) General Counsel.
    (v) Records Officer (Secretary).

[40 FR 45723, Oct. 2, 1975, as amended at 45 FR 44272, July 1, 1980; 59 
FR 37160, July 21, 1994; 60 FR 57345, Nov. 15, 1995]

[[Page 129]]


<R05>
Sec. 266.4   Collection and disclosure of information about individuals.

    (a) The following rules govern the collection of information about 
individuals thorughout Postal Service operations;
    (1) The Postal Service will:
    (i) Collect, solicit and maintain only such information about an 
individual as is relevant and necessary to accomplish a purpose required 
by statute or Executive Order,
    (ii) Collect information, to the greatest extent practicable, 
directly from the subject individual when such information may result in 
adverse determinations about an individual's rights, benefits or 
privileges,
    (iii) Inform any individual who has been asked to furnish 
information about himself whether that disclosure is mandatory or 
voluntary, by what authority it is being solicited, the principal 
purposes for which it is intended to be used, the routine uses which may 
be made of it, and any penalties and specific consequences for the 
individual, which are known to the Postal Service, which will result 
from refusal to furnish it.
    (2) The Postal Service will not discriminate against any individual 
who fails to provide information about himself unless that information 
is required or necessary for the conduct of the system or program in 
which the individual desires to participate.
    (3) No information will be collected (or maintained) describing how 
individuals exercise rights guaranteed by the First Amendment unless the 
Postmaster General specifically determines that such information is 
relevant and necessary to carry out a statutory purpose of the Postal 
Service.
    (4) The Postal Service will not require individuals to furnish their 
Social Security account number or deny a right, privilege or benefit 
because of an individual's refusal to furnish the number unless it must 
be provided by Federal law.
    (b) Disclosures--(1) Disclosure: Limitations On. The Postal Service 
will not disseminate information about an individual unless reasonable 
efforts have been made to assure that the information is accurate, 
complete, timely and relevant and unless:
    (i) The individual to whom the record pertains has requested in 
writing that the information be disseminated, or
    (ii) It has obtained the prior written consent of the individual to 
whom the record pertains, or
    (iii) The dissemination is in accordance with paragraph (b)(2) of 
this section.
    (2) Dissemination of personal information may be made:
    (i) To a person pursuant to a requirement of the Freedom of 
Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552);
    (ii) To those officers and employees of the Postal Service who have 
a need for such information in the performance of their duties;
    (iii) For a routine use as contained in the system notices published 
in the Federal Register;
    (iv) To a recipient who has provided advance adequate written 
assurance that the information will be used solely as a statistical 
reporting or research record, and to whom the information is transferred 
in a form that is not individually identifiable;
    (v) To the Bureau of the Census for purposes of planning or carrying 
out a census or survey or related activity pursuant to the provisions of 
title 13, U.S.C.;
    (vi) To the National Archives of the United States as a record which 
has sufficient historical or other value to warrant its continued 
preservation by the U.S. Government, or for evaluation by the 
Administrator of General Services or his designee to determine whether 
the record has such value;
    (vii) To a person pursuant to a showing of compelling circumstances 
affecting the health or safety of an individual, if upon such disclosure 
notification is transmitted to the last known address of such 
individual;
    (viii) To a federal agency or to an instrumentality of any 
governmental jurisdiction within or under the control of the United 
States for a civil or criminal law enforcement activity, if such 
activity is authorized by law and if the head of the agency or 
instrumentality has made a written request to the Postal Service 
specifying the particular portion of the record desired and the law 
enforcement activity for which the record is sought;

[[Page 130]]

    (ix) To either House of Congress or its committees or subcommittees 
to the extent of matter within their jurisdiction;
    (x) To the Comptroller General or any of his authorized 
representatives in the course of the performance of the duties of the 
General Accounting Office;
    (xi) Pursuant to the order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
    (3) Names and Addresses of Postal Customers. The disclosure of lists 
of names or addresses of Postal customers or other persons to the public 
is prohibited (39 U.S.C. 412). Names or addresses will be disclosed only 
in those cases permitted by 39 CFR 265.6(d) relating to the Release of 
Information.
    (4) Employee Credit References. A credit bureau or commercial firm 
from which an employee is seeking credit may be given the following 
information upon request: grade, duty status, length of service, job 
title, and salary.
    (5) Employee Job References. Prospective employers of a postal 
employee or a former postal employee may be furnished with the 
information in paragraph (b)(4) of this section, in addition to the date 
and the reason for separation, if applicable. The reason for separation 
must be limited to one of the following terms: retired, resigned, or 
separated. Other terms or variations of these terms (e.g., retired--
disability) may not be used. If additional information is desired, the 
requester must submit the written consent of the employee, and an 
accounting of the disclosure must be kept.
    (6) Computer matching purposes. Records from a Postal Service system 
of records may be disclosed to another agency for the purpose of 
conducting a computer matching program or other matching activity as 
defined in paragraphs (c) and (d) of Sec. 262.5, but only after a 
determination by the Data Integrity Board that the procedural 
requirements of the Privacy Act, the guidelines issued by the Office of 
Management and Budget, and these regulations as may be applicable are 
met. These requirements include:
    (i) Routine use. Disclosure is made only when permitted as a routine 
use of the system of records. The USPS Records Officer determines the 
applicability of a particular routine use and the necessity for adoption 
of a new routine use.
    (ii) Notice. Publication of new or revised matching programs in the 
Federal Register and advance notice to Congress and the Office of 
Management and Budget must be made pursuant to paragraph (f) of 
Sec. 266.5.
    (iii) Computer matching agreement. The participants in a computer 
matching program must enter into a written agreement specifying the 
terms under which the matching program is to be conducted (see 
Sec. 266.10). The Records Officer may require that other matching 
activities be conducted in accordance with a written agreement.
    (iv) Data Integrity Board approval. No record from a Postal Service 
system of records may be disclosed for use in a computer matching 
program unless the matching agreement has received approval by the 
Postal Service Data Integrity Board (see Sec. 266.10). Other matching 
activities may, at the discretion of the Records Officer, be submitted 
for Board approval.
    (c) Correction Disclosure. Any person or other agency to which a 
personal record has been or is to be disclosed shall be informed of any 
corrections or notations of dispute relating thereto affecting the 
accuracy, timeliness or relevance of that personal record.
    (d) Recording of Disclosure. (1) An accurate accounting of each 
disclosure will be kept in all instances except those in which 
disclosure is made to the subject of the record, or to Postal Service 
employees in the performance of their duties or is required by the 
Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).
    (2) The accounting will be maintained for at least five (5) years or 
the life of the record, whichever is longer.
    (3) The accounting will be made available to the individual named in 
the record upon inquiry, except for disclosures made pursuant to 
provision paragraph (b)(2)(viii) of this section relating to law 
enforcement activities.

[40 FR 45723, Oct. 2, 1975, as amended at 45 FR 44272, July 1, 1980; 58 
FR 62036, Nov. 24, 1993; 59 FR 37160, July 21, 1994]

[[Page 131]]


<R05>
Sec. 266.5   Notification.

    (a) Notification of Systems. The following procedures permit 
individuals to determine the types of personal records systems 
maintained by the Postal Service.
    (1) Upon written request, the Postal Service will notify any 
individual whether a specific system named by him contains a record 
pertaining to him. See Sec. 266.6 for suggested form of request.
    (2) The Postal Service shall publish annually in the Federal 
Register a notice of existence and character of all personal systems of 
records. This notice will contain the following information:
    (i) Name and location of the system,
    (ii) Nature and purposes of the system,
    (iii) Categories of individuals on whom personal information is 
maintained and categories of personal information generally maintained 
in the system,
    (iv) Confidentiality requirements and the extent to which access 
controls apply to such information,
    (v) Postal Service policies and standards regarding the safeguarding 
and disclosure of information, information storage, duration of 
retention of information, and elimination of such information from the 
system,
    (vi) Routine uses made by the Postal Service of the personal 
information contained in the system, including the categories of users 
and the purpose of the use,
    (vii) Title and official address of the custodian,
    (viii) Procedures by which an individual can be informed if a system 
contains personal information pertaining to him, gain access to such 
information, and contest the accuracy, completeness, timeliness, 
relevance and necessity for retention of the information.
    (ix) Categories of sources of such personal information,
    (x) System status--either developmental or operational.
    (b) Notification of Disclosure. The Postal Service shall make 
reasonable efforts to serve notice on an individual before any personal 
information on such individual is made available to any person under 
compulsory legal process when such process becomes a matter of public 
record.
    (c) Notification of Amendment. (See Sec. 266.7 (b)(3) relating to 
amendment of records upon request.)
    (d) Notification of New Use. Any newly intended use of personal 
information maintained by the Postal Service will be published in the 
Federal Register thirty (30) days before such use becomes operational. 
Public views may then be submitted to the Records Office.
    (e) Notification of Exemptions. The Postal Service will publish 
within the Federal Register its intent to exempt any system of records 
and shall specify the nature and purpose of that system.
    (f) Notification of computer matching program. The Postal Service 
publishes in the Federal Register and forwards to Congress and the 
Office of Management and Budget advance notice of its intent to 
establish, substantially revise, or renew a matching program, unless 
such notice is published by another participant agency. In those 
instances in which the Postal Service is the ``recipient'' agency, as 
defined in the Act, but another participant agency sponsors and derives 
the principal benefit from the matching program, the other agency is 
expected to publish the notice. The notice must be sent to Congress and 
OMB 40 days, and published at least thirty (30) days, prior to (1) 
initiation of any matching activity under a new or substantially revised 
program, or (2) expiration of the existing matching agreement in the 
case of a renewal of a continuing program.

[40 FR 45724, Oct. 2, 1975; 40 FR 48512, Oct. 16, 1975, as amended at 45 
FR 44272, July 1, 1980; 59 FR 37161, July 21, 1994; 60 FR 57345, Nov. 
15, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 266.6  Procedures for requesting inspection, copying, or amendment of records.

    The purpose of this section is to provide procedures by which an 
individual may have access and request amendment to personal information 
within a Privacy Act System of Records.
    (a) Submission of Requests--(1) Manner of submission. Inquiries 
regarding the contents of records systems or access or amendment to 
personal information

[[Page 132]]

should be submitted in writing to the custodian of the official record, 
if known, or to the Freedom of Information/Privacy Acts Officer, U.S. 
Postal Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza SW., Washington, DC 20260-5243, 
telephone (202) 268-2608. Inquiries should be clearly marked, ``Privacy 
Act Request''. Any inquiry concerning a specific system of records 
should provide the Postal Service with the information contained under 
``Notification'' for that system as published in the Federal Register. 
If the information supplied is insufficient to locate or identify the 
record, the requester will be notified promptly and, if possible, 
informed of additional information required. If the requester is not a 
Postal Service employee, he should designate the post office at which he 
wishes to review or obtain copies of records. Amendment requests contest 
the relevance, accuracy, timeliness or completeness of the record and 
will include a statement of the amendment requested.
    (2) Third party inquiries. Anyone desiring to review or copy records 
pertaining to another person must have the written consent of that 
person.
    (3) Period for response by custodian. Upon receipt of an inquiry, 
the custodian will respond with an acknowledgement of receipt within ten 
(10) days. If the inquiry requires the custodian to determine whether a 
particular record exists, the inquirer shall be informed of this 
determination as a part of the acknowledgement letter.
    (b) Compliance with Request for Access--(1) Notification of time and 
place for inspection. When a requested record has been identified and is 
to be disclosed, the custodian shall ensure that the record is made 
available promptly and shall immediately notify the requester where and 
when the record will be available for inspection or copying. Postal 
Service records will normally be available for inspection and copying 
during regular business hours at the postal facilities at which they are 
maintained. The custodian may, however, designate other reasonable 
locations and times for inspection and copying of some or all of the 
records within his custody.
    (2) Identification of requester. The requester must present personal 
identification sufficient to satisfy the custodian as to his identity 
prior to record review. Examples of sufficient identification are a 
valid driver's license, medicare card, and employee identification 
cards.
    (3) Responsibilities of requester. The requester shall assume the 
following responsibilities regarding the review of official personal 
records:
    (i) Requester must agree not to leave Postal Services premises with 
official records unless specifically given a copy for that purpose by 
the custodian or his representative.
    (ii) Requester must sign a statement indicating he has reviewed a 
specific record(s) or category of record.
    (iii) Requester may be accompanied by a person he so chooses to aid 
in the inspection of information; however, requester must furnish the 
Postal Service with written authorization for such review in that 
person's presence.
    (4) Special rules for medical records. A medical record shall be 
disclosed to the requester to whom it pertains unless, in the judgment 
of the medical officer, access to such record could have an adverse 
effect upon such individual. When the medical officer determines that 
the disclosure of medical information could have an adverse effect upon 
the individual to whom it pertains, the medical officer will transmit 
such information to a medical doctor named by the requesting individual.
    (5) Limitations on access. Nothing in this section shall allow an 
individual access to any information compiled in reasonable anticipation 
of a civil action or proceeding. Other limitations on access are those 
specifically addressed in Secs. 266.6(b)(4) and 266.9.
    (6) Response when compliance is not possible. A reply denying a 
written request to review a record shall be in writing signed by the 
custodian or other appropriate official and shall be made only if such a 
record does not exist or does not contain personal information relating 
to the requester, or is exempt from disclosure. This reply shall include 
a statement regarding the determining factors of denial, and the right 
to appeal to denial to the General Counsel.
    (c) Compliance With Request for Amendment. (1) Correct or eliminate

[[Page 133]]

any information that is found to be incomplete, inaccurate, not relevant 
to a statutory purpose of the Postal Service, or not timely and notify 
the requester when this action is complete, or
    (2) Not later than thirty (30) working days after receipt of a 
request to amend, notify the reqester of a determination not to amend 
and of the requester's right to appeal, or to submit, in lieu of an 
appeal, a statement of reasonable length setting forth a position 
regarding the disputed information to be attached to the contested 
personal record.
    (d) Availability of Assistance in Exercising Rights. The Freedom of 
Information/Privacy Acts Officer is available to provide an individual 
with assistance in exercising rights pursuant to this part.

[40 FR 45723, Oct. 2, 1975, as amended at 45 FR 44272, July 1, 1980; 51 
FR 26386, July 23, 1986; 60 FR 57345, Nov. 15, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 266.7   Appeal procedure.

    (a) Appeal Procedure. (1) If a request to inspect, copy, or amend a 
record is denied, in whole or in part, or if no determination is made 
within the period prescribed by this part, the requester shall appeal to 
the General Counsel, U.S. Postal Service, Washington, DC 20260-1100.
    (2) The requester should submit his appeal in writing within thirty 
(30) days of the date of denial, or within ninety (90) days of such 
request if the appeal is from a failure of the custodian to make a 
determination. The letter of appeal should include, as applicable:
    (i) Reasonable identification of the record access to which or the 
amendment of which was requested.
    (ii) A statement of the Postal Service action or failure to act and 
of the relief sought.
    (iii) A copy of the request, of the notification of denial and of 
any other related correspondence.
    (3) Any record found on appeal to be incomplete, inaccurate, not 
relevant, or not timely, shall within thirty (30) working days of the 
date of such findings be appropriately amended.
    (4) The decision of the General Counsel, constitutes the final 
decision of the Postal Service on the right of the requester to inspect, 
copy, change, or update a record. The decision on the appeal shall be in 
writing and in the event of a denial shall set forth the reasons for 
such denial and state the individual's right to obtain judicial review 
in a district court. An indexed file of decisions on appeals shall be 
maintained by the Records Office.
    (b) Submission of Statement of Disagreement. If the final decision 
concerning a request for the amendment of a record does not satisfy the 
requester, any statement of reasonable length provided by that 
individual setting forth a position regarding the disputed information 
will be accepted and attached to the relevant personal record.

[40 FR 45723, Oct. 2, 1975, as amended at 41 FR 24709, June 18, 1976; 45 
FR 44273, July 1, 1980; 51 FR 26386, July 23, 1986; 60 FR 57345, Nov. 
15, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 266.8  Schedule of fees.

    (a) Policy. The purpose of this section is to establish fair and 
equitable fees to permit duplication of records for subject individuals 
(or authorized representatives) while recovering the full allowable 
direct costs incurred by the Postal Service.
    (b) Duplication. (1) For duplicating any paper or micrographic 
record or publication or computer report, the fee is $.15 per page, 
except that the first 100 pages furnished in response to a particular 
request shall be furnished without charge. See paragraph (d) of this 
section for fee limitations.
    (2) The Postal Service may at its discretion make coin-operated copy 
machines available at any location. In that event, requesters will be 
given the opportunity to make copies at their own expense.
    (3) The Postal Service normally will not furnish more than one copy 
of any record. If duplicate copies are furnished at the request of the 
requester, the per page fee is charged for each copy of each duplicate 
page without regard to whether the requester is eligible for free copies 
pursuant to Sec. 266.8(b)(1).
    (c) Aggregating requests. When the custodian reasonably believes 
that a requester is attempting to break a request for similar types of 
records down

[[Page 134]]

into a series of requests in order to evade the assessment of fees, the 
custodian may aggregate the requests and charge accordingly.
    (d) Limitations. No fee will be charged an individual for the 
process of retrieving, reviewing, or amending a record pertaining to 
that individual.
    (e) The Postal Service may, at its discretion, require reimbursement 
of its costs as a condition of participation in a computer matching 
program or activity with another agency. The agency to be charged is 
notified in writing of the approximate costs before they are incurred. 
Costs are calculated in accordance with the schedule of fees at 
Sec. 265.9.

[52 FR 38230, Oct. 15, 1987, as amended at 59 FR 37161, July 21, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 266.9  Exemptions.

    (a) Subsections 552a(j) and (k) of title 5, U.S.C., empower the 
Postmaster General to exempt systems of records meeting certain criteria 
from various other subsections of section 552a. With respect to systems 
of records so exempted, nothing in this part shall require compliance 
with provisions hereof implementing any subsections of section 552a from 
which those systems have been exempted.
    (b) At paragraph (b)(1) of this section is a summary of the Act's 
provisions for which exemption is claimed pursuant to, and to the extent 
permitted by, subsections 552a(j) and (k) of title 5, U.S.C., for some 
systems of records. Paragraphs (b)(2) through (6) of this section 
identify the exempted systems of records, the exemptions applied to 
each, and the reasons for the exemptions:
    (1) Explanation of the Act's provisions for which an exemption is 
claimed in the systems discussed below. (i) Subsection (c)(3) requires 
an agency to make available to the individual named in the records an 
accounting of each disclosure of records.
    (ii) Subsection (c)(4) requires an agency to inform any person or 
other agency to which a record has been disclosed of any correction or 
notation of dispute the agency has made to the record in accordance with 
subsection (d) of the Act.
    (iii) Subsection (d)(1)-(4) requires an agency to permit an 
individual to gain access to records about the individual, to request 
amendment of such records, to request a review of an agency decision not 
to amend such records, and to provide a statement of disagreement about 
a disputed record to be filed and disclosed with the disputed record.
    (iv) Subsection (e)(1) requires an agency to maintain in its records 
only such information about an individual that is relevant and necessary 
to accomplish a purpose required by statute or executive order of the 
President.
    (v) Subsection (e)(2) requires an agency to collect information to 
the greatest extent practicable directly from the subject individual 
when the information may result in adverse determinations about an 
individual's rights, benefits, and privileges under federal programs.
    (vi) Subsection (e)(3) requires an agency to inform each person whom 
it asks to supply information of the authority under which the 
information is sought, the purposes for which the information will be 
used, the routine uses that may be made of the information, whether 
disclosure is mandatory or voluntary, and the effects of not providing 
the information.
    (vii) Subsection (e)(4) (G) and (H) requires an agency to publish a 
Federal Register notice of its procedures whereby an individual can be 
notified upon request whether the system of records contains information 
about the individual, how to gain access to any record about the 
individual contained in the system, and how to contest its content.
    (viii) Subsection (e)(5) requires an agency to maintain its records 
with such accuracy, relevance, timeliness, and completeness as is 
reasonably necessary to ensure fairness to the individual in making any 
determination about the individual.
    (ix) Subsection (e)(8) requires an agency to make reasonable efforts 
to serve notice on an individual when any record on such individual is 
made available to any person under compulsory legal process when such 
process becomes a matter of public record.

[[Page 135]]

    (x) Subsection (f) requires an agency to establish procedures 
whereby an individual can be notified upon request if any system of 
records named by the individual contains a record pertaining to the 
individual, obtain access to the record, and request amendment.
    (xi) Subsection (g) provides for civil remedies if an agency fails 
to comply with the access and amendment provisions of subsections (d)(1) 
and (d)(3), and with other provisions of the Act, or any rule 
promulgated thereunder, in such a way as to have an adverse effect on an 
individual.
    (xii) Subsection (m) requires an agency to cause the requirements of 
the Act to be applied to a contractor operating a system of records to 
accomplish an agency function.
    (2) Inspection Requirements--Investigative File System, USPS 
080.010; Inspection Requirements--Mail Cover Program, USPS 080.020. 
These systems of records are exempt from 5 U.S.C. 552a (c) (3) and (4), 
(d)(1)-(4), (e)(1)-(3), (e)(4) (G) and (H), (e) (5) and (8), (f), (g), 
and (m). The reasons for exemption follow:
    (i) Disclosure to the record subject pursuant to subsections (c)(3), 
(c)(4), or (d)(1)-(4) could (A) Alert subjects that they are targets of 
an investigation or mail cover; (B) alert subjects of the nature and 
scope of the investigation, and of evidence obtained; (C) enable the 
subject of an investigation to avoid detection or apprehension; (D) 
subject confidential sources, witnesses, and law enforcement personnel 
to harassment or intimidation if their identities were released to the 
target of an investigation; (E) constitute unwarranted invasions of the 
personal privacy of third parties who are involved in a certain 
investigation; (F) intimidate potential witnesses and cause them to be 
reluctant to offer information; (G) lead to the improper influencing of 
witnesses, the destruction or alteration of evidence yet to be 
discovered, the fabrication of testimony, or the compromising of 
classified material; and (H) seriously impede or compromise law 
enforcement, mail cover, or background investigations that might involve 
law enforcement aspects as a result of the above.
    (ii) Application of subsections (e)(1) and (e)(5) is impractical 
because the relevance, necessity, or correctness of specific information 
might be established only after considerable analysis and as the 
investigation progresses. As to relevance (subsection (e)(1)), effective 
law enforcement requires the keeping of information not relevant to a 
specific Postal Service investigation. Such information may be kept to 
provide leads for appropriate law enforcement and to establish patterns 
of activity that might relate to the jurisdiction of the Postal 
Inspection Service and/or other agencies. As to accuracy (subsection 
(e)(5)), the correctness of records sometimes can be established only in 
a court of law.
    (iii) Application of subsections (e)(2) and (e)(3) would require 
collection of information directly from the subject of a potential or 
ongoing investigation. The subject would be put on alert that he or she 
is a target of an investigation or mail cover, enabling avoidance of 
detection or apprehension, thereby seriously compromising law 
enforcement, mail cover, or background investigations involving law 
enforcement aspects. Moreover, in certain circumstances the subject of 
an investigation is not required to provide information to 
investigators, and information must be collected from other sources.
    (iv) The requirements of subsections (e)(4)(G) and (H), and (f) do 
not apply because this system is exempt from the individual access and 
amendment provisions of subsection (d). Nevertheless, the Postal Service 
has published notice of its notification, access, and contest procedures 
because access is appropriate in some cases.
    (v) Application of subsection (e)(8) could prematurely reveal an 
ongoing criminal investigation to the subject of the investigation.
    (vi) The provisions of subsection (g) do not apply because exemption 
from the provisions of subsection (d) renders the provisions on suits to 
enforce subsection (d) inapplicable.
    (vii) If one of these systems of records is operated in whole or in 
part by a contractor, the exemptions claimed herein shall remain 
applicable to it (subsection (m)).

[[Page 136]]

    (3) Personnel Records--Preemployment Investigation Records, USPS 
120.110; Personnel Records--Postmaster Selection Program Records, USPS 
120.130. These systems of records are exempt from 5 U.S.C. 552a(d)(1)-
(4) and (e)(1) to the extent that information in the system is subject 
to exemption under 5 U.S.C. 552a(k)(5) as relating to the identity of a 
source who furnished information to the government in confidence as a 
part of an investigation conducted solely for the purpose of determining 
suitability, eligibility, or qualifications of an individual for 
employment. The reasons for exemption follow:
    (i) During its investigation and evaluation of an applicant for a 
position, the Postal Service contacts individuals who, without an 
assurance of anonymity, would refuse to provide information concerning 
the subject of the investigation. If a record subject were given access 
pursuant to subsection (d)(1)-(4), the promised confidentiality would be 
breached and the confidential source would be identified. The result 
would be restriction of the free flow of information vital to a 
determination of an individual's qualifications and suitability for 
appointment to or continued occupancy of his position.
    (ii) In collecting information for investigative and evaluative 
purposes, it is impossible to determine in advance what information 
might be of assistance in determining the qualifications and suitability 
of an individual for appointment. Information that seems irrelevant, 
when linked with other information, can sometimes provide a composite 
picture of an individual that assists in determining whether that 
individual should be appointed to or retained in a position. For this 
reason, exemption from subsection (e)(1) is claimed.
    (4) Personnel Records--Personnel Research and Test Validation 
Records, USPS 120.120; Personnel Records--Career Development and 
Training Records, USPS 120.152. These systems of records are exempt from 
5 U.S.C. 552a(d)(1)-(4), (e)(4)(G) and (H), and (f) to the extent that 
information in the system is subject to exemption pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 
552a(k)(6) as relating to the compromise of the objectivity or fairness 
of the testing or examination process. The reasons for exemption follow:
    (i) These systems contain questions and answers to standard testing 
materials, the disclosure of which would compromise the fairness of the 
future use of these materials. It is not feasible to develop entirely 
new examinations after each administration as would be necessary if 
questions or answers were available for inspection and copying. 
Consequently, exemption from subsection (d) is claimed.
    (ii) The requirements of subsections (e)(4)(G) and (H), and (f) do 
not apply to these systems for which exemption from subsection (d) of 
the Act has been claimed. Nevertheless, the Postal Service has published 
notice of its notification, access, and contest procedures because 
access to system records that do not compromise the objectivity or 
fairness of the testing examination process is appropriate in some 
cases.
    (5) Personnel Records--Recruiting, Examining, and Appointment 
Records, USPS 120.151. This system is exempt from 5 U.S.C. 552a(d)(1)-
(4), (e)(1), (e)(4)(G) and (H), and (f) to the extent that information 
in the system is subject to exemption pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 552a(k)(5) as 
relating to the identity of a source who has furnished information to 
the government in confidence as part of an investigation conducted 
solely for the purpose of determining suitability, eligibility, or 
qualifications of an individual for employment; and to exemption 
pursuant to subsection 5 U.S.C. 552a(k)(6) as relating to the compromise 
of the objectivity or fairness of the testing or examination process. 
The reasons for exemption follow:
    (i) To the extent that information in this system is subject to 
exemption pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 552a(k)(5), application of the provisions 
at subsection (d)(1)-(4) would reveal to the applicant whose suitability 
is being investigated the identity of individuals who supplied 
information under a promise of anonymity. As a result, the Postal 
Service's promise of confidentiality would be breached, its ability to 
obtain information in the future would be diminished, and the 
information source could be subjected to harassment by

[[Page 137]]

the applicant. To the extent that information in this system is subject 
to exemption pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 552a(k)(6), the requirements of the 
exemption at subsection (d)(1)-(4) and the reasons for exempting 
information relating to the compromise of the objectivity or fairness of 
the testing or examination process are the same as those given in 
paragraph (b)(5)(i) of this section.
    (ii) The reasons for exempting this system of records from 
subsection (e)(1) are the same as those given in paragraph (b)(4)(ii) of 
this section.
    (iii) The requirements of subsections (e) (4) (G) and (H), and (f) 
do not apply to this system for which exemption from subsection (d) of 
the Act has been claimed. Nevertheless, the Postal Service has published 
notice of its notification, access, and contest procedures because 
access to system records that do not compromise the objectivity or 
fairness of the testing or examination process or reveal the identity of 
a confidential is appropriate in some cases.
    (6) Equal Employment Opportunity--EEO Discrimination Complaint 
Investigations, USPS 030.010. This system is exempt from 5 U.S.C. 
552a(d) (1)-(4), (e) (4) (G) and (H), and (f) to the extent that 
information in the system is subject to exemption pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 
552a(k)(2) as material compiled for law enforcement purposes and 
subsection (k)(5) as relating to the identity of a source who has 
furnished information to the government in confidence as a part of an 
investigation conducted solely for the purpose of determining 
suitability, eligibility, or qualifications of an individual for 
employment. The reasons for exemption follow.
    (i) To the extent that information in this system is subject to 
exemption pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 552a(k)(2), application of the 
requirements of the exemption at subsection (d)(1)-(4) would cause 
disruption of enforcement of the laws relating to equal employment 
opportunity (EEO). To the extent that information in this system is 
subject to exemption pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 552a(k)(5), application of the 
provisions at subsection (d)(1)-(4) would reveal to the EEO complainant 
the identity of individuals who supplied information under a promise of 
anonymity. It is essential to the integrity of the EEO complaint system 
that information collected in the investigative process not be 
prematurely disclosed and that witnesses be free from restraint, 
interference, coercion, or reprisal.
    (ii) The requirements of subsections (e) (4) (G) and (H), and (f) do 
not apply to this system for which exemption from subsection (d) of the 
Act has been claimed. Nevertheless, the Postal Service has published 
notice of its notification, access, and contest procedures because 
access to system records that do not compromise the investigative 
process or reveal the identity of confidential sources is appropriate in 
some cases.

[59 FR 35625, July 13, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 266.10  Computer matching.

    (a) General. Any agency or Postal Service component that wishes to 
use records from a Postal Service automated system of records in a 
computerized comparison with other postal or non-postal records must 
submit its proposal to the USPS Freedom of Information/Privacy Acts 
Officer. Computer matching programs as defined in paragraph (c) of 
Sec. 262.5 must be conducted in accordance with the Privacy Act, 
implementing guidance issued by the Office of Management and Budget and 
these regulations. Records may not be exchanged for a matching program 
until all procedural requirements of the Act and these regulations have 
been met. Other matching activities must be conducted in accordance with 
the Privacy Act and with the approval of the Freedom of Information/
Privacy Acts Officer. See paragraph (b)(6) of Sec. 266.4.
    (b) Procedure for submission of matching proposals. A proposal must 
include information required for the matching agreement discussed in 
paragraph (d)(1) of this section. The Inspection Service must submit its 
proposals for matching programs and other matching activities to the 
USPS Freedom of Information/Privacy Acts Officer through: Independent 
Counsel, Inspection Service, U.S. Postal Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza SW, 
Rm 3417, Washington, DC 20260-2181. All other matching proposals, 
whether from postal organizations or other government agencies, must be

[[Page 138]]

mailed directly to: Freedom of Information/Privacy Acts Officer, U.S. 
Postal Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza SW., Washington, DC 20260-5243.
    (c) Lead time. Proposals must be submitted to the USPS Freedom of 
Information/Privacy Acts Officer at least 3 months in advance of the 
anticipated starting date to allow time to meet Privacy Act publication 
and review requirements.
    (d) Matching agreements. The participants in a computer matching 
program must enter into a written agreement specifying the terms under 
which the matching program is to be conducted. The Freedom of 
Information/Privacy Acts Officer may require similar written agreements 
for other matching activities.
    (1) Content. Agreements must specify:
    (i) The purpose and legal authority for conducting the matching 
program;
    (ii) The justification for the program and the anticipated results, 
including, when appropriate, a specific estimate of any savings in terms 
of expected costs and benefits, in sufficient detail for the Data 
Integrity Board to make an informed decision;
    (iii) A description of the records that are to be matched, including 
the data elements to be used, the number of records, and the approximate 
dates of the matching program;
    (iv) Procedures for providing notice to individuals who supply 
information that the information may be subject to verification through 
computer matching programs;
    (v) Procedures for verifying information produced in a matching 
program and for providing individuals an opportunity to contest the 
findings in accordance with the requirement that an agency may not take 
adverse action against an individual as a result of information produced 
by a matching program until the agency has independently verified the 
information and provided the individual with due process;
    (vi) Procedures for ensuring the administrative, technical, and 
physical security of the records matched; for the retention and timely 
destruction of records created by the matching program; and for the use 
and return or destruction of records used in the program;
    (vii) Prohibitions concerning duplication and redisclosure of 
records exchanged, except where required by law or essential to the 
conduct of the matching program;
    (viii) Assessments of the accuracy of the records to be used in the 
matching program; and
    (ix) A statement that the Comptroller General may have access to all 
records of the participant agencies in order to monitor compliance with 
the agreement.
    (2) Approval. Before the Postal Service may participate in a 
computer matching program or other computer matching activity that 
involves both USPS and non-USPS records, the Data Integrity Board must 
have evaluated the proposed match and approved the terms of the matching 
agreement. To be effective, the matching agreement must receive approval 
by each member of the Board. Votes are collected by the USPS Freedom of 
Information/Privacy Acts Officer. Agreements are signed on behalf of the 
Board by the Chairman. If a matching agreement is disapproved by the 
Board, any party may appeal the disapproval in writing to the Director, 
Office of Management and Budget, Washington, DC 20503-0001, within 30 
days following the Board's written disapproval.
    (3) Effective dates. No matching agreement is effective until 40 
days after the date on which a copy is sent to Congress. The agreement 
remains in effect only as long as necessary to accomplish the specific 
matching purpose, but no longer than 18 months, at which time the 
agreement expires unless extended. The Data Integrity Board may extend 
an agreement for one additional year, without further review, if within 
3 months prior to expiration of the 18-month period it finds that the 
matching program is to be conducted without change, and each party to 
the agreement certifies that the program has been conducted in 
compliance with the matching agreement. Renewal of a continuing matching 
program that has run for the full 30-month period requires a new 
agreement that has received Data Integrity Board approval.

[59 FR 37161, July 21, 1994, as amended at 60 FR 57345, Nov. 15, 1995]

[[Page 139]]


<R03>
PART 267--PROTECTION OF INFORMATION--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
267.1  Purpose and scope.
267.2  Policy.
267.3  Responsibility.
267.4  Information security standards.
267.5  National Security Information.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401; Pub. L. 93-579, 88 Stat. 1896.


<R05>
Sec. 267.1   Purpose and scope.

    This part addresses the protection of information and records in the 
custody of the Postal Service throughout all phases of information flow 
and within all organization components, and includes micromated, manual 
and data processing information.

[40 FR 45726, Oct. 2, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 267.2  Policy.

    Consistent with the responsibility of the Postal Service to make its 
official records available to the public to the maximum extent required 
by the public interest, and to ensure the security, confidentiality, and 
integrity of official records containing sensitive or national security 
information, it is the policy of the Postal Service to maintain 
definitive and uniform information security safeguards. These safeguards 
will have as their purpose: (a) Ensuring the effective operation of the 
Postal Service through appropriate controls over critical information, 
and (b) Protecting personal privacy, the public interest, and the 
national security by limiting unauthorized access to both restricted and 
national security information.

[44 FR 51224, Aug. 31, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 267.3   Responsibility.

    (a) Chief Postal Inspector and Freedom of Information/Privacy Acts 
Officer. The Chief Postal Inspector and the Freedom of Information/
Privacy Acts Officer will ensure within their respective areas of 
jurisdiction:
    (1) Postal Service-wide compliance with this policy and related 
standards and procedures; and
    (2) Implementation of remedial action when violations or attempted 
violations of these standards and procedures occur.
    (b) Custodians. All custodians are responsible for insuring that 
information security standards and procedures are followed and that all 
relevant employees participate in the information security awareness 
programs.

[40 FR 45726, Oct. 2, 1975, as amended at 60 FR 57345, Nov. 15, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 267.4   Information security standards.

    (a) The Postal Service will operate under a uniform set of 
information security standards which address the following functional 
aspects of information flow and management:
    (1) Information system development,
    (2) Information collection,
    (3) Information handling and processing,
    (4) Information dissemination and disclosure,
    (5) Information storage and destruction,
    (b) Supplementing this list are information security standards 
pertaining to the following administrative areas:
    (1) Personnel selection and training,
    (2) Physical environment protection,
    (3) Contingency planning,
    (4) Information processing or storage system procurement,
    (5) Contractual relationships.

[40 FR 45726, Oct. 2, 1975; 40 FR 48512, Oct. 16, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 267.5  National Security Information.

    (a) Purpose and scope. The purpose of this section is to provide 
regulations implementing Executive Order 12356 National Security 
Information (hereinafter referred to as the Executive Order) which deals 
with the protection, handling and classification of national security 
information.
    (b) Definitions. (1) In this section, National Security Information 
means information on the national defense and foreign relations of the 
United States that has been determined under the Executive Order or 
prior Orders to require protection against unauthorized disclosure and 
has been so designated.
    (2) Derivative Classification means the carrying forward of a 
classification from one document to a newly created

[[Page 140]]

document that contains national security information which is in 
substance the same as information that is currently classified.
    (3) In the Custody of the Postal Service means any national security 
information transmitted to and held by the U.S. Postal Service for the 
information and use of postal officials. (This does not include any 
national security information in the U.S. Mails.)
    (c) Responsibility and authority. (1) The Manager, Payroll 
Accounting and Records, serves as the USPS National Security Information 
Oversight Officer. This officer shall:
    (i) Conduct an active oversight program to ensure that the 
appropriate provisions of these regulations are complied with;
    (ii) Chair a committee composed of the Manager, Payroll Accounting 
and Records; the Chief Postal Inspector (USPS Security Officer); the 
General Counsel; the Executive Assistant to the Postmaster General; and 
the Director, Operating Policies Office; or their designees, with 
authority to act on all suggestions and complaints concerning compliance 
by the Postal Service with the regulations in this part;
    (iii) Ensure that appropriate and prompt corrective action is taken 
whenever a postal employee knowingly, willfully and without 
authorization:
    (A) Discloses national security information properly classified 
under the Executive order, or prior orders,
    (B) Compromises properly classified information through negligence, 
or
    (C) Violates any provisions of these regulations or procedures;
    (vi) Establish, staff, and direct activities for controlling 
documents containing national security information at USPS Headquarters 
and to provide functional direction to the field.
    (v) In conjunction with the USPS Security Officer, prepare and issue 
instructions for the control, protection, and derivative classification 
of national security information in the custody of, and use by, the 
Postal Service. These instructions shall include requirements that:
    (A) A demonstrable need for access to national security information 
is established before requesting the initiation of administrative 
clearance procedures;
    (B) Ensure that the number of people granted access to national 
security information is reduced to and maintained at the minimum number 
consistent with operational requirements and needs;
    (vi) Establish, staff and direct activities for controlling 
documents containing national security information at USPS Headquarters 
and provide functional direction to each Regional Records Control 
Officer;
    (vii) As part of the overall program implementation, develop a 
training program to familiarize appropriate postal employees of the 
requirements for control, protection and classification; and
    (viii) Report to the USPS Security Officer any incidents of possible 
loss or compromise of national security information.
    (2) The USPS Security Officer (the Chief Postal Inspector) shall:
    (i) Provide technical guidance to the Manager, Payroll Accounting 
and Records in implementing the national security information program;
    (ii) Conduct investigations into reported program violations or loss 
or possible compromise of national security information and report any 
actual loss or compromise to the originating agency;
    (iii) Periodically conduct an audit of the USPS national security 
information program;
    (iv) Process requests for sensitive clearances; conduct the 
appropriate investigations and grant or deny a sensitive clearance to 
postal employees having an official ``need to know'' national security 
information; and
    (v) Report to the Attorney General any evidence of possible 
violations of federal criminal law by a USPS employee and of possible 
violations by any other person of those federal criminal laws.
    (3) All postal employees who have access to national security 
information shall:
    (i) Sign a nondisclosure agreement;
    (ii) Be familiar with and follow all Program regulations and 
instructions;

[[Page 141]]

    (iii) Actively protect and be accountable for all national security 
information entrusted to their care;
    (iv) Disclose national security information only to another 
individual who is authorized access;
    (v) Immediately report to the Manager, Payroll Accounting and 
Records and the USPS Security Officer any suspected or actual loss or 
compromise of national security information; and
    (vi) Be subject to administrative sanctions should requirements (ii) 
through (v) not be followed.
    (d) Derivative classification. When applying derivative 
classifications to documents created by the Postal Service, the Postal 
Service shall:
    (1) Respect original classification decisions;
    (2) Verify the information's current level of classification so far 
as practicable before applying the markings; and
    (3) Carry forward to any newly created documents the assigned dates 
or events for declassification or review and any additional authorized 
markings in accordance with section 2 of the Executive order.
    (e) General provisions--(1) Dissemination. National security 
information received by the U.S. Postal Service shall not be further 
disseminated to any other agency without the consent of the originating 
agency.
    (2) Disposal. Classified documents no longer needed by the Postal 
Service shall be either properly destroyed or returned to the 
originating agency.
    (3) Freedom of Information Act or mandatory review requests.
    (i) Requests for classified documents made under the Freedom of 
Information Act (FOIA) and mandatory review requests (requests under 
Section 3-501 of the Executive Order for the declassification and 
release of information), including requests by the news media, should be 
submitted to: Manager, Payroll Accounting and Records, U.S. Postal 
Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza SW., Washington, DC 20260-5243.
    (ii) In response to an FOIA request or a mandatory review request, 
the Postal Service shall not refuse to confirm the existence or non-
existence of a document, unless the fact of its existence or non-
existence would itself be classifiable.
    (iii) The Postal Service shall forward all FOIA and mandatory review 
requests for national security information in its custody (including 
that within records derivatively classified by the USPS) to the 
originating agency for review unless the agency objects on the grounds 
that its association with the information requires protection. The 
requester shall be notified that:
    (A) The request was referred; and
    (B) The originating agency will provide a direct response.
    (4) Research requests. Requests from historical researchers for 
access to national security information shall be referred to the 
originating agency.

(39 U.S.C. 401 (2), (10), 404(a)(7))

[44 FR 51224, Aug. 31, 1979, as amended at 45 FR 30069, May 7, 1980; 49 
FR 22476, May 30, 1984; 60 FR 57345, 57346, Nov. 15, 1995]


<R03>
PART 268--PRIVACY OF INFORMATION--EMPLOYEE RULES OF CONDUCT--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
268.1  General principles.
268.2  Consequences of non-compliance.
    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401; 5 U.S.C. 552a.


<R05>
Sec. 268.1   General principles.

    In order to conduct its business, the Postal Service has the need to 
collect various types of personally identifiable information about its 
customers, employees and other individuals. Information of this nature 
has been entrusted to the Postal Service, and employees handling it have 
a legal and ethical obligation to hold it in confidence and to actively 
protect it from uses other than those compatible with the purpose for 
which the information was collected. This obligation is legally imposed 
by the Privacy Act of 1974, which places specific requirements upon all 
Federal agencies, including the Postal Service, and their employees. In 
implementation of these requirements, the following rules of conduct 
apply:
    (a) Except as specifically authorized in Sec. 266.4(b)(2) of this 
chapter, no employee shall disclose, directly or indirectly, the 
contents of any record about another individual to any person

[[Page 142]]

or organization. Managers are to provide guidance in this regard to all 
employees who must handle such information.
    (b) No employee will maintain a secret system of records about 
individuals. All records systems containing personally identifiable 
information about individuals must be reported to the Freedom of 
Information/Privacy Acts Officer.
    (c) All employees shall adhere strictly to the procedures 
established by the U.S. Postal Service to ensure the confidentiality and 
integrity of information about individuals that is collected, maintained 
and used for official Postal Service business. Employees shall be held 
responsible for any violation of these procedures.

[45 FR 44273, July 1, 1980, as amended at 60 FR 57346, Nov. 15, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 268.2   Consequences of non-compliance.

    (a) The Privacy Act authorizes any individual, whether or not an 
employee, to bring a civil action in U.S. District Court to obtain 
judicial review of the failure of the Postal Service to comply with the 
requirements of the Act or its implementing regulations. In certain 
instances of willful or intentional non-compliance, the plaintiff may 
recover damages from the Postal Service in the minimum amount of $1,000 
together with costs of the action and attorney fees.
    (b) The Act provides criminal sanctions for individuals, including 
employees, who violate certain of its provisions.
    (1) Any officer or employee who, by virtue of his employment or 
position, has possession of, or access to, official records which 
contain individually identifiable information and who, knowing that 
disclosure of the specific material is prohibited by Postal Service 
regulations, willfully discloses the material to a person or agency not 
entitled to receive it, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not 
more than $5,000.
    (2) Any officer or employee who willfully maintains a system of 
records without meeting the notice requirements set forth in Postal 
Service regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more 
than $5,000.
    (3) Any person who knowingly and willfully requests or obtains any 
record concerning another individual from the Postal Service under false 
pretense shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than 
$5,000.
    (c) In addition to the criminal sanctions, any employee violating 
any provisions of these rules of conduct is subject to disciplinary 
action which may result in dismissal from the Postal Service.

[40 FR 45726, Oct. 2, 1975]


<R03>
PART 273--ADMINISTRATION OF PROGRAM FRAUD CIVIL REMEDIES ACT--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
273.1  Purpose.
273.2  Definitions.
273.3  Liability for false claims and statements.
273.4  Non-exclusivity of penalty authority.
273.5  Investigations of alleged violations.
273.6  Evaluation by reviewing official.
273.7  Concurrence of Attorney General.
273.8  Issuance of complaint.
273.9  Collection of civil penalties or assessments.
273.10  Reports.

    Authority: 31 U.S.C. Chapter 38; 39 U.S.C. 401.

    Source: 52 FR 12901, Apr. 20, 1987.


<R05>
Sec. 273.1  Purpose.

    This part establishes procedures for imposing civil penalties and 
assessments under the Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act of 1986 (codified 
at 31 U.S.C. 3801-3812) against any person who makes, submits, or 
presents, or causes to be made, submitted, or presented, a false 
fictitious, or fraudulent claim or written statement to the Postal 
Service. Procedures governing the hearing and appeal rights of any 
person alleged to be liable for such penalties and assessments are set 
forth in part 962 of this title.


<R05>
Sec. 273.2  Definitions.

    (a) Claim means any request, demand, or submission:
    (1) Made to the Postal Service for property, services, or money 
(including

[[Page 143]]

money representing grants, loans, insurance, or benefits); or
    (2) Made to a recipient of property, services, or money from the 
Postal Service or to a party to a contract with the Postal Service:
    (i) For property or services if the United States:
    (A) Provided such property or services;
    (B) Provided any portion of the funds for the purchase of such 
property or services; or
    (C) will reimburse such recipient or party for the purchase of such 
property or services; or
    (ii) For the payment of money (including money representing grants, 
loans, insurance or benefits) if the United States:
    (A) Provided any portion of the money requested or demanded; or
    (B) Will reimburse such recipient or party for any portion of the 
money paid on such request or demand; or
    (3) Made to the Postal Service which has the effect of decreasing an 
obligation to pay or account for property, services, or money.
    (b) Complaint refers to the administrative Complaint served by the 
Reviewing Official on a Respondent pursuant to Sec. 273.8.
    (c) Investigating Official refers to the Chief Postal Inspector of 
the Postal Service or any designee within the United States Postal 
Inspection Service who serves in a position for which the rate of basic 
pay is not less than the minimum rate of basic pay for grade GS-16 under 
the General Schedule.
    (d) Judicial Officer refers to the Judicial Officer or Acting 
Judicial Officer of the United States Postal Service or for purposes 
other than specified in Sec. 962.21 of this title any designee within 
the Judicial Officer Department.
    (e) Knows or has reason to know, for purposes of establishing 
liability under 31 U.S.C. 3802, means that, with respect to a claim or 
statement, although no proof of specific intent to defraud is required, 
a person:
    (1) Has actual knowledge that the claim or statement is false, 
fictitious, or fraudulent;
    (2) Acts in deliberate ignorance of the truth or falsity of the 
claim or statement; or
    (3) Acts in reckless disregard of the truth or falsity of the claim 
or statement.
    (f) Person refers to any individual, partnership, corporation, 
association, or private organization.
    (g) Postmaster General refers to the Postmaster General of the 
United States or his designee.
    (h) Presiding Officer refers to an Administrative Law Judge 
designated by the Judicial Officer to conduct a hearing authorized by 31 
U.S.C. 3803 in accordance with Part 962 of this title.
    (i) Respondent refers to any person alleged to be liable for civil 
penalty or assessment under 31 U.S.C. 3802.
    (j) Reviewing Official refers to the General Counsel of the Postal 
Service or any designee within the Law Department who serves in a 
position for which the rate of basic pay is not less than the minimum 
rate of basic pay for grade GS-16 under the General Schedule.
    (k) Statement means any representation, certification, affirmation, 
document, record, or accounting or bookkeeping entry made:
    (1) With respect to a claim or to obtain the approval or payment of 
a claim (including relating to eligibility to make a claim); or
    (2) With respect to (including relating to eligibility for)--
    (i) A contract with, or a bid or proposal for a contract with; or
    (ii) A grant, loan, or benefit from, the Postal Service, or any 
State, political subdivision of a State, or other party, if the United 
States Government provides any portion of the money or property under 
such contract or for such grant, loan, or benefit, or if the Government 
will reimburse such State, political subdivision, or party for any 
portion of the money or property under such contract or for such grant, 
loan or benefit.

[52 FR 12901, Apr. 20, 1987, as amended at 56 FR 55825, Oct. 30, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 273.3  Liability for false claims and statements.

    Section 3802 of title 31, United States Code, provides for liability 
as follows:

[[Page 144]]

    (a) Claims. (1) Any person who makes, presents, or submits, or 
causes to be made, presented, or submitted, a claim that the person 
knows or has reason to know--
    (i) Is false, fictitious, or fraudulent; or
    (ii) Includes or is supported by any written statement asserting a 
material fact which is false, fictitious, or fraudulent; or
    (iii) Includes or is supported by any written statement that--
    (A) Omits a material fact;
    (B) Is false, fictitious, or fraudulent as a result of such 
omission; and
    (C) Is a statement in which the person making, presenting, or 
submitting such statement has a duty to include such material fact; or
    (iv) Is for payment for the provision of property or services which 
the person has not provided as claimed

Shall be subject to, in addition to any other remedy that may be 
prescribed by law, a civil penalty of not more than $5,500 for each such 
claim.
    (2) Each voucher, invoice, claim form, or other individual request 
or demand for property, services, or money constitutes a separate claim.
    (3) A claim shall be considered made, presented, or submitted to the 
Postal Service, recipient, or party when such claim is actually made to 
an agent, fiscal intermediary, or other entity, including any State or 
political subdivision thereof, acting for or on behalf of the Postal 
Service, recipient, or party.
    (4) Each claim for property, services, or money is subject to the 
civil penalty referred to in paragraph (a)(1) of this section regardless 
of whether such property, service, or money is actually delivered or 
paid.
    (5) If the Government has made payment on a claim, a person subject 
to the civil penalty referred to in paragraph (a)(1) of this section 
shall also be subject to an assessment of not more than twice the amount 
of such claim or twice the amount of that portion thereof that is 
determined to be in violation of paragraph (a)(1) of this section. This 
assessment shall be in lieu of damages sustained by the United States 
because of such claim.
    (b) Statements. (1) Any person who makes, presents, or submits, or 
causes to be made, presented, or submitted, a written statement that--
    (i) The person knows or has reason to know--
    (A) Asserts a material fact which is false, fictitious, or 
fraudulent; or
    (B) Is false, fictitious, or fraudulent because it omits a material 
fact that the person making, presenting or submitting such statement had 
a duty to include in such statement; and
    (ii) Contains or is accompanied by an express certification or 
affirmation of the truthfulness and accuracy of the contents of the 
statement.

Shall be subject to, in addition to any other remedy that may be 
prescribed by law, a civil penalty of not more than $5,500 for each such 
statement.
    (2) Each written representation, certification, or affirmation 
constitutes a separate statement.
    (3) A statement shall be considered made, presented, or submitted to 
the Postal Service when such statement is actually made to an agent, 
fiscal intermediary, or other entity, including any State or political 
subdivision thereof, acting for or on behalf of the Postal Service.
    (c) In any case in which it is determined that more than one person 
is liable for making a claim or statement under this section, the civil 
penalty referred to in paragraph (a)(1) of this section may be imposed 
on each such person without regard to the amount of any penalties 
collected or demanded from others.
    (d) In any case in which it is determined that more than one person 
is liable for making a claim under this section on which the Government 
has made payment, an assessment may be imposed against any such person 
or jointly and severally against any combination of such persons. The 
aggregate amount of the assessments collected with respect to such claim 
shall not exceed twice the portion of such claim determined to be in 
violation of paragraph (a)(1) of this section.

[52 FR 12901, Apr. 20, 1987, as amended at 56 FR 55825, Oct. 30, 1991; 
61 FR 55750, Oct. 29, 1996]

[[Page 145]]


<R05>
Sec. 273.4  Non-exclusivity of penalty authority.

    (a) A determination by the Reviewing Official that there is adequate 
evidence to believe that a person is liable under 31 U.S.C 3802, or a 
final determination that a person is liable under such statute, may 
provide the Postal Service with grounds for commencing any 
administrative or contractual action against such person which is 
authorized by law and which is in addition to any action against such 
person under chapter 38 of title 31, United States Code.
    (b) In the case of an administrative or contractual action to 
suspend or debar any person from eligibility to enter into contracts 
with the Postal Service, a determination referred to in paragraph (a) of 
this section shall not be considered as a conclusive determination of 
such person's responsibility pursuant to Postal Service procurement 
regulations.


<R05>
Sec. 273.5  Investigations of alleged violations.

    (a) Investigations of allegations of liability under 31 U.S.C. 3802 
shall be conducted by the Investigating Official.
    (b)(1) For purposes of an investigation under this part, the 
Investigating Official may issue a subpoena requiring the production of 
all information, documents, reports, answers, records, accounts, papers, 
and data not otherwise reasonably available to the Postal Service. Any 
subpoena issued by the Investigating Official under this authority shall 
cite 31 U.S.C. 3804(a) as the authority under which it is issued, shall 
be signed by the Investigating Official, and shall command each person 
to whom it is directed to produce the specified documentary material at 
a prescribed time and place.
    (2) In the case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena issued 
pursuant to paragraph (b)(1) of this section, the district courts of the 
United States have jursidiction to issue an appropriate order for the 
enforcement of such subpoena. Any failure to obey such order of the 
court may be punishable as contempt. In any case in which the Postal 
Service seeks the enforcement of a subpoena under this section, the 
Postal Service shall request the Attorney General to petition the 
district court for the district in which the person receiving the 
subpoena resides or conducts business to issue such an order.
    (c) Upon completing an investigation under this part, the 
Investigating Official shall submit to the Reviewing Official a report 
containing the findings and conclusions of his investigation, including:
    (1) A description of the claims or statements for which liability 
under 31 U.S.C. 3802 is alleged;
    (2) A description of any evidence which supports allegations of 
liability under 31 U.S.C. 3802, or where applicable, a description of 
any evidence that tends to support a conclusion that such statute has 
not been violated;
    (3) An estimate of the amount of money or the value of property or 
services allegedly requested or demanded in violation of 31 U.S.C. 3802;
    (4) A statement of any exculpatory or mitigating circumstances which 
may relate to the claims or statements under investigation;
    (5) A statement of the amount of penalties and assessments that, 
considering the information described in paragraphs (c) (3) and (4) of 
this section, the Investigating Official recommends be demanded from the 
person alleged to be liable; and
    (6) An estimate of the prospects of collecting the amount specified 
in paragraph (c)(5) of this section, and any reasons supporting such 
estimate.
    (d) Nothing in these regulations modifies any responsibility of the 
Investigating Official to report violations of criminal law to the 
Attorney General

[52 FR 12901, Apr. 20, 1987, as amended at 56 FR 55825, Oct. 30, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 273.6  Evaluation by reviewing official.

    (a) Based upon the investigatory report prepared by the 
Investigating Offical, the Reviewing Official shall determine whether 
there is adequate evidence to believe that a person is liable under 31 
U.S.C. 3802, and , if so, whether prosecution would likely result in the 
imposition and collection of civil penalties and applicable assessments.

[[Page 146]]

    (b) If the Reviewing Offical determines that a case has merit and 
should be referred to the Judicial Officer for assignment to a Presiding 
Officer, he must first transmit to the Attorney General a written notice 
containing the following information:
    (1) A statement setting forth the Reviewing Official's reasons for 
proposing to refer the case to a Presiding Officer;
    (2) A description of the claims or statements for which liability 
under 31 U.S.C. 3802 is alleged;
    (3) A statement specifying the evidence that supports the 
allegations of liability;
    (4) An estimate of the amount of money or the value of property or 
services allegedly requested or demanded in violation of 31 U.S.C. 3802;
    (5) A statement of any exculpatory or mitigating circumstances which 
may relate to the claims or statements under investigation;
    (6) A statement of the amount of penalties and assessments that, 
considering the factors listed in paragraphs (b)(4) and (5) of this 
section, the Reviewing Official recommends be demanded from the person 
alleged to be liable; and
    (7) A statement that, in the opinion of the Reviewing Official, 
there is a reasonable prospect of collecting the amount specified in 
paragraph (b)(6) of this section and the reasons supporting such 
statement.
    (c) No allegations of liability under 31 U.S.C. 3802 with respect to 
any claim made, presented, or submitted by any person shall be referred 
to the Judicial Officer if the Reviewing Official determines that (1) an 
amount of money in excess of $150,000; or (2) property or service with a 
value in excess of $150,000 is requested or demanded in violation of 
section 3802 in such claim or in a group of related claims which are 
submitted at the time such claim is submitted.


<R05>
Sec. 273.7  Concurrence of Attorney General.

    (a) The Attorney General is required by 31 U.S.C. 3803(b) to respond 
to the Reviewing Official's written notice described in Sec. 273.6 
within 90 days. The Reviewing Official may refer allegations of 
liability to the Judicial Officer only if the Attorney General or his 
designee approves such action in a written statement which specifies:
    (1) That the Attorney General or his designee approves the referral 
to the Judicial Officer of the allegations of liability set forth in the 
notice described in Sec. 273.6; and
    (2) That the initiation of a proceeding under the Program Fraud 
Civil Remedies Act is appropriate.
    (b) If at any time after the Attorney General approves the referral 
of a case to the Judicial Officier, the Attorney General or his designee 
transmits to the Postmaster General a written finding that the 
continuation of any proceeding under the Program Fraud Civil Remedies 
Act with respect to a claim or statement may adversely affect any 
pending or potential criminal or civil action related to such claim or 
statement, such proceeding shall be immediately stayed and may be 
resumed only upon written authorization of the Attorney General.


<R05>
Sec. 273.8  Issuance of complaint.

    (a) If the Attorney General or his designee approves the referral of 
allegations of liability to the Judicial Officer, the Reviewing Official 
shall serve on the Respondent, pursuant to paragraph (b) of this 
section, a Complaint, which:
    (1) Specifies the allegations of liability against the Respondent, 
including the statutory basis for liability;
    (2) Identifies the claims or statements that are the basis for the 
alleged liability, and the reasons why liability allegedly arises from 
such claims or statements;
    (3) Specifies the amount of penalties or assessments the Postal 
Service seeks to impose;
    (4) Informs the Respondent of his right to request an oral hearing 
before, or a decision on the record by, a Presiding Officer concerning 
the allegations of liability and the amount of proposed penalties or 
assessments;
    (5) Informs the Respondent of how to request a hearing described in 
paragraph (a)(4) of this section;
    (6) Includes a copy of the procedures which govern hearings under 
the Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act, and

[[Page 147]]

which are set forth in part 962 of this title; and
    (7) Notifies the Respondent that his or her failure to request a 
hearing on the issues raised by the Complaint within 30 days of its 
receipt may result in the imposition of the proposed penalty and 
assessments pursuant to Secs. 962.4(a) and 962.15(d) of this title.
    (b) Service of a Complaint issued under paragraph (a) of this 
section must be effected by registered or certified mail, return-receipt 
requested, or by personal delivery. In the case of personal service, the 
person making service shall, if possible, secure from the person sought 
to be served, or his or her agent, a written acknowledgment of receipt, 
showing the date and time of such receipt. If the person upon whom 
service is made declines to acknowledge receipt, the person effecting 
service shall execute a statement, indicating the time, place and manner 
of service, which shall constitute evidence of service.

[52 FR 12901, Apr. 20, 1987, as amended at 56 FR 55825, Oct. 30, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 273.9  Collection of civil penalties or assessments.

    (a) Any penalty or assessment imposed under the Program Fraud Civil 
Remedies Act may be recovered in a civil action brought by the Attorney 
General. In any such action, no matter that was raised or that could 
have been raised in a hearing conducted under part 962 of this title or 
pursuant to judicial review under 31 U.S.C. 3805 may be raised as a 
defense and the determination of liability and the determination of 
amounts of penalties and assessments shall not be subject to review. A 
civil action to recover a penalty or assessment shall be commenced 
within three years after the date on which the determination of 
liability for such penalty or assessment becomes final.
    (b) The amount of any penalty or assessment which has become final 
may be collected by administrative offset in accordance with 31 U.S.C 
3716, 3807.
    (c) Any penalty or assessment imposed by the Postal Service under 
this part shall be deposited in the Postal Service Fund established by 
section 2003 of title 39.


<R05>
Sec. 273.10  Reports.

    (a) Not later than October 31 of each year, the Postmaster General 
shall prepare and transmit to the appropriate committees and 
subcommittees of the Congress an annual report summarizing actions taken 
under the Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act during the most recent 12-
month period ending the previous September 30.
    (b) The report referred to in paragraph (a) of this section shall 
include the following information for the period covered by the report:
    (1) A summary of matters referred by the Investigating Official to 
the Reviewing Official under this part;
    (2) A summary of matters transmitted to the Attorney General under 
this part;
    (3) A summary of all hearings conducted by a Presiding Officer under 
part 962 of this title, and the results of such hearings; and
    (4) A summary of the actions taken during the reporting period to 
collect any civil penalty or assessment imposed under the Program Fraud 
Civil Remedies Act.


<R03>
Damage to or Destruction of Firm Mailings--Table of Contents

<R05>



<R03>
PART 281--FIRM MAILINGS DAMAGED OR DESTROYED THROUGH TRANSPORTATION ACCIDENTS OR CATASTROPHES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
281.1  Notification of firm mailers.
281.2  Action required by processing postal officials.
281.3  Postal inspector responsibilities.
281.4  Disclaimer.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401, 403, and 404.


<R05>
Sec. 281.1   Notification of firm mailers.

    Whenever bulk firm mail shipments are involved in transportation 
accidents or catastrophes, such as train or highway accidents, fire, 
flood, etc., it will be the responsibility of the sectional center 
director of customer services at the office of mailing to give known 
mailers timely notification of

[[Page 148]]

the incident and its effect on their mail shipment(s).

[39 FR 20974, June 17, 1974, as amended at 40 FR 2179, Jan. 10, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 281.2   Action required by processing postal officials.

    Postal officials processing salvable mail recovered from the scene 
of an accident or catastrophe are responsible for giving timely 
notification of the incident to the sectional center director of 
customer services at the office of mailing. The notification should 
include, but not be limited to:
    (a) The determinable names of the major mailers involved;
    (b) The nature and extent of damage or destruction;
    (c) Anticipated delivery delay; and
    (d) If known, the shipment delivery destination(s).

[39 FR 20974, June 17, 1974, as amended at 40 FR 2179, Jan. 10, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 281.3   Postal inspector responsibilities.

    The postal inspector investigating the incident should assure that 
the processing postal officials are fulfilling their notification 
responsibilities on a timely basis. Should the situation arise where no 
postal officials are involved in processing affected mail, then the 
investigating postal inspector will take necessary action to insure that 
appropriate notification is made.

[39 FR 20974, June 17, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 281.4   Disclaimer.

    The Postal Service will not be liable in damages for any loss 
occasioned by any failure to notify firm mailers in accordance with this 
part of damage to or destruction of firm mailings.

[39 FR 20974, June 17, 1974]

[[Page 149]]


<R03>
        SUBCHAPTER E--RESTRICTIONS ON PRIVATE CARRIAGE OF LETTERS

<R05>


<R03>
PART 310--ENFORCEMENT OF THE PRIVATE EXPRESS STATUTES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
310.1  Definitions.
310.2  Unlawful carriage of letters.
310.3  Exceptions.
310.4  Responsibility of carriers.
310.5  Payment of postage on violation.
310.6  Advisory opinions.
310.7  Amendment of regulations.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401, 404, 601-606; 18 U.S.C. 1693-1699.

    Source: 39 FR 33211, Sept. 16, 1974, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 310.1   Definitions.

    (a) Letter is a message directed to a specific person or address and 
recorded in or on a tangible object, subject to the following:
    (1) Tangible objects used for letters include, but are not limited 
to, paper (including paper in sheet or card form), recording disks, and 
magnetic tapes. Tangible objects used for letters do not include (i) 
objects the material or shape and design of which make them valuable or 
useful for purposes other than as media for long-distance 
communications, unless they are actually used as media for personal and 
business correspondence, and (ii) outsized, rigid objects not capable of 
enclosure in envelopes, sacks, boxes or other containers commonly used 
to transmit letters or packets of letters.
    (2) Message means any information or intelligence that can be 
recorded as described in paragraph (a)(4) of this section.
    (3) A message is directed to a ``specific person or address'' when, 
for example, it, or the container in which it is carried, singly or with 
other messages, identical or different, is marked for delivery to a 
specific person or place, or is delivered to a specific person or place 
in accordance with a selective delivery plan. Selective delivery plans 
include delivery to particular persons or addresses by use of detached 
address labels or cards; address lists; memorized groups of addresses; 
or ``piggy-backed'' delivery with addressed articles of merchandise, 
publications, or other items. Selective delivery plans do not include 
distributions of materials without written addresses to passersby on a 
particular street corner, or to all residents or randomly selected 
residents of an area. A message bearing the name or address of a 
specific person or place is a letter even if it is intended by the 
sender to be read or otherwise used by some person or persons other than 
or in addition to the addressee.
    (4) Methods by which messages are recorded on tangible objects 
include, but are not limited to, the use of written or printed 
characters, drawing, holes, or orientations of magnetic particles in a 
manner having a predetermined significance.
    (5) Whether a tangible object bears a message is to be determined on 
an objective basis without regard to the intended or actual use made of 
the object sent.
    (6) Identical messages directed to more than one specific person or 
address or separately directed to the same person or address constitute 
separate letters.
    (7) The following are not letters within the meaning of these 
regulations:<SUP>1
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1</SUP>Several of the items enumerated in this paragraph (a)(7) do 
not self-evidently lie outside of the definition of ``letter''. To the 
extent, however, that there is any question whether these items may 
properly be excluded by definition, the Postal Service has determined by 
adoption of these regulations that the restrictions of the Private 
Express Statutes are suspended pursuant to 39 U.S.C. 601(b).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (i) Telegrams.
    (ii) Checks, drafts, promissory notes, bonds, other negotiable and 
nonnegotiable financial instruments, stock certificates, other 
securities, insurance policies, and title policies when shipped to, 
from, or between financial institutions.
    (A) As used above, checks and drafts include documents intrinsically 
related to and regularly accompanying the

[[Page 150]]

movement of checks or drafts within the banking system. ``Checks'' do 
not include materials accompanying the movement of checks to financial 
institutions from persons who are not financial institutions, or vice 
versa, except such materials as would qualify under Sec. 310.3(a) if 
``checks'' were treated as cargo. Specifically, for example, ``checks'' 
do not include bank statements sent to depositors showing deposits, 
debits, and account balances.
    (B) As used above, financial institutions means:
    (1) As to checks and drafts: banks, savings banks, savings and loan 
institutions, credit unions, and their offices, affiliates, and 
facilities.
    (2) As to other instruments: institutions performing functions 
involving the bulk generation, clearance, and transfer of such 
instruments.
    (iii) Abstracts of title, mortgages and other liens, deeds, leases, 
releases, articles of incorporation, papers filed in lawsuits or formal 
quasi-judicial proceedings, and orders of courts and of quasi-judicial 
bodies.
    (iv) Newspapers and periodicals.
    (v) Books and catalogs consisting of 24 or more bound pages with at 
least 22 printed, and telephone directories. Separate letters of less 
than 24 bound and 22 printed pages bound to other material do not 
qualify for this exclusion. In determining whether separate letters have 
been bound to other material, the following factors will be considered, 
along with any other relevant factors: Whether the parts are visually 
similar; whether the parts were printed and bound together at the same 
time and by the same process; whether the binding serves an important 
purpose and has been a longstanding practice; and whether the same 
individual reads all parts of the bound document. Ordinarily, books and 
catalogs deal with matters of interest to, and are intended for, a 
substantial number of recipients. In addition, books generally contain a 
substantial number of pages. Accordingly, this exclusion will not apply 
when the nature of the message conveyed, the limited numbers of 
published copies and of recipients, the limited number of pages, or 
other relevant factors suggest that it is not appropriate to treat the 
material as a book or catalog. An item distributed privately, or 
privately and by mail, to fewer than 25 separate persons or places will 
generally not be treated as a book or catalog falling within this 
exclusion.
    (vi) Matter sent from a printer, stationer, or similar source, to a 
person ordering such matter for use as his letters. This exclusion 
applies whether or not the printer, stationer, or similar source is 
owned by or affiliated with the person who orders such matter for use as 
his letters.
    (vii) Letters sent to a records storage center exclusively for 
storage, letters sent exclusively for destruction, letters retrieved 
from a records storage center, and letters sent as part of a household 
or business relocation.
    (viii) Tags, labels, stickers, signs or posters the type-size, 
layout or physical characteristics of which indicate they are primarily 
intended to be attached to other objects for reading.
    (ix) Photographic material being sent by a person to a processor and 
processed photographic material being returned from the processor to the 
person sending the material for processing.
    (x) Copy sent from a person to an independent or company-owned 
printer or compositor, or between printers and compositors, and proofs 
or printed matter returned from the printer or compositor to the office 
of the person who initially sent the copy.
    (xi) Sound recordings, films, and packets of identical printed 
letters containing messages all or the overwhelming bulk of which are to 
be disseminated to the public. The ``public'' does not include 
individuals residing at the place of address; individuals employed by 
the organization doing business at the place of address (whether or not 
the actual place of employment is the place of address); individuals who 
are members of an organization, if an organization is located at the 
place of address; or other individuals who, individually or as members 
of a group, are reasonably identifiable to the sender.
    (xii) Computer programs recorded on media suitable for direct input. 
For the conditions under which the Private Express Statutes are 
suspended for data processing materials, see Sec. 320.2.

[[Page 151]]

    (b) Packet means two or more letters, identical or different, or two 
or more packets of letters, under one cover or otherwise bound together. 
As used in these regulations, unless the context otherwise requires, 
``letter'' or ``letters'' includes ``packet'' or ``packets''.
    (c) Person means an individual, corporation, association, 
partnership, governmental agency, or other organization or entity.
    (d) Post routes are routes on which mail is carried by the Postal 
Service, and includes post roads as defined in 39 U.S.C. 5003, as 
follows:
    (1) The waters of the United States, during the time the mail is 
carried thereon;
    (2) Railroads or parts of railroads and air routes in operation;
    (3) Canals, during the time the mail is carried thereon;
    (4) Public roads, highways, and toll roads during the time the mail 
is carried thereon; and
    (5) Letter-carrier routes established for the collection and 
delivery of mail.
    (e) Private carriage, private carrier, and terms of similar import 
used in connection with the Private Express Statutes or these 
regulations mean carriage by anyone other than the Postal Service, 
regardless of any meaning ascribed to similar terms under other bodies 
of law or regulation.
    (f) The Private Express Statutes are set forth in 18 U.S.C. 1693-
1699 and 39 U.S.C. 601-606 (1970).
    (g) The term identical printed letters includes letters that differ 
only in name, address or serial number.

[39 FR 33211, Sept. 16, 1974, as amended at 44 FR 52833, Sept. 11, 1979; 
45 FR 3034, Jan. 16, 1980; 45 FR 59873, Sept. 11, 1980; 48 FR 42354, 
Sept. 27, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 310.2   Unlawful carriage of letters.

    (a) It is generally unlawful under the Private Express Statutes for 
any person other than the Postal Service in any manner to send or carry 
a letter on a post route or in any manner to cause or assist such 
activity. Violation may result in injunction, fine or imprisonment or 
both and payment of postage lost as a result of the illegal activity 
(see Sec. 310.5).
    (b) Activity described in paragraph (a) of this section is lawful 
with respect to a letter if:
    (1)(i) The letter is enclosed in an envelope or other suitable 
cover;
    (ii) The amount of postage which would have been charged on the 
letter if it had been sent through the Postal Service is paid by stamps, 
or postage meter stamps, on the cover or by other methods approved by 
the Postal Service;
    (iii) The name and address of the person for whom the letter is 
intended appear on the cover;
    (iv) The cover is so sealed that the letter cannot be taken from it 
without defacing the cover;
    (v) Any stamps on the cover are canceled in ink by the sender; and
    (vi) The date of the letter, or of its transmission or receipt by 
the carrier, is endorsed on the cover in ink by the sender or carrier, 
as appropriate; or
    (2)(i) The activity is in accordance with the terms of a written 
agreement between the shipper or the carrier of the letter and the 
Postal Service. Such an agreement may include some or all of the 
provisions of paragraph (b)(1) of this section, or it may change them, 
but it must:
    (A) Adequately ensure payment of an amount equal to the postage to 
which the Postal Service would have been entitled had the letters been 
carried in the mail;
    (B) Remain in effect for a specified period (subject to renewals); 
and
    (C) Provide for periodic review, audit, and inspection.
    (ii) Possible alternative arrangements may include but are not 
limited to:
    (A) Payment of a fixed sum at specified intervals based on the 
shipper's projected shipment of letters for a given period, as verified 
by the Postal Service; or
    (B) Utilization of a computer record to determine the volume of 
letters shipped during an interval and the applicable postage to be 
remitted to the Postal Service.
    (c) The Postal Service may suspend the operation of any part of 
paragraph (b) of this section where the public interest requires the 
suspension.

[[Page 152]]

    (d) Activity described in paragraph (a) of this section is permitted 
with respect to letters which:
    (1) Relate to some part of the cargo of, or to some article carried 
at the same time by, the conveyance carrying it (see Sec. 310.3(a));
    (2) Are sent by or addressed to the carrier (see Sec. 310.3(b));
    (3) Are conveyed or transmitted without compensation (see 
Sec. 310.3(c));
    (4) Are conveyed or transmitted by special messenger employed for 
the particular occasion only, provided that not more than twenty-five 
such letters are conveyed or transmitted by such special messenger (see 
Sec. 310.3(d)); or
    (5) Are carried prior or subsequent to mailing (see Sec. 310.3(e)).

[39 FR 33211, Sept. 16, 1974, as amended at 45 FR 77029, Nov. 21, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 310.3  Exceptions.

    (a) Cargo. The sending or carrying of letters is permissible if they 
accompany and relate in all substantial respects to some part of the 
cargo or to the ordering, shipping or delivering of the cargo.
    (b) Letters of the carrier. (1) The sending or carrying of letters 
is permissible if they are sent by or addressed to the person carrying 
them. If the individual actually carrying the letters is not the person 
sending the letters or to whom the letters are addressed, then such 
individual must be an officer or employee of such person (see 
Sec. 310.3(b)(2)) and the letters must relate to the current business of 
such person.
    (2) The fact that the individual actually carrying the letters may 
be an officer or employee of the person sending the letters or to whom 
the letters are addressed for certain purposes does not necessarily mean 
that he is an officer or employee for purposes of this exception. The 
following factors bear on qualifications for the exception: the carrying 
employee is employed for a substantial time, if not fulltime (letters 
must not be privately carried by casual employees); the carrying 
employee carries no matter for other senders; the carrying employee is a 
regular salaried employee and shares in all privileges enjoyed by other 
regular employees (including employees not engaged primarily by the 
letter carrying function), including but not limited to salary, annual 
vacation time, absence allowed for illness, health benefits, workmen's 
compensation insurance, and retirement benefits.
    (3) Separately incorporated carriers are separate entities for 
purposes of this exception, regardless of any subsidiary, ownership, or 
leasing arrangement. When, however, two concerns jointly operate an 
enterprise with joint employees and share directly in its revenues and 
expenses, either of the concerns may carry the letters of the joint 
enterprise.
    (c) Private hands without compensation. The sending or carrying of 
letters without compensation is permitted. Compensation generally 
consists of a monetary payment for services rendered. Compensation may 
also consist, however, of non-monetary valuable consideration and of 
good will Thus, for example, when a business relationship exists or is 
sought between the carrier and its user, carriage by the carrier of the 
user's letter will ordinarily not fall under this exception; or, when a 
person is engaged in the transportation of goods or persons for hire, 
his carrying of letters ``free of charge'' for customers whom he does 
charge for the carriage of goods or persons does not fall under this 
exception.
    (d) Special messenger. (1) The use of a special messenger employed 
for the particular occasion only is permissible to transmit letters if 
not more than twenty-five letters are involved. The permission granted 
under this exception is restricted to use of messenger service on an 
infrequent, irregular basis by the sender or addressee of the message.
    (2) A special messenger is a person who, at the request of either 
the sender or the addressee, picks up a letter from the sender's home or 
place of business and carries it to the addressees home or place of 
business, but a messenger or carrier operating regularly between fixed 
points is not a special messenger.
    (e) Carriage prior or subsequent to mailing. (1) The private 
carriage of letters which enter the mail stream at some point between 
their origin and their destination is permissible. Except as provided in 
paragraph (e)(3) of this section, however, the carriage of letters

[[Page 153]]

from a place where they have been opened, read, separated, or otherwise 
utilized, does not fall within this exception even though such letters 
had previously been in the mail stream. Similarly, the carriage of 
letters to a place where they will be consolidated or otherwise utilized 
does not fall within this exception even though they will subsequently 
enter the mail stream.
    (2) Examples of permitted activities are the pickup and carriage of 
letters which are delivered to post offices for mailing; the pickup and 
carriage of letters at post offices for delivery to addressees; and the 
bulk shipment of individually addressed letters ultimately carried by 
the Postal Service.
    (3) The private carriage of letters from branches of an organization 
to a location for preparation for mailing does not constitute a 
consolidation. The private carriage of letters from an organization's 
point of mail delivery to its branches in the locality does not 
constitute a separation.

[39 FR 33211, Sept. 16, 1974, as amended at 44 FR 52834, Sept. 11, 1979; 
45 FR 59873, Sept. 11, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 310.4   Responsibility of carriers.

    Private carriers are cautioned to make sure that their carriage of 
matter is lawful within the definition, exceptions, suspension, and 
conditions contained in this part and in part 320 of this chapter. They 
should take reasonable measures to inform their customers of the 
contents of these regulations so that only proper matter is tendered to 
them for carriage. Carriers should desist from carrying any matter when 
the form of shipment, identity of sender or recipient, or any other 
information reasonably accessible to them indicates that matter tendered 
to them for carriage is not proper under these regulations.


<R05>
Sec. 310.5   Payment of postage on violation.

    (a) Upon discovery of activity made unlawful by the Private Express 
Statutes, the Postal Service may require any person or persons who 
engage in, cause, or assist such activity to pay an amount or amounts 
not exceeding the total postage to which it would have been entitled had 
it carried the letters between their origin and destination.
    (b) The amount equal to postage will be due and payable not later 
than 15 days after receipt of formal demand from the Inspection Service 
unless an appeal is taken to the Judicial Officer Department in 
accordance with rules of procedure set out in part 959 of this chapter.
    (c) Refusal to pay an unappealed demand or a demand that becomes 
final after appeal will subject the violator to civil suit by the Postal 
Service to collect the amount equal to postage.
    (d) The payment of amounts equal to postage on violation shall in no 
way limit other actions to enforce the Private Express Statutes by civil 
or criminal proceedings.


<R05>
Sec. 310.6  Advisory opinions.

    An advisory opinion on any question arising under this part and part 
320 of this chapter may be obtained by writing the Law Department, U.S. 
Postal Service, Washington, DC 20260. A numbered series of advisory 
opinions is available for inspection by the public in the Library of the 
U.S. Postal Service, and copies of individual opinions may be obtained 
upon payment of charges for duplicating services.

[45 FR 59873, Sept. 11, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 310.7   Amendment of regulations.

    Amendments of the regulations in this part and in part 320 may be 
made only in accordance with the rulemaking provisions of the 
Administrative Procedure Act.

[40 FR 23295, May 29, 1975]


<R03>
PART 320--SUSPENSION OF THE PRIVATE EXPRESS STATUTES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
320.1  Definitions.
320.2  Suspension for certain data processing materials.
320.3  Operations under suspension for certain data processing 
          materials.
320.4  Suspension for certain letters of college and university 
          organizations.
320.5  Suspension for certain international-ocean carrier-related 
          documents.
320.6  Suspension for extremely urgent letters.

[[Page 154]]

320.7  Suspension for advertisements accompanying parcels or 
          periodicals.
320.8  Suspension for international remailing.
320.9  Revocation or amendment of suspensions.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401, 404, 601-606; 18 U.S.C. 1693-1699.


<R05>
Sec. 320.1   Definitions.

    The definitions in Sec. 310.1 apply to part 320 as well.<SUP>1
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1</SUP> Several of the items enumerated in Sec. 310.1(a)(7) do not 
self-evidently lie outside of the definition of ``letter''. To the 
extent, however, that there is any question whether these items may 
properly be excluded by definition, the Postal Service has determined by 
adoption of these regulations that the restrictions of the Private 
Express Statutes are suspended pursuant to 39 U.S.C. 601(b).

[39 FR 33212, Sept. 16, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 320.2  Suspension for certain data processing materials.

    (a) The operation of 39 U.S.C. 601(a) (1) through (6) and 
Sec. 310.2(b) (1) through (6) of this chapter is suspended on all post 
routes for data processing materials defined in paragraph (c) of this 
section on the terms detailed in paragraph (b) of this section, subject 
to the operating requirements in Sec. 320.3.
    (b) The suspension referred to in paragraph (a) of this section is 
for data processing materials conveyed (1) to a data processing center, 
if carriage is completed within 12 hours or by noon of the addressee's 
next business day and if data processing work is commenced on such 
materials within 36 hours of their receipt at the center; or (2) back 
from the data processing center to the address of the office originating 
the incoming materials, if carriage is completed within 12 hours or by 
noon of the addressee's next business day, and if data processing work 
was commenced on the incoming materials within 36 hours of their receipt 
at the center. For purposes of the time limitations for completion of 
delivery referred to in the preceding sentence, delivery of shipments 
between a domestic point and a foreign point shall be deemed to begin at 
the time materials of foreign origin are received at the international 
gateway city or end at the time materials of domestic origin leave the 
international gateway city. This suspension does not apply to carriages 
from or to originating offices that are neither part of the firm owning 
the data processing center nor data processing customers of the firm 
owning the data processing center.
    (c) For purposes of this suspension, (1) ``addressee's next business 
day'' means the first calendar day, stated in his local time, on which 
he conducts business, following the calendar day of dispatch, stated in 
the sender's local time; (2) ``data processing'' means electro-
mechanical or electronic processing and includes the recording of data 
by electro-mechanical or electronic means for further processing; and 
(3) ``data processing materials'' means materials of all types that are 
sent exclusively for data processing and are ready for immediate data 
processing, but only if they are produced recurringly in the course of 
the normal business operations of the office originating them or 
receiving them back from the processing center. The performance of 
clerical work which is merely preparatory and incidental to the 
commencement of data processing is not, for purposes of this suspension, 
inconsistent with the requirement that the materials be sent exclusively 
for data processing and be ready for immediate data processing.

[44 FR 52834, Sept. 11, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 320.3   Operations under suspension for certain data processing materials.

    (a) Carriers intending to establish or alter operations based on the 
suspension granted pursuant to Sec. 320.2 shall, as a condition to the 
right to operate under the suspension, notify the Private Express 
Liaison Officer, Customer Services Department, U.S. Postal Service, 
Washington, DC 20260, of their intention to establish such operations 
not later than the beginning of such operations. Such notification, on a 
form available from the Private Express Liaison Office, shall include 
information on the identity and authority of the carrier and the scope 
of its proposed operations.
    (b) Carriers operating under the suspension granted pursuant to 
Sec. 320.2 are

[[Page 155]]

responsible for making sure that their carriage of matter under the 
suspension meets all conditions contained in Sec. 320.2. (See 
Sec. 310.4.) The containers or covers of any matter carried under the 
suspension must be made available for examination upon request by a 
properly identified postal inspector. Carrier records--either in the 
form of notations on the containers or covers of any matter carried 
under the suspension granted pursuant to Sec. 320.2 or in the form of 
records kept by employees of the actual times they make delivery or 
pickup stops--must be sufficient to show that the delivery of such 
matter was completed within the applicable time limitation prescribed in 
Sec. 320.2. The provisions of this paragraph shall not restrict the 
Postal Service in the exercise of search powers conferred upon it by 
law.
    (c) The filing of notifications under this section does not relieve 
the operator of responsibility for assuring that its operations conform 
to applicable statutes and regulations.
    (d) Failure to comply with the notification requirements of this 
section and carriage of material or other action in violation of other 
provisions of this part and of part 310 are grounds for administrative 
revocation of the suspension as to a particular carrier for a period of 
not less than one year, in a proceeding instituted by the General 
Counsel, following a hearing by the Judicial Officer Department in 
accordance with the rules of procedure set out in part 959 of this 
chapter.

(Note: The form referred to in Sec. 320.3 is reproduced below.)

Notice of Intent to Establish Operations Under Suspension of the Private 
Express Statutes<SUP>1
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    1</SUP> Information relates exclusively to operations under the 
suspension for data processing materials. This form should be used for 
an initial notice of operations and for any amendments to the initial or 
subsequent notices.

    (see 39 cfr part 320, suspension of the private express statutes)

                       Private Carriage of Letters

Name of Carrier_________________________________________________________
Address_________________________________________________________________
State of Incorporation__________________________________________________
Geographical Area to Be Served__________________________________________
    1. Designate the specific markets or areas in which operations will 
be conducted.
    2. Describe specifically any authorizations issued by local, state, 
or federal regulatory agencies under which operations will be conducted.
________________________________________________________________________
                                                  (Signature of Officer)
________________________________________________________________________
                                                      (Name and Title)  
    Subscribed and sworn to before me this ---- day of ----------, 197--
--.
________________________________________________________________________
                                                         Notary Public  
    Seal
My commission expires___________________________________________________

(Note: False statements contained herein are punishable by law, 18 
U.S.C. 1001.)

[39 FR 33212, Sept. 16, 1974; 39 FR 34533, Sept. 26, 1974, as amended at 
40 FR 23295, May 29, 1975; 44 FR 52835, Sept. 11, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 320.4  Suspension for certain letters of college and university organizations.

    The operation of 39 U.S.C. 601(a) (1) through (6) and Sec. 310.2(b) 
(1) through (6) of this chapter is suspended on all post routes to 
permit colleges and universities to carry in their internal mail systems 
the letters of their bona fide student or faculty organizations to 
campus destinations. This suspension does not cover the letters of 
faculty members, students, or organizations other than bona fide student 
or faculty organizations of the carrying college or university. Colleges 
and universities choosing to provide their student or faculty 
organizations access to their internal mail systems are responsible for 
assuring that only letters of bona fide student or faculty organizations 
addressed to campus destinations are carried. (See Sec. 310.4.) For 
purposes of this suspension, ``internal mail systems'' are those which 
carry letters on, between, and among the various campuses of a single 
college or university and which operate in accordance with the Letters 
of the carrier exception in 39 CFR 310.3(b).

[44 FR 52835, Sept 11, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 320.5  Suspension for certain international-ocean carrier-related documents.

    The operation of 39 U.S.C. 601(a) (1) through (6) and Sec. 310.2(b) 
(1) through (6) of this chapter is suspended on all post

[[Page 156]]

routes for documents, sent by a shipper or an ocean carrier from a 
foreign origin to a United States ocean-carrier port city destination or 
from a United States ocean-carrier port city origin to a foreign 
destination, that would be excepted under Sec. 310.3(a) if the documents 
accompanied the cargo. This suspension covers only shipments to or from 
ports where the cargo to which the documents relate is actually loaded 
on, or unloaded from, an ocean vessel. For purposes of this suspension 
``foreign origins'' or ``foreign destinations'' means origins or 
destinations outside the contiguous 48 states.

[44 FR 52835, Sept 11, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 320.6  Suspension for extremely urgent letters.

    (a) The operation of 39 U.S.C. 601(a) (1) through (6) and 
Sec. 310.2(b) (1) through (6) of this chapter is suspended on all post 
routes for extremely urgent letters if the conditions of either 
paragraph (b) or (c) of this section, and of the other paragraphs of 
this section, are met.
    (b)(1) For letters dispatched within 50 miles of the intended 
destination, delivery of those dispatched by noon must be completed 
within 6 hours or by the close of the addressee's normal business hours 
that day, whichever is later, and delivery of those dispatched after 
noon and before midnight must be completed by 10 A.M. of the addressee's 
next business day. For other letters, delivery must be completed within 
12 hours or by noon of the addressee's next business day. The suspension 
is available only if the value or usefulness of the letter would be lost 
or greatly diminished if it is not delivered within these time limits. 
For any part of a shipment of letters to qualify under this paragraph 
(b), each of the letters must be extremely urgent.
    (2) Letters sent from the 48 contiguous states of the United States 
to other jurisdictions of the United States or to other nations are 
deemed ``delivered'' when they are in the custody of the international 
or overseas carrier at its last scheduled point of departure from the 48 
contiguous states. Letters sent from other jurisdictions of the United 
States or from other nations into the 48 contiguous states are deemed 
``dispatched'' when they are in the custody of the domestic carrier, 
having been passed by United States Customs, if applicable, at the 
letters' point of arrival in the 48 contiguous states.
    (3) Except as provided in this paragraph (b)(3), the times and time 
limits specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section are not applicable 
to any locations outside the 48 contiguous states. The times and time 
limits specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section are applicable to 
letters dispatched and delivered wholly within Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto 
Rico or a territory or possession of the United States. The regulations 
provided in paragraph (b)(2) of this section relating to the delivery 
and dispatch of letters are applicable by analogy to letters shipped 
between these jurisdictions and other nations.
    (c) It will be conclusively presumed that a letter is extremely 
urgent and is covered by the suspension if the amount paid for private 
carriage of the letter is at least three dollars or twice the applicable 
U.S. postage for First-Class Mail (including priority mail) whichever is 
the greater. If a single shipment consists of a number of letters that 
are picked up together at a single origin and delivered together to a 
single destination, the applicable U.S. postage may be computed for 
purposes of this paragraph as though the shipment constituted a single 
letter of the weight of the shipment. If not actually charged on a 
letter-by-letter or shipment-by-shipment basis, the amount paid may be 
computed for purposes of this paragraph on the basis of the carrier's 
actual charge divided by a bona fide estimate of the average number of 
letters or shipments during the period covered by the carrier's actual 
charge.
    (d) The sender must prominently mark the outside covers or 
containers of letters carried under this suspension with the words 
``Extremely Urgent'' or ``Private Carriage Authorized by Postal 
Regulations (39 CFR 320.6)'' or with a similar legend identifying the 
letters as carried pursuant to this suspension. In addition, each 
outside container or cover must show the name and address of the 
carrier, and the name and address of the addressee. Carrier records

[[Page 157]]

must be sufficient to show that the delivery of the letters was 
completed within the applicable time limitations, if carried under the 
authority of paragraph (b) of this section, and must be made available 
for inspection at the request of the Postal Service. The required 
records may be either in the form of notations on the containers or 
covers of any letters asserted to be carried under this suspension, or 
in the form of records kept by employees of the actual times they pick 
up and deliver such materials.
    (e) Violation by a shipper or carrier of the terms of this 
suspension is grounds for administrative revocation of the suspension as 
to such shipper or carrier for a period of one year in a proceeding 
instituted by the General Counsel, following a hearing by the Judicial 
Officer Department in accordance with the rules of procedure set out in 
Part 959 of this chapter. The period of the revocation may be reduced or 
be extended for not to exceed one additional year by the Judicial 
Officer, depending on such mitigating or aggravating factors as the 
extent of the postal revenue lost because of the violation and the 
presence or absence of good faith error or of previous violations. The 
failure of a shipper or carrier to cooperate with an authorized 
inspection or audit conducted by the Postal Inspection Service for the 
purpose of determining compliance with the terms of this suspension 
shall be deemed to create a presumption of a violation for the purpose 
of this paragraph (e) and shall shift to the shipper or carrier the 
burden of establishing the fact of compliance. Revocation of this 
suspension as to a shipper or carrier shall in no way limit other 
actions as to such shipper or carrier to enforce the Private Express 
Statutes by administrative proceedings for collection of postage (see 
Sec. 310.5) or by civil or criminal proceedings.
    (f) The following examples illustrate the application of this 
suspension.

    Example (1). The headquarters of a city police department each night 
compiles a list of the license plate numbers and descriptions of 
automobiles reported stolen within the metropolitan area during the 
previous 24 hours. This list is delivered by 7 a.m. the following day to 
each of the local precinct offices located throughout the city. By 9 
a.m. that day, the list is circulated for use by law enforcement units 
operating from each office. Effective police recovery of stolen vehicles 
depends upon having this information handed out in written form to all 
units on at least a daily basis. The private carriage of these lists 
would qualify under the test set in paragraph (b) of this section.
    Example (2). The same police department headquarters also from time 
to time distributes memoranda advising the local precinct officers on 
departmental policy and vacation schedules, and responding to inquiries 
from the local precinct offices. Nothing substantial turns on whether 
these memoranda arrive by midnight or by 10 a.m. of the next business 
day or whether their transmission takes a day or more longer to 
complete. The private carriage of these memoranda would not qualify 
under the test set out in paragraph (b) of this section.
    Example (3). A health maintenance organization (HMO) operating its 
own hospital, clinics, and medical laboratory daily sends test samples 
and specimens from the HMO's hospital and clinics to its medical 
laboratory in a different location for immediate analysis. In return, 
the HMO laboratory sends to the HMO's hospital and clinics the 
laboratory reports for these samples and specimens on the day the 
reports are completed. The reports are then promptly utilized by the 
hospital and clinics as part of regular diagnostic procedures. The 
private carriage of these reports would qualify under the loss-of-value 
test set out in paragraph (b) of this section.
    Example (4). The same HMO's hospital and clinics send requisitions 
and invoices to the HMO's central office as the need arises for the 
ordering of and payment for goods and services, which are handled 
centrally. Every other Friday, the central office sends to the hospital 
and clinics reports and memoranda on expenditures for personnel, 
supplies, utilities, and other goods and services. Nothing substantial 
turns on whether these materials arrive the same day or by 10 a.m. of 
the next business day or whether their transmission takes a day or more 
longer to complete. The private carriage of these materials would not 
qualify under the test set out in paragraph (b) of this section.
    Example (5). On Sunday, Tuesday, and Thursday evenings, the central 
office of a regional grocery store chain sends out to its various stores 
in the area inventory bulletins prepared over the previous 24 hours 
showing the current availability and prices of meat, produce, dairy 
products, breadstuffs, frozen foods and similar items. Early the 
following afternoon, each store must send these inventory bulletins back 
to the central office with a notation of the store's orders to assure 
that the central office can ship sufficient supplies of such items for 
sale by the store on its next business day. The private carriage of 
these bulletins would

[[Page 158]]

qualify under the test set out in paragraph (b) of this section.
    Example (6). On Sunday, Tuesday, and Thursday evenings, the central 
office of a different regional grocery chain sends out to its various 
stores in the area inventory bulletins showing the current availability 
and prices of meat, produce, dairy products, breadstuffs, frozen foods 
and similar items. Early in the afternoon of the second day following 
receipt of the bulletins, each store sends the bulletins back to the 
central office so that supplies of such items may be shipped to the 
store four days later. Nothing substantial turns on whether these 
bulletins arrive within 12 hours or by noon of the next business day or 
whether their transmission takes a day or more longer to complete. The 
private carriage of these materials would not qualify under the test set 
out in paragraph (b) of this section.
    Example (7). The headquarters office of a large bank each business 
day prepares and sends to its branch offices lists showing current 
foreign exchange rates and similar information that must be updated and 
distributed to the branches on a daily basis in order for the bank to 
avoid the risk of serious financial loss. Within three hours of their 
receipt by each branch office, these lists are circulated and utilized 
by officials of the branch office in conducting regular banking 
procedures involving the use of such lists. The private carriage of 
these lists would qualify under the test set out in paragraph (b) of 
this section.
    Example (8). The field office of an insurance company daily sends 
the insurance applications it has taken in that day to the company's 
central office. The applications are bound (i.e., constitute evidence of 
insurance) for 30 days, but may be canceled by the company. Few if any 
policies have been canceled by the company within 48 hours of their 
receipt at the central office, though the company normally begins 
processing the applications soon after their receipt. Nothing 
substantial turns on whether these bound applications arrive within 12 
hours or by noon of the next business day or whether their transmission 
takes a day or more longer to complete. The private carriage of these 
materials would not qualify under the test set out in paragraph (b) of 
this section.
    Example (9). An organization of real estate brokers in a community 
issues periodic bulletins containing information about properties which 
have been listed for sale by the constituent brokers. Each broker is 
entitled to show the properties to prospective buyers. In order to 
provide each broker with substantially equal opportunity to secure a 
buyer, it is necessary that the bulletins be delivered on the same day 
and within the shortest time span within that day. The bulletins 
constitute the basic source of information for the brokers and delivery 
in the foregoing manner is a key element in the functioning of the 
brokers. The private carriage of the bulletins would therefore qualify 
under the test set out in paragraph (b) of this section.
    Example (10). The same organization distributes memoranda regarding 
speakers at real estate seminars, sales figures for a given period, and 
other information of significance and interest to real estate brokers 
but which does not affect their competitive positions. A failure to make 
simultaneous or near simultaneous delivery to the brokers, or a failure 
to make delivery within a specified period of time, has no material 
bearing upon the day-to-day operations of the brokers and private 
carriage of these materials would not qualify under the test set out in 
paragraph (b) of this section.

[44 FR 61181, Oct. 24, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 320.7  Suspension for advertisements accompanying parcels or periodicals.

    (a) The operation of 39 U.S.C. 601(a) (1) through (6) and 
Sec. 310.2(b) (1) through (6) of this chapter is suspended on all post 
routes for advertisements enclosed with merchandise in parcels or 
accompanying periodicals under the following circumstances:
    (1) The advertisements must not be marked with the names or 
addresses of the intended recipients.
    (2) The advertisements must be incidental to the shipment of the 
merchandise or the periodical.
    (i) An advertisement is incidental to the shipment of the 
accompanying merchandise or the periodical when the merchandise or the 
periodical has been ordered by or would otherwise be sent to the 
recipient even without the accompanying advertisement.
    (ii) Notwithstanding Sec. 320.7(a)(2)(i), an advertisement is not 
incidental to the merchandise when the pertinent circumstances, such as 
the nominal value of the merchandise, its shipment on an unsolicited 
basis, or its status as a sample, reasonably indicate that the shipper's 
primary purpose is the conveyance of the advertisement itself and that 
the merchandise is merely an adjunct to the advertisement.
    (b) An item is an advertisement if its primary purpose is to cause 
or induce the purchase of goods or services from the shipper or others.

[45 FR 59874, Sept. 11, 1980]

[[Page 159]]


<R05>
Sec. 320.8  Suspension for international remailing.

    (a) The operation of 39 U.S.C. 601(a)(1) through (6) and 
Sec. 310.2(b)(1) through (6) of this chapter is suspended on all post 
routes to permit the uninterrupted carriage of letters from a point 
within the United States to a foreign country for deposit in its 
domestic or international mails for delivery to an ultimate destination 
outside the United States.

    Example (1) The letters to overseas customers of commercial firm A 
in Chicago are carried by Carrier B to New York where they are delivered 
to Carrier C for carriage to Europe. Carrier C holds the letters in its 
distribution center overnight, then sorts them by country of destination 
and merges them with letters of other firms to those countries before 
starting the carriage to Europe in the morning. The carriage of firm A's 
letters is not interrupted. The suspension for international remailing 
applies to the carriage by Carrier B and by Carrier C.
    Example (2) The bills addressed to foreign customers of the Chicago 
branch office of commercial firm D are carried by Carrier E to New York 
where they are delivered to the accounting department of firm D's home 
office. The accounting department uses the information in the bills to 
prepare its reports of accounts receivable. The bills are then returned 
to Carrier E which carries them directly to Europe where they are 
entered into the mails of a foreign country. The carriage of the bills 
from Chicago to Europe is interrupted in New York by the delivery to 
firm D's home office. The suspension for international remailing does 
not apply to the carriage from Chicago to New York. It does apply to the 
subsequent carriage from New York to Europe.

    (b) This suspension shall not permit the shipment or carriage of a 
letter or letters out of the mails to any foreign country for subsequent 
delivery to an address within the United States.

    Example (1) A number of promotional letters originated by firm F in 
Los Angeles are carried by Carrier G to Europe for deposit in the mails 
of a foreign country. Some of the letters are addressed to persons in 
Europe, some to persons in the United States. The suspension for 
international remailing does not apply to the letters addressed to 
persons in the United States.

    (c) Violation by a shipper or carrier of the terms of this 
suspension is grounds for administrative revocation of the suspension as 
to such shipper or carrier for a period of one year in a proceeding 
instituted by the General Counsel in accordance with part 959 of this 
chapter. The failure of a shipper or carrier to cooperate with an 
inspection or audit authorized and conducted by the Postal Inspection 
Service for the purpose of determining compliance with the terms of this 
suspension shall be deemed to create a presumption of a violation for 
the purpose of this paragraph (c) and shall shift to the shipper or 
carrier the burden of establishing the fact of compliance. Revocation of 
this suspension as to a shipper or carrier shall in no way limit other 
actions as to such shipper or carrier to enforce the Private Express 
Statutes by administrative proceedings for collection of postage (see 
Sec. 310.5) or by civil or criminal proceedings.

[51 FR 29638, Aug. 20, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 320.9  Revocation or amendment of suspensions.

    These suspensions may be revoked or amended in accordance with 
Sec. 310.7. No revocation of the suspension provided in Sec. 320.2 will 
curtail operations of particular carriers existing at the time of the 
revocation to a level of operations (in dollar or volume terms, 
whichever is larger) lower than that antedating the revocation in a 
particular market served prior to the revocation. Should the suspension 
referred to in Sec. 320.2 be revoked, carriers, as a condition to 
continuing operations under this section, will be required to provide 
reasonably complete and accurate data to support estimates of past 
operating levels in particular markets.

[44 FR 52835, Sept. 11, 1979. Redesignated at 44 FR 61181, Oct. 24, 
1979]

[[Page 160]]


<R03>
                         SUBCHAPTER F--PERSONNEL

<R05>


<R03>
PART 447--RULES OF CONDUCT FOR POSTAL EMPLOYEES--Table of Contents

<R05>


                Subpart A--Applicability and Definitions

Sec.
447.11  Applicability.
447.12  Definitions.

                       Subpart B--Employee Conduct

447.21  Prohibited conduct.

    Subpart C--Ethical Conduct Advisory Services and Post-Employment 
                               Activities

447.31  Advisory service.
447.32  Post-employment activities.

                     Subpart D--Political Activities

447.41  General.
447.42  Additional prohibited political activities.
447.43  Investigation and enforcement.

              Subpart E--Participation in Community Affairs

447.51  General.
447.52  Holding of State or local office by Postal Service employees.

            Subpart F--Bribery, Undue Influence, or Coercion

447.61  General.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401.

    Source: 39 FR 1990, Jan. 16, 1974, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                Subpart A--Applicability and Definitions

    Source: 60 FR 47243, Sept. 11, 1995, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 447.11  Applicability.

    This part contains rules of conduct for the employees of the Postal 
Service. Employees are required to comply with the regulations in this 
part, and violations of the regulations may be cause for disciplinary 
action. The regulations in this part are in addition to other rules of 
conduct provided by applicable statutes, regulations, or Postal Service 
handbooks and manuals. For applicable rules of ethical conduct, 
employees are referred to the Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees 
of the Executive Branch, 5 CFR part 2635, and Postal Service regulations 
supplemental thereto, 5 CFR part 7001.


<R05>
Sec. 447.12  Definitions.

    The following definitions apply for purposes of this part.
    (a) Postal Service. The United States Postal Service as established 
by 39 U.S.C. 201.
    (b) Employee. An individual appointed to a position, temporary or 
permanent, within the Postal Service, or hired as an executive under an 
employment contract, including a substitute or a special employee as 
defined by 18 U.S.C. 202(a). The term ``employee'' does not include the 
Governors of the Postal Service.


<R04>
                       Subpart B--Employee Conduct


<R05>
Sec. 447.21  Prohibited conduct.

    (a) An employee must not engage, either on a paid or unpaid basis, 
in teaching, lecturing, or writing for the purpose of the special 
preparation of a person or class of persons for an examination of the 
Office of Personnel Management or Board of Examiners for the Foreign 
Service, or for appointment in the U.S. Postal Service, when these 
activities are dependent on information obtained as a result of his or 
her employment with the Postal Service, except when that information has 
been made available to the general public, or will be made available on 
request, or when the Postmaster General gives written authorization that 
the use of nonpublic information is in the public interest.
    (b) No employee shall take sick leave to enable himself to engage in 
outside work.
    (c) No employee while acting in his official capacity shall directly 
or indirectly authorize, permit, or participate in any action, event or 
course of conduct which subjects any person to discrimination, or 
results in any person being discriminated against, on the

[[Page 161]]

basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, or age.
    (d) No employee shall engage in criminal, dishonest, notoriously 
disgraceful or immoral conduct, or other conduct prejudicial to the 
Postal Service. Conviction of a violation of any criminal statute may be 
grounds for disciplinary action by the Postal Service in addition to any 
other penalty imposed by or pursuant to statute.
    (e) No employee shall habitually use intoxicating beverages to 
excess. No employee shall drink beer, wine, or other intoxicating 
beverages while on duty. No employee shall begin work or return to duty 
while intoxicated. No employee shall drink intoxicating beverages in a 
public place while in uniform. Unless the Postmaster General 
specifically authorizes an exception (as in the case, for example, of an 
official reception) no employee shall have or bring any container of 
beer, wine, or other intoxicating beverage on premises occupied by a 
postal facility, whether or not the container has been opened.
    (f) Illegal use of drugs may be grounds for removal from the Postal 
Service.
    (g) No employee while on property owned or leased by the Postal 
Service or the United States or while on duty, shall participate in any 
gambling activity, including the operation of a gambling device, in 
conducting or acting as an agent for a lottery or pool, in conducting a 
game for money or property, or in selling or purchasing a numbers slip 
or ticket.

    Note: Paragraph (g) of this section does not prohibit participation 
in activities specified herein if participation is necessitated by an 
employee's law enforcement duties, or if participation is in accordance 
with section 3 of Executive Order No. 10927, of March 18, 1961, relating 
to agency-approved solicitations.

[39 FR 1990, Jan. 16, 1974; 39 FR 3677, Jan. 28, 1974, as amended at 48 
FR 48231, Oct. 18, 1983. Redesignated and amended at 60 FR 47244, Sept. 
11, 1995]


<R04>
    Subpart C--Ethical Conduct Advisory Services and Post-Employment 
                               Activities


<R05>
Sec. 447.31  Advisory service.

    (a) The Ethical Conduct Officer is responsible for the 
administration of the ethics program of the Postal Service. In the 
exercise of that responsibility, the Ethical Conduct Officer shall 
coordinate the advisory service provided by this section, assure that 
authoritative interpretations of the Standards of Ethical Conduct for 
Employees of the Executive Branch (Standards) and Supplemental Postal 
Service Regulations (Supplemental Regulations) are available to the 
Associate Ethical Conduct Officers, and render final rulings on behalf 
of the Postal Service in appeals by employees from rulings under the 
Standards and Supplemental Regulations made by an agency designee. The 
Ethical Conduct Officer shall provide advice and guidance for the 
Postmaster General and all Associate Ethical Conduct Officers concerning 
questions arising under the Standards and Supplemental Regulations. The 
Ethical Conduct Officer may delegate to an Assistant Ethical Conduct 
Officer authority to perform any duty or function vested in him or her 
by this Section. The General Counsel is the Ethical Conduct Officer of 
the Postal Service and the Designated Agency Ethics Official for 
purposes of the Ethics in Government Act, as amended, and implementing 
regulations of the Office of Government Ethics, including 5 CFR part 
2638.
    (b) The Deputy Postmaster General is the Associate Ethical Conduct 
Officer for the Office of the Postmaster General and the Office of the 
Deputy Postmaster General. The Chief Operating Officer, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Vice Presidents, and such other persons as the Ethical 
Conduct Officer may designate are Associate Ethical Conduct Officers for 
their respective organizational elements. Each Associate Ethical Conduct 
Officer shall designate a suitable employee to coordinate the ethics 
program within his or

[[Page 162]]

her organization and to act as liaison with the Ethical Conduct Officer. 
Each Associate may designate other suitable employees to assist or act 
for him or her and shall ensure that there is an adequate number of 
Qualified Ethics Trainers to comply with the requirements of the annual 
ethics training program.
    (c) The Ethical Conduct Officer and, with his or her approval, 
Associate Ethical Conduct Officers, may delegate to additional persons 
or classes of persons the authority to make determinations, to give 
approval, or to take other action in accordance with the Standards of 
Ethical Conduct, as is contemplated by 5 CFR 2635.102(b), defining 
``agency designee.''
    (d) An employee may obtain advice and guidance on questions of 
conflicts of interest from the Ethical Conduct Officer or the Associate 
Ethical Conduct Officer having appropriate jurisdiction. In order to 
avoid undue interference with established grievance and disciplinary 
procedures, advisory service under this subpart will not normally be 
available in an instance in which a grievance is pending or disciplinary 
action has been initiated.
    (e) An employee may request any ruling provided for by the Standards 
and Supplemental Regulations by submitting a request in writing to the 
Senior Counsel, Ethics, or, in the field, to the Chief Field Counsel or 
Deputy Chief Field Counsel, General Law.
    (f) An employee may appeal to the Ethical Conduct Officer from a 
ruling made by an agency designee concerning matters covered by the 
Standards and Supplemental Regulations within 30 days from the date of 
the ruling. The appeal must be in writing and must contain a full 
statement of the relevant facts. It should be addressed to the Ethical 
Conduct Officer, U.S. Postal Service, Washington, DC 20260, and a copy 
thereof should be sent to the official whose ruling is being appealed.

[60 FR 47244, Sept. 11, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 447.32  Post-employment activities.

    (a) Restrictions on the post-employment activities of persons who 
have been employed by the Postal Service are imposed by 18 U.S.C. 207. 
The Ethics Reform Act of 1989 includes amendments to 18 U.S.C. 207, 
which became effective January 1, 1991. Employees who terminated their 
employment prior to January 1, 1991, are subject to the restrictions 
imposed under 18 U.S.C. 207 in effect prior to that date, while all 
other employees are subject to the restrictions imposed under 18 U.S.C. 
207 as amended.
    (b) The Office of Government Ethics has issued regulations, 
contained in 5 CFR part 2637, that implement 18 U.S.C. 207 as in effect 
prior to January 1, 1991. Employees who terminated their employment with 
the Postal Service prior to January 1, 1991, may refer to 5 CFR part 
2637 for guidance concerning applicable post-employment restrictions, 
and further guidance may be obtained in accordance with Sec. 447.31 of 
this part.
    (c) Employees who terminate their postal employment on or after 
January 1, 1991, are subject to 18 U.S.C. 207 as amended. Guidance 
concerning post-employment restrictions applicable to such employees may 
be obtained in accordance with Sec. 447.31 of this part.

[60 FR 47244, Sept. 11, 1995]


<R04>
                     Subpart D--Political Activities


<R05>
Sec. 447.41   General.

    (a) Postal Service employees, except those mentioned in paragraph 
(b) of this section, are subject, at all times to restrictions on their 
participation in political activity (5 U.S.C. subchapter III of chapter 
73, and 18 U.S.C. 602, 603, and 607), and to the regulations issued by 
the Office of Personnel Management relating thereto.
    (b) Those Postal Service employees who are employed on an irregular 
or occasional basis; e.g., experts and consultants, substitute rural 
carriers, others on a per diem basis, and without compensation or when 
actually employed employees, are subject to the restrictions mentioned 
in paragraph (a) of this section only while in an active duty status and 
only for the entire 24 hours of any day of actual employment. 
Notwithstanding this paragraph, full-time employees in a leave status

[[Page 163]]

and part-time employees are fully subject to the restrictions of 
paragraph (a) of this section.

[39 FR 1990, Jan. 16, 1974, as amended at 48 FR 48231, Oct. 18, 1983. 
Redesignated at 60 FR 47245, Sept. 11, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 447.42   Additional prohibited political activities.

    (a) In addition to the restrictions on political activities 
mentioned in Sec. 447.51, an employee may not:
    (1) Display a political picture or sticker on property owned or 
leased by the Postal Service. He is not forbidden by this paragraph, 
however, from displaying a picture, including a personally autographed 
picture of a political figure in his office or place of work if it has 
no language in the nature of political campaigning;
    (2) Wear a political badge or button while in uniform or while on 
duty when that duty requires him to deal with the public or be in the 
view of the public;
    (3) Display a political picture or sticker on his private vehicle 
while that vehicle is being used for official postal purposes.

[39 FR 1990, Jan. 16, 1974. Redesignated at 60 FR 47245, Sept. 11, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 447.43  Investigation and enforcement.

    The Office of the Special Counsel and the Merit Systems Protection 
Board investigate and adjudicate allegations of political activity in 
violation of the regulations of the Office of Personnel Management by 
Postal Service employees. For jurisdiction in such a case, see 5 CFR 
734.102 and part 1201.

[60 FR 47245, Sept. 11, 1995]


<R04>
              Subpart E--Participation in Community Affairs


<R05>
Sec. 447.51   General.

    An employee is permitted to participate in community affairs to the 
extent consistent with the proper performance of his postal duties and 
with applicable laws and regulations. Nothing in this section shall 
prevent an employee from serving as an official of a religious or 
fraternal organization or of a civil nonpolitical organization which is 
supported by dues or contributions from its own members.

[39 FR 1990, Jan. 16, 1974. Redesignated at 60 FR 47245, Sept. 11, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 447.52   Holding of State or local office by Postal Service employees.

    (a) An employee may seek, accept, or hold a nonpartisan State or 
local office subject to the provisions of this Code and in particular 
this section. A ``nonpartisan'' office is one filled by a ``nonpartisan 
election'', which is an election at which none of the candidates are to 
be nominated or elected as representing a political party any of whose 
candidates for presidential elector received votes in the last preceding 
election at which presidential electors were selected.
    (b) An employee who wishes to seek, accept, or hold a nonpartisan 
State or local office is responsible for ascertaining:
    (1) Whether the office is ``nonpartisan'' within the definition in 
Sec. 447.62(a).
    (2) Whether State or local law permits a Postal Service employee to 
seek, accept, or hold the particular office.
    (3) Whether the duties of the office would result in a conflict with 
his Postal Service employment.
    (4) Whether the discharge of the duties of the office would 
interfere with the performance by the particular employee of his Postal 
Service duties in an acceptable manner or would interfere with the 
performance by other Postal Service employees of their respective duties 
in an acceptable manner.
    (c) An employee is encouraged to seek advice from his Associate 
Ethical Conduct Counselor prior to taking any action to seek, accept, or 
hold a State or local office. If, after the employee has entered upon 
the discharge of the duties of this non-postal office, his non-postal 
duties interfere with the proper discharge of postal duties, either by 
him or by other postal employees, the employee holding the non-postal 
office shall be advised by his superior to eliminate the interference, 
either by resignation from the non-postal office, or in such other 
manner as is appropriate under the circumstances. If

[[Page 164]]

the employee fails, refuses, or neglects to comply with the foregoing 
advice and the interference continues, he will be subject to 
disciplinary proceedings.
    (d) Employees, other than postmasters or acting postmasters in a 
salary level of EAS-25 or higher, may be granted permission to campaign 
for a full-time State or local nonpartisan office while on annual leave 
or on authorized leave without pay during the campaign when:
    (1) The criteria in paragraphs (b) (1) and (2) of this section are 
met, and
    (2) The Vice President, Area Operations, determines that the 
employee's postal responsibilities are being conducted in a satisfactory 
manner and that the absence of the employee during the campaign period 
will not disrupt the operation of the facility where he or she is 
employed.

    Note: Requests shall be submitted through the postmaster or other 
installation head to the Vice President, Area Operations. If the 
employee is elected to and takes such a full-time office, he or she may 
either be separated from the Postal Service or granted leave without 
pay.

    (e) A postmaster or acting postmaster in salary level EAS-25 or 
higher shall not be authorized to take annual leave or leave without pay 
for the purpose of campaigning for a full-time State or local 
nonpartisan office.

[39 FR 1990, Jan. 16, 1974, as amended at 48 FR 48231, Oct. 18, 1983. 
Redesignated and amended at 60 FR 47245, Sept. 11, 1995]


<R04>
            Subpart F--Bribery, Undue Influence, or Coercion


<R05>
Sec. 447.61   General.

    (a) An employee shall report immediately to the General Counsel, 
U.S. Postal Service, Washington, DC 20260:
    (1) Any instance in which a person either within or outside the 
Postal Service uses or attempts to use a bribe, undue influence, or 
coercion to induce or attempt to induce the employee to act or neglect 
to act in regard to his official responsibilities; and
    (2) Any information that causes him to believe that there has been a 
violation of a Federal criminal statute or any law or regulation 
directly or indirectly related to the responsibilities of the Postal 
Service. A copy of a report made under this paragraph shall also be sent 
by the employee to the Chief Postal Inspector, Washington, DC 20260. The 
report shall be sent in a sealed envelope clearly marked ``Limited 
Official Use--To Be Opened by Addressee Only''.

[39 FR 1990, Jan. 16, 1974. Redesignated at 60 FR 47245, Sept. 11, 1995]


<R03>
PART 491--GARNISHMENT OF SALARIES OF EMPLOYEES OF THE POSTAL SERVICE AND THE POSTAL RATE COMMISSION--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
491.1  Authorized Agent to receive service.
491.2  Manner of service.
491.3  Sufficient legal form.
491.4  Identification of employees.
491.5  Costs.
491.6  Response to process.
491.7  Release of information.
491.8  Execution of process.
491.9  Restrictions on garnishment.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5520a; 39 U.S.C. 401; E.O. 12897.

    Source: 59 FR 45625, Sept. 2, 1994, unless othewise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 491.1   Authorized Agent to receive service.

    Notwithstanding the designation, in Sec. 2.2 of this title, of the 
General Counsel as agent for the receipt of legal process against the 
Postal Service, the sole agent for service of garnishment process 
directed to the pay of Postal Service employees and employees of the 
Postal Rate Commission (``employees'') is the Manager, Payroll 
Processing Branch, 1 Federal Drive, Ft. Snelling, MN 55111-9650 
(``Authorized Agent''). The Authorized Agent shall have sole authority 
to receive service of legal process in the nature of garnishment 
(hereinafter sometimes referred to as ``process'') arising under the law 
of any state, territory, or possession, or the order of a court of 
competent jurisdiction of any state, territory, or possession (including 
any order for child support and alimony). No process shall be 
effectively served until it is received by the office of the Authorized 
Agent. No other employee shall have the authority to accept service of 
such process. Service of process

[[Page 165]]

in conformity with Rule 4(i) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure is 
not waived for any suit or action wherein the Postal Service, its 
officers, or employees are parties.


<R05>
Sec. 491.2   Manner of service.

    Service of process on the Authorized Agent may be made in person or 
by certified or registered mail, with return receipt requested, at the 
address of the Authorized Agent. Service may also be made on the 
Authorized Agent by means of any private delivery service pursuant to 
its authority for the private carriage of letters under an exception to 
the Private Express Statutes, 39 U.S.C. 601-606, provided that the 
private delivery organization issues a receipt bearing the name and 
address of both the addressee and sender, as well as the date of 
delivery and the signature of the receiving agent. No garnishment is 
effectively served until it is received by the Authorized Agent 
regardless of the chosen mode of delivery. Process addressed to, 
delivered to, or in any manner given to any employee, other than the 
Authorized Agent, may, at the sole discretion of the employee, be 
returned to the issuing court marked ``Not Effectively Served.'' A copy 
of or reference to these regulations may be included. Employees are not 
authorized to redirect or forward garnishment process to the Authorized 
Agent. In the event that the address of the Authorized Agent is changed, 
mail may be forwarded from his or her last published address to the new 
official address until such time as these regulations are amended to 
reflect the new address.


<R05>
Sec. 491.3   Sufficient legal form.

    No document purporting to garnish employee wages shall be deemed 
sufficient unless it can be determined from the face of the document 
that it is legal process in the nature of garnishment; that it is issued 
by a court of competent jurisdiction or an authorized official pursuant 
to an order of such a court or pursuant to state or local law, evidenced 
by a signature of the issuing person; and that it contains the name of 
the garnished party, with his or her social security number, orders the 
employing agency to withhold from pay a specific amount of money, 
specifically describes the judgment of debt or administrative action 
complete with statutory citation and contains specific advice as to 
where to send the funds withheld including the complete ZIP Code 
(ZIP+4). Documents deficient in any of these respects may be returned to 
the issuing court or authorized official inscribed ``Insufficient as to 
legal form.''


<R05>
Sec. 491.4  Identification of employees.

    Garnishments must be accompanied by sufficient information to permit 
prompt identification of the employee and the payments involved. 
Garnishment of an employee whose name and social security number are 
similar to but not identical with the name and social security number on 
the garnishment will not be processed. An exact match of both name and 
social security number is required in order to permit processing; 
otherwise, the garnishment will be returned marked ``Insufficient 
identifying information.'' Garnishments that are insufficient in regard 
to identifying information will not be held pending receipt of further 
information.


<R05>
Sec. 491.5   Costs.

    The Postal Service's administrative costs in executing the 
garnishment action shall be added to each garnishment and the costs 
recovered shall be retained as offsetting collections.


<R05>
Sec. 491.6   Response to process.

    Within 15 days after receipt of process that is sufficient for legal 
form and contains sufficient information to identify the employee, the 
Authorized Agent shall send written notice that garnishment process has 
been served, together with a copy thereof, to the affected employee at 
his or her duty station or last known address. The Authorized Agent 
shall respond, in writing, to the garnishment or interrogatories within 
30 days of receipt of process. The Authorized Agent may respond within a 
longer period of time as may be prescribed by applicable state Law. 
Neither the Authorized Agent nor any employee shall be required to 
respond in person to any garnishment served according to the provisions 
of 5

[[Page 166]]

U.S.C. 5520a and the regulations in this section.


<R05>
Sec. 491.7   Release of information.

    No employee whose duties include responding to interrogatories to 
garnishments shall release information in response to a garnishment 
until it is determined that sufficient information, as required in 
Sec. 491.4 above, has been received in writing as part of the 
garnishment legal process. The Authorized Agent may, at his or her sole 
discretion, accept or initiate telephone inquiries concerning 
garnishments. No other employee may release any information about 
employees except in conformity with the Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. 
552a, and the regulations in 39 CFR part 266, Privacy of Information.


<R05>
Sec. 491.8   Execution of process.

    All legal process in the nature of garnishment shall be date- and 
time-stamped by the Authorized Agent when received for the purpose of 
determining the order of receipt of process that is sufficient as to 
legal form and contains sufficient information for identification of the 
employee, the Authorized Agent's date- and time-stamp shall be 
conclusive evidence. Child support and alimony garnishments will be 
accorded priority over commercial garnishments under 5 U.S.C. 5520a as 
provided in 5 U.S.C. 5520a(h)(2). Garnishments shall be executed if the 
pay cycle is open for input or, if closed, will be held until the next 
cycle.


<R05>
Sec. 491.9  Restrictions on garnishment.

    Garnishments under this section shall be subject to the restrictions 
in 15 U.S.C. 1671-1677, including limits on the amounts that can be 
withheld from an employee's pay.

[[Page 167]]


<R03>
                      SUBCHAPTER G--POSTAGE METERS

<R05>


<R03>
PART 501--AUTHORIZATION TO MANUFACTURE AND DISTRIBUTE POSTAGE METERS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
501.1  Manufacturer authorization.
501.2  Manufacturer qualification.
501.3  Changes in ownership or control.
501.4  Burden of proof standard.
501.5  Suspension and revocation of authorization.
501.6  Specifications.
501.7  Test plans.
501.8  Submission of each model.
501.9  Security testing.
501.10  Meter approval.
501.11  Conditions for approval.
501.12  Suspension and revocation of approval.
501.13  Reporting.
501.14  Administrative sanction on reporting.
501.15  Materials and workmanship.
501.16  Breakdown and endurance testing.
501.17  Protection of printing dies and keys.
501.18  Destruction of meter stamps.
501.19  Inspection of new and rebuilt meters.
501.20  Keys and setting equipment.
501.21  Distribution facilities.
501.22  Distribution controls.
501.23  Administrative sanction.
501.24  Meter replacement.
501.25  Inspection of meters in use.
501.26  Meters not located.
501.27  Repair of internal mechanism.
501.28  Computerized remote postage meter resetting.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 552(a); 39 U.S.C. 101, 401, 403, 404, 410, 2601, 
2605; Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended (Pub. L. 95-452, as 
amended), 5 U.S.C. App. 3.

    Source: 60 FR 30726, June 9, 1995, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 501.1  Manufacturer authorization.

    Any person or concern seeking authorization to manufacture and 
distribute postage meters must submit a request to the Postal Service in 
person or in writing. Upon qualification and approval, the applicant is 
authorized in writing to manufacture meters and to lease them to persons 
licensed accordingly by the Postal Service. The Postal Service may 
specify the functional area charged with processing the application and 
administering its meter program.


<R05>
Sec. 501.2  Manufacturer qualification.

    Any concern wanting authorization to manufacture and/or lease 
postage meters for use by licensees under Domestic Mail Manual P030.1.2 
must:
    (a) Satisfy the Postal Service of its integrity and financial 
responsibility;
    (b) Obtain approval of at least one meter model incorporating all 
the features and safeguards specified in Sec. 501.6;
    (c) Have, or establish, and keep under its supervision and control 
adequate manufacturing facilities suitable to carry out the provisions 
of Secs. 501.15 through 501.20 to the satisfaction of the Postal Service 
(such facilities must be subject to unannounced inspection by 
representatives of the Postal Service); and
    (d) Have, or establish, and keep adequate facilities for the 
control, distribution, and maintenance of meters and their replacement 
when necessary.


<R05>
Sec. 501.3  Changes in ownership or control.

    Any person or concern wanting to acquire ownership or control of an 
authorized postage meter manufacturer must provide the Postal Service 
with satisfactory evidence of that person's or concern's integrity and 
financial responsibility.


<R05>
Sec. 501.4  Burden of proof standard.

    The burden of proof is on the Postal Service in adjudications of 
suspension and revocation under Secs. 501.5 and 501.12 and 
administrative sanctions under Secs. 501.14 and 501.23. Except as 
otherwise indicated in those sections, the standard of proof shall be 
the preponderance-of-evidence standard.


<R05>
Sec. 501.5  Suspension and revocation of authorization.

    (a) The Postal Service may suspend and/or revoke authorization to 
manufacture and/or distribute any or all of a manufacturer's postage 
meters if the manufacturer engages in any unlawful scheme or enterprise, 
fails to comply with any provision in this part 501, or fails to 
implement instructions issued in accordance with any final decision

[[Page 168]]

issued by the Postal Service within its authority over the meter 
program.
    (b) The decision to suspend or revoke a manufacturer's authorization 
shall be based on the nature and circumstances of the violation (whether 
the violation was willful, whether the manufacturer voluntarily admitted 
to the violation, whether the manufacturer cooperated with the Postal 
Service, whether the manufacturer implemented successful remedial 
measures) and on the manufacturer's performance history. Before 
determining whether a manufacturer's authorization to manufacture and/or 
distribute meters should be revoked, the procedures in paragraph (c) of 
this section shall be followed.
    (c) Suspension in all cases shall be as follows:
    (1) Upon determination by the Postal Service that a manufacturer is 
in violation of the provisions in this part 501, the Postal Service 
shall issue a written notice of proposed suspension citing deficiencies 
for which suspension of authorization to manufacture and/or distribute a 
specific meter or class of meters may be imposed under paragraph (c)(2) 
of this section. Except in cases of willful violation, the manufacturer 
shall be given an opportunity to correct deficiencies and achieve 
compliance with all requirements within a time limit corresponding to 
the potential risk to postal revenue.
    (2) In cases of willful violation, or if the Postal Service 
determines that the manufacturer has failed to correct cited 
deficiencies within the specified time limit, the Postal Service shall 
issue a written notice setting forth the facts and reasons for the 
decision to suspend and the effective date if a written defense is not 
presented as provided in paragraph (d) of this section.
    (3) If, upon consideration of the defense as provided in paragraph 
(e) of this section, the Postal Service deems that the suspension is 
warranted, the suspension shall remain in effect for up to 90 days 
unless withdrawn by the Postal Service, as provided in paragraph 
(c)(4)(iii) of this section.
    (4) At the end of the 90-day suspension, the Postal Service may:
    (i) Extend the suspension in order to allow more time for 
investigation or to allow the manufacturer to correct the problem;
    (ii) Make a determination to revoke authorization to manufacture 
and/or distribute the manufacturer's meters in part or in whole; or
    (iii) Withdraw the suspension based on identification and 
implementation of a satisfactory solution to the problem. Manufacturer 
suspensions may be withdrawn  before the end of the 90-day period if the 
Postal Service determines that the manufacturer's solution and 
implementation are satisfactory.
    (d) The manufacturer may present the Postal Service with a written 
defense to any suspension or revocation determination within 30 calendar 
days of receiving the written notice (unless a shorter period is deemed 
necessary). The defense must include all supporting evidence and state 
with specificity the reasons for which the order should not be imposed.
    (e) After receipt and consideration of the defense, the Postal 
Service shall advise the manufacturer of the decision and the facts and 
reasons for it. The decision shall be effective on receipt unless it 
provides otherwise. The decision shall also advise the manufacturer that 
it may appeal that determination within 30 calendar days of receiving 
written notice (unless a shorter time frame is deemed necessary), as 
specified therein. The appeal must include all supporting evidence and 
state with specificity the reasons the manufacturer believes that the 
decision is erroneous.
    (f) An order or final decision under this section does not preclude 
any other criminal or civil statutory, common law, or administrative 
remedy that is available by law to the Postal Service, the United 
States, or any other person or concern.


<R05>
Sec. 501.6  Specifications.

    Postage meters must incorporate all the following features and 
safeguards:
    (a) A postage meter is the postage printing die and postage 
registering mechanism of a mailing machine. It may be integral with the 
mailing machine or separable. In either case, the licensee must be able 
to take the meter to the post office for setting or examination.

[[Page 169]]

    (b) A meter may be capable of printing one denomination of postage 
and registering the number of such impressions made (single 
denomination), or it may be capable of printing varying denominations 
and registering either multiples of the smallest unit printed 
(multidenomination) or the currency value of the impressions made 
(omnidenomination). The printing die or dies, counters, and 
counteractuating mechanism must be inseparable from the meter, except by 
the manufacturer.
    (c) In each meter, there must be two accurate and dependable 
counting devices: one ascending and registering the total imprinted, the 
other descending and registering the unused postage balance. The 
descending register must actuate a locking mechanism that prevents 
further operation of the meter after the register descends to zero or an 
amount less than the largest denomination printable in one operation. In 
electronic meters, the locking device must prevent printing if the 
amount to be printed reduces the descending register to less than zero. 
The construction of the descending register must allow the post office 
to set any amount of postage or number of impressions within its 
capacity, prepaid by the licensee.
    (d) The entire meter must be encased in a substantial housing to 
which unauthorized access cannot be gained without creating obvious 
damage. The descending register must be accessible to the post office by 
a door equipped with a suitable lock and with provision for a post 
office seal. The requirement that accessibility to the descending 
register be restricted does not apply to Computerized Remote Postage 
Meter Resetting System electronic meters that have no access to the 
descending register of the meter. Descending registers on this type of 
meter are reset electronically by coded input only. The ascending 
register and all other components must be so shielded as not to be 
accessible even when the door is open. The readings of both registers 
must be easily obtainable at any time between operations, by visibility 
through closed windows, by imprint on tape or card, or by a combination 
of the two methods. The construction of the housing must make it 
impossible to alter the readings of the ascending register except by 
normal operation or impossible to gain access to the internal 
components, except for setting the descending register under 
Sec. 501.20(c), without mutilation.
    (e) The printing die must either conform in design to one already in 
use or be approved by the Postal Service. The die must include the 
serial number of the meter and identification of the manufacturer, and 
the die must be so constructed or shielded that it is not practically 
possible without proper registration in the ascending and descending 
register to obtain imprints fraudulently. The die must be attached to 
the meter in a manner (such as with breakoff screws) that it is not 
practicable to remove or replace the die fraudulently.
    (f) The meter die must include a postmark to print the name of the 
city and state from which mail is dispatched and the date of mailing, 
except as specified by the Postal Service. Information that must appear 
in the meter postmark and the location of that postmark must be as 
specified by the Postal Service.
    (g) A meter may be designed to print a meter slogan or ad plate to 
the left of, and next to, the postmark. The size and position of a meter 
slogan or ad plate must not interfere with or obscure the meter stamp or 
postmark, and it must be possible to install the plate easily without 
exposing the meter stamp die. Plates must be made of suitable, durable 
material that does not soften or disintegrate while in use. Plates must 
be well-fitted and so securely fastened to the printing mechanism that 
they do not become loose or detached or otherwise interfere with proper 
operation of a meter.
    (h) The entire meter must be of sufficiently solid, substantial, and 
dependable construction that protects the Postal Service amply against 
loss of revenue from fraud, manipulation, misoperation, or breakdown.
    (i) In addition to the features and safeguards above, electronic 
meters must:
    (1) Have either nonvolatile ascending and descending registers or a 
solid-state memory that stores the data for the ascending and descending 
registers.

[[Page 170]]

Solid-state memories that rely on applied voltage for memory retention 
must be powered by batteries with a minimum support life of 5 years from 
the date of battery renewal with no external power applied and with 
sufficient redundancy to be self-checking.
    (2) Be able to display the amounts in both the ascending and the 
descending registers (not necessarily at the same time).
    (3) Be able to display, free from accidental changes, the next 
amount of postage to be printed.
    (4) Be resettable by Postal Service employees, preferably without 
customized equipment.
    (5) Contain a fault-detection device for computational security that 
automatically locks out the meter and prevents printing of additional 
postage in the event of malfunction.
    (6) Meet Postal Service test specifications in United States Postal 
Service Specification, Postage Meters, Electronic, Postal Service-M-942 
(RDC). Persons wanting to manufacture electronic meters may obtain a 
copy of this Postal Service test specification from Postal Service 
Headquarters.
    (j) Auxiliary equipment required for the operation of the meters 
must be part of the final production models submitted for Postal Service 
approval. Failure of the auxiliary equipment, which could cause 
malfunction in meter operation, is considered the same as a meter 
failure.


<R05>
Sec. 501.7  Test plans.

    To receive Postal Service approval, a postage meter must be tested. 
Manufacturers of electronic meters must submit a detailed test plan to 
the Postal Service for approval at least 60 days before conducting the 
tests. The test plan must include tests that, if passed by a meter, 
prove compliance by the meter with all postal requirements. The test 
plan must list the parameters to be tested, test equipment, procedures, 
test sample sizes, and test data formats. Also, the plan must include 
detailed descriptions, specifications, design drawings, schematic 
diagrams, and explanations of the purposes of all special test equipment 
and nonstandard or noncommercial instrumentation.


<R05>
Sec. 501.8  Submission of each model.

    Each meter model proposed for manufacture must be approved by the 
Postal Service after testing at the manufacturer's expense. A 
preliminary working model that meets the specifications in Sec. 501.6 
may be submitted for tentative approval. No meter of any model may be 
distributed or used for postage payment until a complete unit made to 
production drawings and specifications is submitted, tested, and 
approved, unless authorized for preliminary field testing.


<R05>
Sec. 501.9  Security testing.

    The Postal Service reserves the right to require or conduct 
additional examination and testing at any time, without cause, of any 
meter submitted to the Postal Service for approval or approved by the 
Postal Service for manufacture and distribution.


<R05>
Sec. 501.10  Meter approval.

    As provided in Sec. 501.13, the manufacturer has a duty to report 
security weaknesses to the Postal Service to ensure that each meter 
model and every meter in service protects the Postal Service against 
loss of revenue at all times. A grant of approval of a model does not 
constitute an irrevocable determination that the Postal Service is 
satisfied with the revenue-protection capabilities of the model. After 
approval is granted to manufacture and distribute a meter, no change 
affecting the basic features or safeguards of a meter may be made except 
as authorized or ordered by the Postal Service in writing.


<R05>
Sec. 501.11  Conditions for approval.

    (a) The Postal Service may require, and reserves future rights to 
require, that production models of approved meters be deposited with the 
Postal Service.
    (b) The manufacturer must provide copies of resetting and inspection 
media to each licensing post office before distribution. The contents of 
the media must explain how the meter is reset and describe any special 
or unique features of the meter. The manufacturer must also provide a 
training video for any new metering product

[[Page 171]]

that includes an explanation of how the device is reset as well as 
recommended methods for detecting evidence of tampering.
    (c) As a condition of approval, the manufacturer has a continuing 
obligation to provide the Postal Service with copies of service manuals 
and updates to setting instructions. The manufacturer must also promptly 
provide Retail Systems and Equipment, Postal Service Headquarters, with 
any additional documentation on request.
    (d) On request by the Postal Service, additional meters must be 
submitted to the Postal Service for testing, at the expense of the 
manufacturer.


<R05>
Sec. 501.12  Suspension and revocation of approval.

    (a) The Postal Service may suspend meter approval under Sec. 501.10 
if the Postal Service has probable cause to believe that a 
manufacturer's meter or class of meters poses an unreasonable risk to 
postal revenue. Suspension of approval to manufacture or distribute a 
meter or class of meters in whole or in part shall be based on the 
potential risk to postal revenue. Before determining whether approval of 
a meter or class of meters should be revoked, the procedures in 
paragraph (b) of this section shall be followed.
    (b) Suspension in all cases shall be as follows:
    (1) Upon determination by the Postal Service that a meter poses an 
unreasonable risk to postal revenue, the Postal Service shall issue a 
written notice of proposed suspension citing deficiencies for which 
suspension may be imposed under paragraph (b)(2) of this section. The 
manufacturer shall be given an opportunity to correct deficiencies and 
achieve compliance with all requirements within a time limit 
corresponding to the potential risk to postal revenue.
    (2) If the Postal Service determines that the manufacturer has 
failed to correct cited deficiencies within the specified time limit, 
the Postal Service shall issue a written notice setting forth the facts 
and reasons for the decision to suspend and the effective date if a 
written defense is not presented as provided in paragraph (c) of this 
section.
    (3) If, upon consideration of the defense as provided in paragraph 
(d) of this section, the Postal Service deems that the suspension is 
warranted, the suspension shall remain in effect for up to 90 days 
unless withdrawn by the Postal Service, as provided in paragraph 
(b)(4)(iii) of this section.
    (4) At the end of the 90-day suspension, the Postal Service may:
    (i) Extend the suspension in order to allow more time for 
investigation or to allow the manufacturer to correct the problem;
    (ii) Make a determination to revoke the approval of the 
manufacturer's meter or class of meters; or
    (iii) Withdraw the suspension based on identification and 
implementation of a satisfactory solution to the problem. Manufacturer 
suspensions may be withdrawn before the end of the 90-day period if the 
Postal Service determines that the manufacturer's solution and 
implementation are satisfactory.
    (c) The manufacturer may present the Postal Service with a written 
defense to any suspension or revocation determination within 30 calendar 
days of receiving the written notice (unless a shorter period is deemed 
necessary). The defense must include all supporting evidence and state 
with specificity the reasons for which the order should not be imposed.
    (d) After receipt and consideration of the written defense, the 
Postal Service shall advise the manufacturer of the decision and the 
facts and reasons for it. The decision shall be effective on receipt 
unless it provides otherwise. The decision shall also advise the 
manufacturer that it may appeal that determination within 30 calendar 
days of receiving written notice (unless a shorter period is deemed 
necessary), as specified therein. The appeal must include all supporting 
evidence and state with specificity the reasons that the manufacturer 
believes that the decision is erroneous.
    (e) An order or final decision under this section does not preclude 
any other criminal or civil statutory, common law, or administrative 
remedy that is available by law to the Postal Service, the United 
States, or any other person or concern.

[[Page 172]]


<R05>
Sec. 501.13  Reporting.

    (a) For purposes of this section, ``manufacturer'' refers to the 
authorized postage meter manufacturer in Sec. 501.1 and its foreign 
affiliates, subsidiaries, assigns, dealers, independent dealers, 
employees, and parent corporations.
    (b) Each authorized meter manufacturer in Sec. 501.1 must submit a 
preliminary report to notify the Postal Service promptly (in no event 
more than 21 calendar days of discovery or 21 calendar days from June 
30, 1995) of the following:
    (1) All findings or results of any testing known to the manufacturer 
concerning the security or revenue protection features, capabilities, or 
failings of any meters sold, leased, or distributed by the manufacturer 
that have been approved for sale, lease, or distribution by the Postal 
Service or any foreign postal administration; or have been submitted for 
approval by the manufacturer to the Postal Service or other foreign 
postal administration(s).
    (2) All potential security weaknesses or methods of meter tampering 
of the meters that the manufacturer distributes of which the 
manufacturer knows or should know, and the meter or model subject to 
each method. These potential security weaknesses include but are not 
limited to suspected equipment defects, suspected abuse by a meter 
licensee or manufacturer employee, suspected security breaches of the 
Computerized Remote Postage Meter Resetting System, occurrences outside 
normal performance, or any repeatable deviation from normal meter 
performance (within the same model family and/or by the same licensee).
    (c) Within 45 days of the preliminary notification of the Postal 
Service under Sec. 501.13(b), the manufacturer must submit a written 
report to the Postal Service. The report must include the circumstances, 
proposed investigative procedure, and the anticipated completion date of 
the investigation. The manufacturer must also provide periodic status 
reports to the Postal Service during subsequent investigation and, on 
completion, must submit a summary of the investigative findings.
    (d) The manufacturer must establish and adhere to timely and 
efficient procedures for internal reporting of potential security 
weaknesses. The manufacturer is required to submit a copy of internal 
reporting procedures and instructions to the Postal Service for review.


<R05>
Sec. 501.14  Administrative sanction on reporting.

    (a) Notwithstanding any act, admission, or omission by the Postal 
Service before June 30, 1995, an authorized postage meter manufacturer 
may be subject to an administrative sanction for failing to comply with 
Sec. 501.13.
    (b) The Postal Service shall determine all costs and revenue losses 
measured from the date that the manufacturer knew, or should have known, 
of a potential security weakness, including, but not limited to, 
administrative and investigative costs and documented revenue losses 
that result from any meter for which the manufacturer failed to comply 
with any provision in Sec. 501.13. The Postal Service shall recover any 
and all such costs and losses (net of any amount collected by the Postal 
Service from the licensees or meter users) with interest by issuing a 
written notice to the manufacturer setting forth the facts and reasons 
on which the determination to impose the sanction is based. The notice 
shall advise the manufacturer of the date that the action takes effect 
if a written defense is not presented within 30 calendar days of receipt 
of the notice.
    (c) The manufacturer may present the Postal Service with a written 
defense to the proposed action within 30 calendar days of receipt. The 
defense must include all supporting evidence and state with specificity 
the reasons for which the sanction should not be imposed.
    (d) After receipt and consideration of the defense, the Postal 
Service shall advise the manufacturer of the decision and the facts and 
reasons for it; the decision shall be effective on receipt unless it 
provides otherwise. The decision shall also advise the manufacturer that 
it may, within 30 calendar days of receiving written notice, appeal that 
determination as specified therein.

[[Page 173]]

    (e) The manufacturer may submit a written appeal to the Postal 
Service within 30 calendar days of receipt of the decision. The appeal 
must include all supporting evidence and state with specificity the 
reasons that the manufacturer believes that the administrative sanction 
was erroneously imposed. The submission of an appeal stays the 
effectiveness of the sanction.
    (f) The imposition of an administrative sanction under this section 
does not preclude any other criminal or civil statutory, common law, or 
administrative remedy that is available by law to the Postal Service, 
the United States, or any other person or concern.


<R05>
Sec. 501.15  Materials and workmanship.

    All meters must adhere to the quality in materials and workmanship 
of the approved production model and must be manufactured with suitable 
jigs, dies, tools, etc., to ensure proper maintenance and 
interchangeability of parts.


<R05>
Sec. 501.16  Breakdown and endurance testing.

    Each meter model proposed for manufacturing must pass without error 
or breakdown the following described printing cycle endurance test, 
which includes operation of the printing mechanism with proper 
registration of the selected postage value in both the ascending and 
descending registers. At reasonably frequent intervals, the manufacturer 
must take meters at random from production and subject them to breakdown 
tests to make certain that quality and performance standards are 
maintained.
    (a) For meters that operate at 100 or more printing cycles per 
minute--4 million cycles. For meters that operate at less than 100 
printing cycles per minute (and cannot be used interchangeably on power-
base machines that operate at 100 or more printing cycles per minute)--2 
million cycles.
    (b) For multidenomination and omnidenomination meters, postage value 
selection elements must be tested for one-half million operations. A 
complete operation includes selection of a value and return to zero.
    (c) Balance register lockout operation must be done at the start of, 
at intervals during, and after the printing cycle test.


<R05>
Sec. 501.17  Protection of printing dies and keys.

    During the process of fabricating parts and assembling postage 
meters, the manufacturer must exercise due care to prevent loss or theft 
of keys or of serially numbered postage-printing dies or component parts 
(such as denomination-printing dies, or auxiliary power supply and 
meter-setting equipment for electronic meters) that might be used in 
some manner to defraud the Postal Service of revenue. All serially 
numbered printing dies produced should be accounted for by assembly into 
meters or by evidence of mutilation or destruction. Postage printing 
dies removed from meters and not suitable for reassembly must also be 
mutilated so that the dies cannot be used or they must be completely 
destroyed.


<R05>
Sec. 501.18  Destruction of meter stamps.

    All meter stamps printed in the process of testing dies or meters 
must be collected and destroyed daily.


<R05>
Sec. 501.19  Inspection of new and rebuilt meters.

    All new and rebuilt meters must be inspected carefully before 
leaving the manufacturer's meter service station.


<R05>
Sec. 501.20  Keys and setting equipment.

    The meter manufacturer must furnish keys and other essential 
equipment for setting the meters to all post offices under whose 
jurisdiction its meters are licensed for use. These items must be 
protected and must not be furnished to persons not authorized by the 
Postal Service to possess them. The Postal Service shall maintain 
control over the procurement, manufacture, and distribution of meter 
security seals. Manufacturers must reimburse the Postal Service promptly 
for the cost of the seals. All costs associated with meter security 
seals are apportioned twice annually to the meter manufacturers by the 
installed base of each manufacturer.


<R05>
Sec. 501.21  Distribution facilities.

    Authorized manufacturers must keep adequate facilities for and 
records of

[[Page 174]]

the distribution, control, and maintenance of postage meters. All such 
facilities and records are subject to inspection by Postal Service 
representatives.


<R05>
Sec. 501.22  Distribution controls.

    Each authorized postage meter manufacturer must do the following:
    (a) Hold title permanently to all meters of its manufacture except 
those purchased by the Postal Service.
    (b) On behalf of applicants, transmit electronically copies of 
completed PS Forms 3601-A, Application for a License to Lease and Use 
Postage Meters, to the designated Postal Service central processing 
facility.
    (c) Lease meters only to parties that have valid licenses issued by 
the Postal Service.
    (d) Supply only those meter slogan or ad plates that meet the Postal 
Service requirements for suitable quality and content.
    (e) (1) Have all meters set, sealed (if applicable), and checked 
into service by the appropriate Postal Service representative before 
delivering them to licensees. Meters must be checked into service at the 
licensing post office, unless the meter is serviced under the on-site 
meter-setting program.
    (2) The meter manufacturer must present the meter and a completed PS 
Form 3601-C, Postage Meter Installation, Withdrawal, or Replacement, to 
the appropriate Postal Service representative when checking a meter into 
service.
    (3) A meter should show a zero in the descending register before 
being checked into service. If a zero is not shown, the initial payment 
must include the residual amount the locked-out meter could not imprint.
    (f) Notify Computerized Remote Postage Meter Resetting System 
licensees of the dates on which meter examinations are due, and notify 
the licensing post offices of CMRS meters that have not been reset 
during the previous 3 months and/or are due for an annual examination. 
Resetting transactions must not be completed by the manufacturer if the 
meters are not taken to the post office for examination by the due date. 
Licensees who do not bring in their meters after the initial 
manufacturer notification must be approached again within 15 days, 
preferably by personal contact. If a response is not received within 
another 15 days, the Postal Service shall notify the licensee that the 
meter is to be removed from service and the meter license revoked, 
following the procedures for revocation specified by regulation. The 
Postal Service shall notify the manufacturer to remove the meter from 
the licensee's location and present it to the licensing post office to 
be checked out of service within 15 days.
    (g) Present meters to the licensing post office to be checked out of 
service if the licensee no longer wants the meter or if the meter is to 
be removed from service for any other reason. Take the meter to the 
licensing post office for withdrawal, with a completed PS Form 3601-C, 
Postage Meter Installation, Withdrawal, or Replacement, and copy of the 
applicable PS Form 3602-A, Record of Meter Register Readings, or 
equivalent.
    (h) Retrieve any misregistering, faulty, or defective meter and 
present it to the licensing post office to have the meter checked out of 
service within 3 business days of being notified by the licensee of the 
defect. After examining a meter withdrawn for apparent faulty operation 
affecting registration, the manufacturer must furnish a report 
explaining the malfunction to the licensing post office. That report 
must include all applicable meter documentation and a recommendation for 
the appropriate postage adjustment, if applicable, as follows:
    (1) Mechanical meters. The manufacturer's postage adjustment 
recommendation for a misregistering mechanical meter must be accompanied 
by a refund request; a copy of the licensee's PS Form 3610, Record of 
Postage Meter Settings, and PS Form 3602-A, Record of Meter Register 
Readings, or equivalent, and the manufacturer's analysis of the 
licensee's recent mailing history supporting the recommended postage 
adjustment.
    (2) Electronic meters. The manufacturer's postage adjustment 
recommendation for a misregistering electronic meter must be accompanied 
by a manufacturer-generated summary report of

[[Page 175]]

the appropriate redundant electronic register memory readouts for the 
meter, clearly indicating the register readings; a letter of instruction 
explaining the summary report; a copy of the licensee's PS Form 3610, PS 
Form 3602-A, if maintained, and applicable system-generated register 
documentation (if maintained in lieu of PS Form 3602-A); and an 
explanation of the meter malfunction that resulted in inaccurate 
registration, if determined. If a summary report of the appropriate 
redundant electronic register memory readouts cannot be retrieved, the 
manufacturer's recommendation must be accompanied by a refund request; a 
copy of the licensee's PS Form 3610, PS Form 3602-A, and applicable 
system-generated register documentation (if the PS Form 3602-A is not 
maintained); and the manufacturer's analysis of the licensee's recent 
mailing history supporting the recommended postage adjustment.
    (i) Report promptly the loss or theft of any meter or the recovery 
of any lost or stolen meter. The manufacturer must provide notification 
by the Postal Service with completing a standardized lost and stolen 
meter incident report notifying within 30 calendar days of the 
manufacturer's determination of a meter loss, theft, or recovery. The 
manufacturer must complete all preliminary location activities specified 
in Sec. 501.26 before submitting this report to the Postal Service.
    (j) Provide the designated Postal Service Information Systems 
Service Center (ISSC) with a compatible computer magnetic tape, computer 
diskette, or electronic transmission, listing all licensee meters in 
service, at the close of business each postal quarter. Include in each 
file record the meter serial number, model number, the user's name and 
address, the date that the meter was placed in service, and the ZIP Code 
or finance number of the licensing post office. Manufacturers are 
responsible for reconciling differences and keeping accurate records. 
This reporting includes reconciliation of differences with licensing 
post offices by the manufacturer's branches or dealers, which results 
from meters that are not in Postal Service or manufacturer records.
    (k) Keep at manufacturer's headquarters a complete record by serial 
number of all meters manufactured, showing all movements of each from 
the time that the meter is produced until it is scrapped, and the 
reading of the ascending register each time the meter is checked into or 
out of service through a post office. These records must be available 
for inspection by Postal Service officials at any time during business 
hours. These records must be destroyed 3 years after the meter is 
scrapped.
    (l) Cancel a lease agreement with any lessee whose meter license is 
revoked by the Postal Service, remove the meter within 15 calendar days, 
and have the meter checked out of service.
    (m) Promptly remove from service any meter that the Postal Service 
indicates should be removed from service. When a meter license is 
canceled, all meters in use by the licensee must be removed from 
service.
    (n) Keep a permanent record by serial number of all meter keys 
issued to postmasters, as well as those sections of the manufacturer's 
establishment in which their use of the keys is essential, preferably in 
the form of signed receipt cards. The record must include the date, 
location, and details of any loss, theft, or recovery of such keys.
    (o) Examine each meter withdrawn from service for failure to record 
its operations correctly and accurately, and report to the Postal 
Service the mechanical condition or fault that caused the failure.
    (p) Provide monthly the designated ISSC with a compatible computer 
tape of lost or stolen meters. The file is due on the first of each 
month (for the preceding month's activity).
    (q) Take reasonable precautions in the transportation and storage of 
meters to prevent use by unauthorized individuals. Manufacturers must 
ship all meters by Postal Service registered mail unless given written 
permission by the Postal Service to use another carrier. The 
manufacturer must demonstrate that the alternative delivery carrier 
employs security procedures equivalent to those for registered mail.
    (r) Affix to all meters both a cautionary label providing the meter 
user with basic reminders on leasing, meter

[[Page 176]]

movement, and misuse and a barcoded label containing a barcoded 
representation of the meter serial number.
    (1) The cautionary label must be placed on all meters in a 
conspicuous and highly visible location. Words printed in capital 
letters should be emphasized, preferably printed in red. The minimum 
width of the label should be 3.25 inches, and the minimum height should 
be 1.75 inches. The label should read as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                   RENTED POSTAGE MEMBER--NOT FOR SALE

                   PROPERTY OF [NAME OF MANUFACTURER]

Use of this meter is permissible only under U.S. Postal Service license. 
          Call [Name of Manufacturer] at (800) ###-#### to relocate/
          return this meter.

             WARNING! METER TAMPERING IS A FEDERAL OFFENSE.

                     IF YOU SUSPECT METER TAMPERING,

       CALL POSTAL INSPECTORS AT 1-800-654-8896 OR (202) 484-5480.

REWARD UP TO $50,000 for information leading to the conviction of any 
          person who misuses postage meters resulting in the Postal 
          Service not receiving correct postage payments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
    (2) The barcode label must be placed near the stamped serial number 
and must meet these specifications: Code 3 of 9, ten digits long, with 
the first two digits being the manufacturer code (01--Ascom Hasler, 02--
Pitney Bowes, 03--Francotyp-Postalia, 04--Friden Neopost) and the next 
eight digits being the meter serial number, zero-filled, right-
justified. Additional barcode digits may be used for manufacturer 
purposes if the Postal Service is notified of the information to be 
encoded thereby.
    (3) Exceptions to the formatting of required labeling are determined 
on a case-by-case basis. Any deviation from standardized meter labeling 
requirements must be approved in writing by the Postal Service.


<R05>
Sec. 501.23  Administrative sanction.

    (a) Meter for purposes of this section means any postage meter 
manufactured by an authorized postage meter manufacturer under 
Sec. 501.1 that is not owned or leased by the Postal Service.
    (b) An authorized manufacturer that, without just cause, fails to 
conduct or perform adequately any of the controls in Sec. 501.22, to 
follow standardized lost and stolen meter incident reporting in 
Sec. 501.26, or to conduct any of the inspections required by 
Sec. 501.25 in a timely fashion is subject to an administrative sanction 
based on the investigative and administrative costs and documented 
revenue losses (net of any amount collected by the Postal Service from 
the licensee or meter user) with interest per occurrence measured from 
the date on which the cost and/or loss occurred, as determined by the 
Postal Service. Sanctions shall be based on the costs and revenue losses 
that result from the manufacturer's failure to comply with these 
requirements.
    (c) The Postal Service may impose an administrative sanction under 
this section by issuing a written notice to the manufacturer setting 
forth the facts and reasons on which the determination to impose the 
sanction is based. The Postal Service shall determine all costs and 
losses. The notice shall advise the manufacturer of the date that the 
action shall take effect if a written defense is not presented within 30 
calendar days of receipt of the notice.
    (d) The manufacturer may present to the Postal Service a written 
defense to the proposed action within 30 calendar days of receipt of the 
notice. The defense must include all supporting evidence and state with 
specificity the reasons for which the sanction should not be imposed.
    (e) After receipt and consideration of the written defense, the 
Postal Service shall advise the manufacturer of the decision and the 
facts and reasons for it. The decision shall be effective on receipt 
unless it provides otherwise.
    (f) The manufacturer may submit a written appeal of the decision 
within 30 calendar days of receiving the decision, addressed to the 
manager of Retail and Customer Service, Postal Service Headquarters. The 
appeal must include all supporting evidence and state with specificity 
the reasons that the manufacturer believes that the administrative 
sanction was erroneously imposed. The submission of an appeal stays the 
effectiveness of the sanction.

[[Page 177]]

    (g) The imposition of an administrative sanction under this section 
does not preclude any other criminal or civil statutory, common law, or 
administrative remedy that is available by law to the Postal Service, 
the United States, or any other person or concern.


<R05>
Sec. 501.24  Meter replacement.

    The manufacturer must keep its postage meters in proper operating 
condition for licensees by replacing them when necessary or desirable to 
prevent mechanical breakdown.


<R05>
Sec. 501.25  Inspection of meters in use.

    (a) The manufacturer must have all its meters in service with 
licensees inspected according to the following schedule. A high-volume 
mailer is defined as one who has annual metered postage in excess of 
$12,000.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09JN95.008


    (b) Manufacturer inspections must be sufficiently thorough to 
determine that each meter is clean, in proper operating condition, and 
recording its operations correctly and accurately. The manufacturers 
must:
    (1) Compare the meter serial number on the meter with the serial 
number on the source document (manufacturer's records).
    (2) Record the ascending and descending register readings and 
calculate the total readings. Record the locking-seal identification 
number.
    (3) Obtain the licensee's PS Form 3602-A, Record of Meter Register 
Readings, or equivalent, and a copy of the most recent PS Form 3603, 
Receipt for Postage Meter Setting, and verify the control total after 
the last setting with the control total calculated during the proof-of-
register procedure.
    (4) Verify the accuracy of postage selection, denomination indicator 
wheels or electronic display, and denomination printing wheels following 
the proof of registers by printing a .00 meter stamp and then comparing 
the register readings with the recorded register readings.
    (5) Check to determine that the post office locking seal is in place 
and properly sealed and that the seal wire is properly wound and tightly 
gripped by the seal-locking mechanism, and tightly pulled up to the lock 
cover or post. Ensure that the locking-seal identification number 
matches the seal number recorded at the time of the last meter 
resetting.
    (6) Check to determine that the lock cover properly protects the 
lock and has not been loosened, bent, or tampered with.
    (7) Complete the following, as applicable to the specific meter 
model:
    (i) Check to ensure that the meter fits properly on the meter base.
    (ii) Check all breakoff screws to determine that no screw is missing 
or loose or shows signs of removal.
    (iii) Operate the dater and meter ad selector dials to test the 
dater, postmark die, and meter ad plate.
    (iv) Check the alignment and condition of engraving on the 
denomination printing wheels, when visible.
    (v) Check the descending register door for damage, pry marks, or 
scarring. Make certain that the door cannot be opened without unlocking 
it.
    (vi) Examine the meter drum for damage, pry marks, or scarring.

[[Page 178]]

    (vii) Examine the meter cover for pry marks or scarring near the 
post office lock or breakoff screws, any drilled holes, or any signs of 
attempted entry into the internal mechanism of the meter.
    (viii) Examine the meter stamp die for excessive wear, damage, 
breakage, or scars from prying, and the postage die retaining screws for 
signs of wear to ensure that none is missing or shows signs of removal.
    (ix) Check the register, counter, and display windows for breakage 
or cloudiness.
    (x) Obtain the signature of the licensee to show that a meter 
inspection has taken place.
    (8) Report immediately to the licensee's licensing postmaster any 
irregularity in the operation of the meter or sign of improper use, and 
take steps to replace or remove the meter.


<R05>
Sec. 501.26  Meters not located.

    Upon learning that one or more of its postage meters in service 
cannot be located, the manufacturer must undertake reasonable efforts to 
locate the meters by following a series of Postal Service-specified 
actions designed to locate the meters. If these efforts are unsuccessful 
and a meter is determined to be lost or stolen, the manufacturer must 
notify the Postal Service within 30 days by submitting a Lost and Stolen 
Meter Incident Report.
    (a) If a licensee cannot be located, the manufacturer must, at a 
minimum, complete the following actions:
    (1) Call the licensee's last known telephone number.
    (2) Call directory assistance for the licensee's new telephone 
number.
    (3) Contact the licensee's local post office for current change of 
address information.
    (4) Contact the local post office for a copy of the applicable PS 
Form 3610 and PS Form 3601-C. Verify the location of the meter or 
licensee currently maintained in those meter records.
    (5) Contact the rental agency responsible for the property where the 
licensee was located, if applicable.
    (6) Visit the licensee's last known address to see whether the 
building superintendent or a neighbor knows the meter licensee's new 
address.
    (7) Check the centralized meter inspection file for change of 
address notation.
    (8) Mail a certified letter with return receipt to the licensee at 
the last known address with the notation ``Forwarding and Address 
Correction Requested.''
    (9) If new address information is obtained during these steps, any 
scheduled meter inspections must be completed promptly.
    (b) If a meter is reported to be lost or stolen by the licensee, the 
manufacturer must, at a minimum, complete the following actions:
    (1) Ensure that the meter licensee has filed a police report and 
that copies have been provided to the appropriate Inspection Service 
Contraband Postage Identification Program (CPIP) specialist.
    (2) Withhold issuance of a replacement meter until the missing meter 
has been properly reported to the police and to the appropriate 
Inspection Service CPIP specialist.
    (c) If the manufacturer later learns that the meter has been located 
and/or recovered, the manufacturer must update lost and stolen meter 
activity records, inspect the meter promptly, initiate a postage 
adjustment or transfer if appropriate, and check the meter out of 
service if a replacement meter has been supplied to the meter licensee.
    (d) If a meter reported to the Postal Service as lost or stolen is 
later located, the manufacturer is responsible for submitting a new Lost 
and Stolen Meter Incident Report that references the initial report and 
outlines the details of how the meter was recovered. This report must be 
submitted to the Postal Service within 30 days of recovery of the meter. 
The meter manufacturer is also responsible for purging lost and stolen 
meter reports that are provided on a periodic basis to the Postal 
Service ISSC for those meters that have been recovered.
    (e) Any authorized manufacturer that fails to comply with 
standardized lost and stolen reporting procedures and instructions is 
subject to an administrative sanction under Sec. 501.23, as determined 
by the Postal Service.


[[Page 179]]




<R05>
Sec. 501.27  Repair of internal mechanism.

    Repair or reconditioning of meters involving access to internal 
mechanisms must be done only within a factory or suitable meter repair 
department under the manufacturer's direct control and supervision. 
Meters must be checked out of service by the post office of setting 
before they are opened or internal repairs are undertaken.


<R05>
Sec. 501.28  Computerized remote postage meter resetting.

    (a) Description. The Computerized Remote Postage Meter Resetting 
System (CMRS) permits postal licensees using specially designed postage 
meters to reset their meters at their places of business via telephonic 
communications. Authorized meter manufacturers that offer CMRS services 
are known as meter resetting companies (MRCs). To reset a meter, the 
licensee telephones the MRC and provides identifying data. Before 
proceeding with the setting transaction, the MRC must verify the data 
and ascertain from its own files whether the licensee has sufficient 
funds on deposit with the Postal Service. If the funds are available or 
the manufacturer opts to provide a funds advance in accordance with 
paragraph (b)(5) of this section, the MRC may complete the setting 
transaction.

    (b) Deposits with the Postal Service. (1) Deposits in the Postal 
Service Fund at Treasury are backed in full faith and credit by the U. 
S. Treasury.

    (2) A CMRS licensee is required to have funds available on deposit 
with the Postal Service before resetting a meter or the manufacturer may 
opt to provide a funds advance in accordance with paragraph (b)(4) of 
this section. The details of this deposit requirement are covered within 
the Acknowledgment of Deposit Requirement document. By signing this 
document, the licensee agrees to transfer funds to the Postal Service 
through a lockbox bank, as specified by the MRC, for the purpose of 
prepayment of postage. The MRC representative must provide all new CMRS 
licensees with this document when a new account is established. The 
document must be completed and signed by the licensee and sent to the 
licensing post office by the MRC.

    (3) The MRC is required to incorporate the following language into 
its meter rental agreements:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  Acknowledgment of Deposit Requirement

By signing this meter rental agreement, you represent that you have read 
the Acknowledgment of Deposit Requirement and are familiar with its 
terms. You agree that, upon execution of this Agreement with [the MRC], 
you will also be bound by all terms and conditions of the Acknowledgment 
of Deposit Requirement, as it may be amended from time to time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
    (4) The licensee is permitted to make deposits in one of three ways: 
check, electronic funds transfer (or wire transfer), or automated 
clearinghouse (ACH) transfer. These deposits are to be processed by the 
lockbox bank. The lockbox bank must wire daily all available balances to 
the Postal Service.

    (5) If the MRC chooses to offer advancement of funds to licensees, 
the MRC is required to maintain a deposit with the Postal Service equal 
to at least 1 day's average funds advanced. The total amount of funds 
advanced to licensees on any given day may not exceed the amount the 
manufacturer has on deposit with the Postal Service. The MRC is not 
authorized to perform settings in excess of the licensee's balance in 
any other circumstance. The Postal Service shall not be liable for any 
payment made by the MRC on behalf of a licensee that is not reimbursed 
by the licensee because the MRC is solely responsible for the collection 
of advances.

    (c) Revenue protection. The Postal Service shall conduct periodic 
assessments of the revenue protection safeguards of each MRC system and 
shall reserve the right to revoke an MRC's authorization if the CMRS 
system does not meet all requirements set forth by the Postal Service. 
In addition, the Postal Service shall reserve the right to suspend the 
operation of the MRC for any serious operational deficiency that is 
likely to result in the loss of funds to the Postal Service as provided 
in Sec. 501.12.


[[Page 180]]


    (d) Equipment. The meters used in the computerized resetting system 
must conform to the specifications in Sec. 501.6. They must be tested 
under Sec. 501.7 and conform to the safeguards, distribution, and 
maintenance requirements of Secs. 501.15 through 501.23 to protect the 
Postal Service against loss of revenue from fraud, manipulation, 
misoperation, or breakdown.
    (e) Financial operation. (1) Before the Postal Service's selection 
of a lockbox provider, the MRC must establish a lockbox account in the 
name of the Postal Service at a bank or banks approved by the Postal 
Service to handle the deposits of licensees. The MRC must make 
arrangements with such banks under which the banks are to inform the 
manufacturer of the amounts of licensee funds received each banking day.
    (2) The Postal Service lockbox bank processes the CMRS deposits 
daily, consolidates the data, and performs a direct file transmission to 
each MRC. The daily deposit processing cutoff times and the automated 
file transmission times are coordinated independently with each of the 
MRCs. Manufacturers must ensure that their data center computers are 
programmed to reflect each licensee deposit and track all licensee 
activity.
    (3) The MRC must require each licensee that requests meter resetting 
to provide the meter serial number, the licensee account number, and the 
meter's ascending and descending register readings. The manufacturer 
must verify that the information provided to the licensee is consistent 
with its records. The MRC must also verify that there are sufficient 
funds in the licensee's account to cover the postage setting requested 
before proceeding with the setting transaction (unless the manufacturer 
opts to provide the licensee a funds advance). Immediately following 
each such resetting, the MRC must charge the licensee's account for the 
amount of the postage reset. After the completion of each transaction, 
the manufacturer must promptly provide the licensee with a statement 
documenting the transaction and the balance remaining in the licensee's 
account. As an alternative, the manufacturer may provide a statement 
monthly that documents all transactions for the period and that shows 
the balance in the licensee's account after each transaction.
    (4) Each banking day, the lockbox bank is to transfer, by 10 a.m. 
local time, amounts payable to the Postal Service from the transactions 
during the previous day to a designated Federal Reserve Bank. The MRC 
must maintain licensee service activity data to accept and respond to 
inquiries from licensees concerning the status of their payments. The 
lockbox bank must provide the MRCs with a nationwide, toll-free 
telephone number for licensee service. The Postal Service lockbox bank 
must assign a dedicated senior level licensee service representative to 
handle all inquiries and investigations.
    (5) The Postal Service requires that the MRCs publicize to all CMRS 
licensees the following payment options (listed in order of preference):
    (i) Automated clearinghouse (ACH) debits/credits.
    (ii) Electronic funds transfers (wire transfers).
    (iii) Checks.
    (6) Licensee check deposits must be mailed to a predetermined post 
office box address specified by the lockbox bank and accompanied by a 
preencoded deposit ticket. The Postal Service provides CMRS customers 
with deposit tickets for inclusion with check payments. At the time a 
new account is opened, a licensee not possessing a preencoded deposit 
slip must present the initial payment to the MRC representative who in 
turn assigns the licensee a new account number and manually prepares a 
deposit ticket to be mailed to the lockbox bank for processing.
    (7) If a licensee prefers to use a payment form other than a check, 
the licensee must contact the MRC representative for instructions, and 
the MRC must provide the licensee with the appropriate information 
regarding the use of ACH debits/credits and electronic funds transfers 
(wire transfers).
    (8) Returned checks and ACH debits are the responsibility of the 
Postal Service. In the case of a returned check, the Postal Service 
lockbox

[[Page 181]]

bank, after an automatic second presentment, advises the MRC of the 
account in question so that the MRC data file can be locked. The MRC 
must lock the licensee account immediately so that the licensee is 
unable to reset the meter until the Postal Service receives payment in 
full for the check returned. The lockbox bank provides collection 
services for returned checks on behalf of the Postal Service. The Postal 
Service lockbox bank notifies the MRC once this item is paid. The MRC 
then releases the account for activity.
    (f) Refunds. The Postal Service issues a refund to a licensee for 
any unused postage in a meter. Refunds of licensee balances maintained 
by the Postal Service in the Postal Service fund are intended to be made 
directly to the licensee by the lockbox bank within 48 hours after 
receipt of a licensee's request.
    (g) Reports. The manufacturer must provide reports according to the 
following schedule:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Report description                   Content                Frequency                  Medium          
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MRC CMRS Daily Activity Report......  Summary of Business     Daily.................  Paper (facsimile).        
                                       Activity.                                                                
Revenue Allocation Report...........  ZIP Code of Licensing   Postal Accounting       Electronic.               
                                       Post Office; Amount     Period.                                          
                                       of Resettings.                                                           
Postage Refunds Report..............  Customer ID; ZIP Code;  Daily (by request                                 
                                       Amount of Refund.       only)................  Paper.                    
Funds Advanced Report...............  Customer ID; ZIP Code;  Daily (by request                                 
                                       Amount of Funds         only)................  Paper.                    
                                       Advanced.                                                                
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (h) Inspection of records and facilities. The manufacturer must make 
its facilities that handle the operation of the computerized resetting 
system and all records about the operation of the system available for 
inspection by representatives of the Postal Service at all reasonable 
times.

[[Page 182]]


<R03>
SUBCHAPTER H--PROCUREMENT SYSTEM FOR THE U.S. POSTAL SERVICE: INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS OTHER THAN PATENTS

<R05>


<R03>
PART 601--PROCUREMENT OF PROPERTY AND SERVICES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
601.100  Procurement Manual; incorporation by reference.
601.101  Effective date.
601.102  Applicability and coverage.
601.103  Content of Procurement Manual.
601.104  Availability of Procurement Manual.
601.105  Amendments to the Procurement Manual.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 552(a); 39 U.S.C. 401, 404, 410, 411, 2008, 
5001-5605.

    Source: 53 FR 24267, June 28, 1988, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 601.100  Procurement Manual; incorporation by reference.

    Section 552(a) of title 5, U.S.C., relating to public information 
requirements of the Administrative Procedure Act, provides in pertinent 
part that ``* * * matter reasonably published in the Federal Register 
when incorporated by reference therein with the approval of the Director 
of the Federal Register.'' In conformity with that provision, with 39 
U.S.C. section 410(b)(1), and as provided in this part, the U.S. Postal 
Service hereby incorporates by reference its Procurement Manual (PM), 
Publication 41, a loseleaf publication.


<R05>
Sec. 601.101  Effective date.

    The provisions of the Procurement Manual are applicable, effective 
June 1, 1988, with respect to all covered procurement activities of the 
Postal Service. However, the Procurement Manual is being implemented on 
the following phased basis: Headquarters Office of Procurement and 
Office of Design and Construction Management--June 1, 1988; Mail 
Processing Department--July 1, 1988; Procurement and Material Management 
Service Centers and Service Offices, U.S. Postal Service Field 
Divisions, Facilities Service Centers and Facilities Service Offices--
August 1, 1988. During the implementation phase procurement actions will 
be accomplished in accordance with policies prescribed either in the 
Postal Contracting Manual or the Procurement Manual, depending upon the 
implementation schedule established for an individual procurement 
entity.


<R05>
Sec. 601.102  Applicability and coverage.

    (a) The Procurement Manual applies to all Postal Service 
procurements of property and services.
    (b) When fully effective, the Procurement Manual supersedes the 
Postal Contracting Manual.


<R05>
Sec. 601.103  Content of Procurement Manual.

    The Procurement Manual consists of 12 chapters and 6 appendices, as 
follows:
    (a) Chapter 1--Authority, Responsibility, and Policy--covers general 
procurement policies, including the delegation of procurement authority 
and responsibility.
    (b) Chapter 2--Procurement Planning--establishes requirements and 
procedures for advance procurement planning including source selection 
plans, and policies regarding specifications and statements of work.
    (c) Chapter 3--Sources--covers sources of supplies and services and 
their priority, including Postal Service sources, other Government 
agencies, and commercial sources. It establishes requirements for 
publicizing procurements and covers matters regarding contractor 
qualifications.
    (d) Chapter 4--Purchasing Methods--covers competitive purchasing 
procedures, including solicitation, evaluation of proposals, price 
negotiation, and contractor selection. It includes simplified procedures 
for purchases below certain dollar ceilings and establishes limitations 
on noncompetitive purchasing. It sets forth rules for filing and 
considering protests against Postal Service contracting procedures and 
awards.

[[Page 183]]

    (e) Chapter 5--Contract Pricing--describes the types of contracts 
authorized for Postal Service use and the circumstances for their use. 
It establishes policies and procedures for price evaluation, including 
price analysis, cost analysis, and principles for determining the 
allowability of costs.
    (f) Chapter 6--Contract Administration--Describes responsibilities 
and procedures for the administration of Postal Service contracts, and 
for their modification and termination.
    (g) Chapter 7--Bonds, Insurance, and Taxes--sets forth policies and 
procedures governing bonds and insurance under contracts, and discusses 
the applicability of Federal, State, and local taxes.
    (h) Chapter 8--Special Categories of Contracts--covers various types 
of contracts subject to special procedures and describes the authorities 
of officials authorized to issue policy and procedural directives 
supplementing the Procurement Manual.
    (i) Chapter 9--Patents and Data Rights--covers the acquisition of 
patents, copyrights, and other rights in data.
    (j) Chapter 10--Socioeconomic policies--contains procedures for 
contracting with minority-owned businesses, and policies carrying out 
the requirements of certain statutes, including the Contract Work Hours 
and Safety Standards Act, the Davis-Bacon Act, and the Service Contract 
Act. It establishes Postal Service policy and preference regarding 
purchase of domestic-source products and services.
    (k) Chapter 11--Facilities and Related Services--covers the 
specialized procedures involved in the procurement of construction, the 
acquisition of real property, and leases.
    (l) Chapter 12--Mail Transportation--prescribes policies and 
procedures for the procurement of mail transportation and directly 
related ancillary services by contract.
    (m) Appendix A--Solicitations--prescribes the forms, format, and 
provisions to be used in preparing solicitations, and the establishment 
and maintenance of solicitation mailing lists. It contains all 
solicitation provisions prescribed in the Manual.
    (n) Appendix B--Contract Clauses--prescribes certain clauses not 
prescribed elsewhere in the Manual and contains all clauses prescribed 
in the Manual.
    (o) Appendix C--Forms and formats--states that the forms and 
computer generated formats necessary to implement and supplement the 
manual are in the Procurement Handbook, the Facilities Design and 
Construction Handbook, the Mail Transportation Procurement Handbook, and 
other publications and directives referenced in the Manual or in these 
handbooks.
    (p) Appendix D--Rules of Practice in Proceedings Relative to 
Debarment and Suspension from Contracting--contains a reprint of the 
rules of practice issued by the Judicial Officer as 39 CFR Part 957.
    (q) Appendix E--Rules of Practice Before the Postal Service Board of 
Contract Appeals--contains a reprint of the rules of practice issued as 
39 CFR Part 955.
    (r) Appendix F--Procurement Manual Index--is an alphabetical index 
of important words and terms used in the Manual.


<R05>
Sec. 601.104  Availability of Procurement Manual.

    (a) Copies of the Procurement Manual, Publication 41, may be 
purchased, and changes to the Manual may be obtained, from the 
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, DC 20402-9325. The Manual may be examined during normal 
business hours at the U.S. Postal Service Library, 475 L'Enfant Plaza 
West SW., Washington, DC 20260-1641, and at the following Postal Service 
Procurement and Materiel Management Service Centers:

Central Region, 433 West Van Buren St., Chicago, IL 60699-6260.
Eastern Region, 1845 Walnut St., Philadelphia, PA 19197-6260.
Northeast Region, 8 Griffin Road North, Windsor, CT 06006-6260.
Southern Region, 1407 Union Ave., Memphis, TN 38166-6260.
Western Region, 850 Cherry Ave., San Bruno, CA 94099-6260.

    (b) A copy of the Procurement Manual is on file with the Director, 
Office

[[Page 184]]

of the Federal Register, National Archives and Records Administration, 
800 North Capitol Street, NW., suite 700, Washington, DC.


<R05>
Sec. 601.105  Amendments to the Procurement Manual.

    Notice of changes made in the Procurement Manual will be 
periodically published in the Federal Register. The text of such changes 
will be filed with the Director, Office of the Federal Register. 
Subscribers to the Basic Manual will receive from time to time the 
amendments from the Postal Service in the form of Procurement Manual 
Circulars or in Postal Bulletin notices. These amendments will be 
cumulated in a periodic Transmittal Letter which subscribers will 
receive from the Government Printing Office.

                    Amendments to Procurement Manual                    
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       Federal Register 
       Transmittal letter               Dated            publication    
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2..............................  June 1, 1988......  53 FR 24265        
3..............................  December 1, 1989..  54 FR 48243        
4..............................  January 1, 1991...  56 FR 2138         
5..............................  February 1, 1992..  57 FR 31129        
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[53 FR 24267, June 28, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 48243, Nov. 22, 1989; 
56 FR 2138, Jan. 22, 1991; 57 FR 31129, July 14, 1992]


<R03>
PART 602--INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS OTHER THAN PATENTS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
602.1  General principles.
602.2  Office of Licensing, Philatelic and Retail Services Department.
602.3  Requests for use.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401(5).

    Source: 43 FR 42250, Sept. 20, 1978, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 602.1  General principles.

    It is the policy of the Postal Service to secure full ownership 
rights for its intellectual properties other than patents (hereinafter, 
intellectual properties) having significant economic or other business 
value, except when to do so would be contrary to the best interest of 
the Postal Service. Intellectual property rights shall be acquired and 
managed so as to:
    (a) Promote the economic, operational, and competitive well-being of 
the Postal Service;
    (b) Limit restrictions on the use of Postal Service intellectual 
property to a minimum consistent with its statutory obligations;
    (c) Assure that all potential users are treated fairly;
    (d) Give due regard to other relevant considerations.


<R05>
Sec. 602.2   Office of Licensing, Philatelic and Retail Services Department.

    In accordance with the foregoing policy, the Postal Service Office 
of Licensing, Philatelic and Retail Services Department, formulates the 
program for the management of the Postal Service's rights in 
intellectual property (except patents and technical data rights in 
Postal Service contracts, which is the responsibility of Postal Service 
contracting officers). The Office of Licensing and the contracting 
officers identify intellectual properties in which the Postal Service 
should secure its rights. It receives and makes recommendations for the 
disposition of applications for use of Postal Service intellectual 
property. It periodically reviews the intellectual property rights 
portfolio to determine the extent of the utilization of protected 
properties and to recommend relinquishment of ownership when it 
considers ownership no longer desirable. It is advised by the Office of 
Procurement of performance under license agreements and makes 
recommendations for corrective measures when necessary. In consultation 
with the Law Department, it recommends appropriate action against 
unauthorized use of intellectual property.

[56 FR 58859, Nov. 22, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 602.3   Requests for use.

    (a) Inquiries concerning licenses to use Postal Service trademarks 
or service marks, copyright materials and intellectual property other 
than patents and technical data rights in Postal Service contracts must 
be sent to: Office of Licensing, Philatelic and Retail Services 
Department, US Postal Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza SW., Washington, DC 
20260-6700.

[[Page 185]]

    (b) Requests for the use of intellectual property should be 
submitted on the form provided by the Office of Licensing to the 
licensing advisor designated by that Office. Each request is considered 
in a timely fashion in accordance with the policy established in this 
section. Requests favorably considered are forwarded to the Office of 
Licensing for approval.
    (c) Approved requests contemplating a permissive (no fee) use of the 
intellectual property are evidenced by a letter of permission furnished 
to the requester.
    (d) Approved requests contemplating a contractual (fee) use of the 
intellectual property are forwarded to the Office of Licensing for the 
negotiation of a satisfactory license agreement.
    (e) Each license agreement is subject to legal review.
    (f) Requesters are promptly advised of unapproved requests.
    A transmittal letter effecting the above changes to the Domestic 
Mail Manual will be published and transmitted automatically to 
subscribers. Notice of issuance of the transmittal letter will be 
published in the Federal Register as provided by 39 CFR 111.3.

[56 FR 58859, Nov. 22, 1991]

[[Page 186]]


<R03>
                        SUBCHAPTER I--[RESERVED]

<R05>


<R03>
SUBCHAPTER J--POSTAL SERVICE DEBT OBLIGATIONS; DISBURSEMENT POSTAL MONEY ORDERS

<R05>


<R03>
PART 760--APPLICABILITY OF TREA- SURY DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS--Table of Contents

<R05>



<R05>
Sec. 760.1   Treasury Department regulations; applicability to Postal Service.

    The provisions of Treasury Department Circular No. 300, 31 CFR part 
306 (other than subpart O), as amended from time to time, shall apply 
insofar as appropriate to obligations of the U.S. Postal Service to the 
extent they are consistent with the Trust Indenture of the Postal 
Service and the agreement between the Postal Service and the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York acting as Fiscal Agent of the United States on 
behalf of the Postal Service. Definitions and terms used in Treasury 
Department Circular 300 should be read as though modified to effectuate 
the application of the regulations to the U.S. Postal Service.

(39 U.S.C. Secs. 401, 402, 2005)

[37 FR 211, Jan. 7, 1972]


<R03>
PART 761--BOOK-ENTRY PROCEDURES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
761.1  Definition of terms.
761.2  Authority of Reserve Banks.
761.3  Scope and effect of book-entry procedure.
761.4  Transfer or pledge.
761.5  Withdrawal of Postal Service securities.
761.6  Delivery of Postal Service securities.
761.7  Registered bonds and notes.
761.8  Servicing book-entry Postal Service securities; payment of 
          interest, payment at maturity or upon call.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401, 402, 2005.

    Source: 37 FR 16801, Aug. 19, 1972, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 761.1   Definition of terms.

    In this part, unless the context otherwise requires or indicates:
    (a) Reserve Bank means the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (and any 
other Federal Reserve Bank which agrees to issue Postal Service 
securities in book-entry form) as fiscal agent of the United States 
acting on behalf of the Postal Service and when indicated acting in its 
individual capacity.
    (b) Postal Service security means any obligation of the Postal 
Service issued under 39 U.S.C. 2005, in the form of a definitive Postal 
Service security or a book-entry Postal Service security.
    (c) Definitive Postal Service security means a Postal Service 
security in engraved or printed form.
    (d) Book-entry Postal Service security means a Postal Service 
security in the form of an entry made as prescribed in these regulations 
on the records of a Reserve Bank.
    (e) Pledge includes a pledge of, or any other security interest in, 
Postal Service securities as collateral for loans or advances or to 
secure deposits of public moneys or the performance of an obligation.
    (f) Date of call is the date fixed in the authorizing resolution of 
the Board of Governors of the Postal Service on which the obligor will 
make payment of the security before maturity in accordance with its 
terms.
    (g) Member bank means any national bank, State bank, or bank or 
trust company which is a member of a Reserve bank.


<R05>
Sec. 761.2   Authority of Reserve Banks.

    Each Reserve Bank is hereby authorized, in accordance with the 
provisions of this part, to (a) issue book-entry Postal Service 
securities by means of entries on its records which shall include the 
name of the depositor, the amount, the loan title (or series) and 
maturity date; (b) effect conversions between book-entry Postal Service 
securities and definitive Postal Service securities; (c) otherwise 
service and maintain book-entry Postal Service securities; and (d) issue 
a confirmation of transaction in the form of a written advice (serially 
numbered or otherwise) which specifies the amount and description of any 
securities; that is, loan title (or series) and maturity date, sold

[[Page 187]]

or transferred, and the date of the transaction.


<R05>
Sec. 761.3   Scope and effect of book-entry procedure.

    (a) A Reserve Bank as fiscal agent of the United States acting on 
behalf of the Postal Service may apply the book-entry procedure provided 
for in this part to any Postal Service securities which have been or are 
hereafter deposited for any purpose in accounts with it in its 
individual capacity under terms and conditions which indicate that the 
Reserve Bank will continue to maintain such deposit accounts in its 
individual capacity, notwithstanding application of the book-entry 
procedure to such securities. This paragraph is applicable, but not 
limited, to securities deposited:
    (1) As collateral pledged to a Reserve Bank (in its individual 
capacity) for advances by it;
    (2) By a member bank for its sole account;
    (3) By a member bank held for the account of its customers;
    (4) In connection with deposits in a member bank of funds of States, 
municipalities, or other political subdivisions; or,
    (5) In connection with the performance of an obligation or duty 
under Federal, State, municipal, or local law, or judgments or decrees 
of courts.

The application of the book-entry procedure under this paragraph shall 
not derogate from or adversely affect the relationships that would 
otherwise exist between a Reserve Bank in its individual capacity and 
its depositors concerning any deposits under this paragraph. Whenever 
the book-entry procedure is applied to such Postal Service securities, 
the Reserve Bank is authorized to take all action necessary in respect 
of the book-entry procedure to enable such Reserve Bank in its 
individual capacity to perform its obligations as depository with 
respect to such Postal Service securities.
    (b) A Reserve Bank as fiscal agent of the United States acting on 
behalf of the Postal Service may apply the book-entry procedure to 
Postal Service securities deposited as collateral pledged to the United 
States under Treasury Department Circulars Nos. 92 and 176, both as 
revised and amended, and may apply the book-entry procedure, with the 
approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, to any other Postal Service 
securities deposited with a Reserve Bank as fiscal agent of the United 
States.
    (c) Any person having an interest in Postal Service securities which 
are deposited with a Reserve Bank (in either its individual capacity or 
as fiscal agent of the United States) for any purpose shall be deemed to 
have consented to their conversion to book-entry Postal Service 
securities pursuant to the provisions of this part, and in the manner 
and under the procedures prescribed by the Reserve Bank.
    (d) No deposits shall be accepted under this section on or after the 
date of maturity or call of the securities.


<R05>
Sec. 761.4   Transfer or pledge.

    (a) A transfer or pledge of book-entry Postal Service securities to 
a Reserve bank (in its individual capacity or as fiscal agent of the 
United States) or to the United States, or to any transferee or pledgee 
eligible to maintain an appropriate book-entry account in its name with 
a Reserve bank under this part, is effected and perfected, 
notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, by a Reserve bank 
making an appropriate entry in its records of the securities transferred 
or pledged. The making of such an entry in the records of a Reserve bank 
shall (1) have the effect of a delivery in bearer form of definitive 
Postal Service securities; (2) have the effect of a taking of delivery 
by the transferee or pledgee; (3) constitute the transferee or pledgee a 
holder; and (4) if a pledge, effect a perfected security interest 
therein in favor of the pledgee. A transfer or pledge of book-entry 
Postal Service securities effected under this paragraph shall have 
priority over any transfer, pledge, or other interest, theretofore or 
thereafter effected or perfected under paragraph (b) of this section or 
in any other manner.
    (b) A transfer or a pledge of transferable Postal Service 
securities, or any interest therein, which is maintained by a Reserve 
bank (in its individual capacity or as fiscal agent of the United 
States) in a book-entry account under

[[Page 188]]

this part, including securities in book-entry form under 
Sec. 761.3(a)(3), is effected, and a pledge is perfected, by any means 
that would be effective under applicable law to effect a transfer or to 
effect and perfect a pledge of the Postal Service securities, or any 
interest therein, if the securities were maintained by the Reserve bank 
in bearer definitive form. For purposes of transfer or pledge hereunder, 
book-entry Postal Service securities maintained by a Reserve bank shall, 
notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, be deemed to be 
maintained in bearer definitive form. A Reserve bank maintaining book-
entry Postal Service securities either in its individual capacity or as 
fiscal agent of the United States is not a bailee for purposes of 
notification of pledges of those securities under this paragraph, or a 
third person in possession for purposes of acknowledgment of transfers 
thereof under this paragraph. Where transferable Postal Service 
securities are recorded on the books of a depositary (a bank, banking 
institution, financial firm, or similar party, which regularly accepts 
in the course of its business Postal Service securities as a custodial 
service for customers, and maintains accounts in the names of such 
customers reflecting ownership of or interest in such securities) for 
account of the pledgor or transferor thereof and such securities are on 
deposit with a Reserve bank in a book-entry account hereunder, such 
depositary shall, for purposes of perfecting a pledge of such securities 
or effecting delivery of such securities to a purchaser under applicable 
provisions of law, be the bailee to which notification of the pledge of 
the securities may be given or the third person in possession from which 
acknowledgment of the holding of the securities for the purchaser may be 
obtained. A Reserve bank will not accept notice or advice of a transfer 
or pledge effected or perfected under this paragraph, and any such 
notice or advice shall have no effect. A Reserve bank may continue to 
deal with its depositor in accordance with the provisions of this part, 
notwithstanding any transfer or pledge effected or perfected under this 
paragraph.
    (c) No filing or recording with a public recording office or officer 
shall be necessary or effective with respect to any transfer or pledge 
of book-entry Postal Service securities or any interest therein.
    (d) A Reserve Bank shall, upon receipt of appropriate instructions, 
convert book-entry Postal Service securities into definitive Postal 
Service securities and deliver them in accordance with such 
instructions; no such conversion shall effect existing interests in such 
Postal Service securities.
    (e) A transfer of book-entry Postal Service securities within a 
Reserve Bank shall be made in accordance with procedures established by 
the Bank not inconsistent with this part.
    (f) All requests for transfer or withdrawal must be made prior to 
the maturity or date of call of the securities.

[37 FR 16801, Aug. 19, 1972, as amended at 38 FR 12919, May 17, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 761.5   Withdrawal of Postal Service securities.

    (a) A depositor of book-entry Postal Service securities may withdraw 
them from a Reserve Bank by requesting delivery of like definitive 
Postal Service securities to itself or on its order to a transferee.
    (b) Postal Service securities which are actually to be delivered 
upon withdrawal may be issued either in registered or in bearer form.


<R05>
Sec. 761.6   Delivery of Postal Service securities.

    A Reserve Bank which has received Postal Service securities and 
effected pledges, made entries regarding them, or transferred or 
delivered them according to the instructions of its depositor is not 
liable for conversion or for participation in breach of fiduciary duty 
even though the depositor had no right to dispose of or take other 
action in respect of the securities. A Reserve Bank shall be fully 
discharged of its obligations under this part by the delivery of Postal 
Service securities in definitive form to its depositor or upon the order 
of such depositor. Customers of a member bank or other depositary (other 
than a Reserve Bank) may obtain Postal Service securities in definitive 
form only by causing the depositor

[[Page 189]]

of the Reserve Bank to order the withdrawal thereof from the Reserve 
Bank.


<R05>
Sec. 761.7   Registered bonds and notes.

    No formal assignment shall be required for the conversion to book-
entry Postal Service securities of registered Postal Service securities 
held by a Reserve Bank (in either its individual capacity or as fiscal 
agent of the United States) on the effective date of this part for any 
purpose specified in Sec. 761.3(a). Registered Postal Service securities 
deposited thereafter with a Reserve Bank for any purpose specified in 
Sec. 761.3 shall be assigned for conversion to book-entry Postal Service 
securities. The assignment, which shall be executed in accordance with 
the provisions of part 760 of this subchapter and subpart F of 31 CFR 
part 306, so far as applicable, shall be to ``Federal Reserve Bank of --
---------- as fiscal agent of the United States acting on behalf of the 
Postal Service for conversion to book-entry Postal Service securities.''


<R05>
Sec. 761.8   Servicing book-entry Postal Service securities; payment of interest, payment at maturity or upon call.

    Interest becoming due on book-entry Postal Service securities shall 
be charged in the Postal Service Fund on the interest due date and 
remitted or credited in accordance with the depositor's instructions. 
Such securities shall be redeemed and charged in the Postal Service Fund 
on the date of maturity, call or advance refunding, and the redemption 
proceeds, principal and interest, shall be disposed of in accordance 
with the depositor's instructions.


<R03>
PART 762--DISBURSEMENT POSTAL MONEY ORDERS--Table of Contents

<R05>


                Subpart A--General, Definitions, Issuance

Sec.
762.11  General.
762.12  Definitions.
762.13  Issuance.
762.14  Amounts for which disbursement postal money orders may be 
          issued.
762.15  Postal Service payments not made by disbursement postal money 
          order.

Subpart B--Endorsements, Payment, Guaranties, Warranties and Processing 
                   of Disbursement Postal Money Orders

762.21  Scope.
762.22  Definitions.
762.23  General rules.
762.24  Guaranty of endorsements.
762.25  Reclamation of amounts of paid disbursement postal money orders.
762.26  Postal facilities not to cash disbursement postal money orders.
762.27  Processing of disbursement postal money orders by Federal 
          Reserve Banks.
762.28  Release of original disbursement postal money orders.
762.29  Endorsement of disbursement postal money orders by payees.
762.30  Disbursement postal money orders issued to incompetent payees.
762.31  Disbursement postal money orders issued to deceased payees.

 Subpart C--Issuance of Substitutes for Lost, Destroyed, Mutilated, and 
                Defaced Disbursement Postal Money Orders

762.41  Advice of non-receipt or loss, destruction, or mutilation.
762.42  Request for substitute disbursement postal money orders; 
          requirements for undertaking of indemnity.
762.43  Issuance of substitute disbursement postal money order.
762.44  Receipt or recovery of original disbursement postal money order.
762.45  Removal of stoppage of payment.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401(2), 401(3), 401(4), 401(10), and 404(6).

    Source: 40 FR 52371, Nov. 10, 1975, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                Subpart A--General, Definitions, Issuance


<R05>
Sec. 762.11   General.

    The Postal Service, at its discretion, issues a specialized postal 
money order, designated a Disbursement Postal Money Order in payment of 
Postal Service obligations. Disbursement Postal Money Orders are 
distinguishable on their face from other postal money orders in the 
following ways:
    (a) Disbursement Postal Money Orders have words of negotiability--
``Pay to the order of''--printed on their face, while other postal money 
orders simply bear the words ``Pay to'' on their face;
    (b) Disbursement Postal Money Orders, unlike other postal money 
orders, bear on their face the phrase, ``This

[[Page 190]]

special money order is drawn by the Postal Service to pay one of its own 
obligations.''; and
    (c) The amounts of Disbursement Postal Money Orders are printed in 
words as well as numbers, while the amounts of postal money orders 
available at post offices are printed in numbers only.


<R05>
Sec. 762.12   Definitions.

    As used in part 762 of this chapter, the term:
    (a) Disbursement Postal Money Order means a money order (described 
in Part 762) issued by the Postal Service to pay one of its own 
obligations.
    (b) Federal Reserve Bank means a Federal Reserve Bank or branch 
thereof.
    (c) Financial organization means any bank, savings bank, savings and 
loan association or similar institution, or Federal or State chartered 
credit union.
    (d) Person or persons means an individual or individuals, or an 
organization or organizations, whether incorporated or not, including 
all forms of banking institutions.
    (e) Presenting Bank means a bank or other depositor of a Federal 
Reserve Bank which presents Disbursement Postal Money Orders to and 
receives credit therefor from a Federal Reserve Bank.
    (f) Reclamation means the action taken by the Postal Service to 
obtain refund of the amounts of paid Disbursement Postal Money Orders.
    (g) Postal Service means the U.S. Postal Service.


<R05>
Sec. 762.13   Issuance.

    Disbursement Postal Money Orders are issued solely by Postal Data 
Centers and solely for the purpose of paying Postal Service obligations. 
Accordingly, Disbursement Postal Money Orders may be issued in lieu of 
U.S. Treasury checks.


<R05>
Sec. 762.14   Amounts for which disbursement postal money orders may be issued.

    Disbursement Postal Money Orders may be issued for any amount 
appropriate to pay Postal Service Obligations. There is no maximum 
amount above which a Disbursement Postal Money Order may not be issued.


<R05>
Sec. 762.15   Postal Service payments not made by disbursement postal money order.

    Postal Service payments not made by Disbursement Postal Money Order 
are made by cash, U.S. Treasury Check, or by regular postal money order, 
and may be made by electronic funds transfer.


<R04>
Subpart B--Endorsements, Payment, Guaranties, Warranties and Processing 
                   of Disbursement Postal Money Orders


<R05>
Sec. 762.21   Scope.

    The regulations in this subpart prescribe the requirements for 
endorsement and the conditions for payment of Disbursement Postal Money 
Orders drawn by the Postal Service.


<R05>
Sec. 762.22   Definitions.

    For definitions applicable to this subpart see Sec. 762.12 of this 
chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 762.23   General rules.

    All Disbursement Postal Money Orders drawn by the Postal Service are 
payable without limitation of time. The Postal Service shall have the 
usual right of a drawee to examine Disbursement Postal Money Orders 
presented for payment and refuse payment of any Disbursement Postal 
Money Orders, and shall have a reasonable time to make such examination. 
Disbursement Postal Money Orders shall be deemed to be paid by the 
Postal Service only after first examination has been fully completed. If 
the Postal Service is on notice of a doubtful question of law or fact 
when a Disbursement Postal Money Order is presented for payment, payment 
will be deferred pending settlement by the Postal Service.


<R05>
Sec. 762.24   Guaranty of endorsements.

    The presenting bank and the endorsers of a Disbursement Postal Money 
Order presented to the Postal Service for payment shall be deemed to 
guarantee to the Postal Service that all prior endorsements are genuine, 
whether or not an express guaranty is placed on

[[Page 191]]

the Disbursement Postal Money Order. When the first endorsement has been 
made by one other than the payee personally, the presenting bank and the 
endorsers shall be deemed to guarantee to the Postal Service, in 
addition to other warranties, that the person who so endorsed had 
unqualified capacity and authority to endorse the Disbursement Postal 
Money Order on behalf of the payee.


<R05>
Sec. 762.25   Reclamation of amounts of paid disbursement postal money orders.

    The Postal Service shall have the right to demand refund from the 
presenting bank of the amount of a paid Disbursement Postal Money Order 
if after payment the Disbursement Postal Money Order is found to bear a 
forged or unauthorized endorsement, or an endorsement by another for a 
deceased payee where the right to the proceeds of such Disbursement 
Postal Money Orders terminated upon the death of the payee, or to 
contain any other material defect or alteration which was not discovered 
upon first examination. If refund is not made, the Postal Service shall 
take such action against the proper parties as may be necessary to 
protect its interests.


<R05>
Sec. 762.26   Postal facilities not to cash disbursement postal money orders.

    Post offices and other postal facilities shall not be expected to 
cash Disbursement Postal Money Orders or to return cash for endorsed 
Disbursement Postal Money Orders offered in payment for postal service 
in amounts less than the value of a Disbursement Postal Money Order. 
However, properly endorsed Disbursement Postal Money Orders may be 
accepted as total or partial payment for postal services.


<R05>
Sec. 762.27   Processing of disbursement postal money orders by Federal Reserve Banks.

    In accordance with an agreement between the Postal Service and the 
Federal Reserve Banks as depositaries and fiscal agents of the United 
States, Federal Reserve Banks will handle Disbursement Postal Money 
Orders as follows:
    (a) Federal Reserve Banks shall not be expected to cash Disbursement 
Postal Money Orders presented directly to them for payment; and
    (b) Each Federal Reserve Bank shall:
    (1) Receive Disbursement Postal Money Orders from its member banks, 
and its other depositors which guarantee all prior endorsements thereon;
    (2) Give immediate credit therefor in accordance with its current 
Time Schedules and charge the amount thereof to the general account of 
the U.S. Treasury, subject to examination and payment by the Postal 
Service; and
    (3) Forward the Disbursement Postal Money Orders to the Postal 
Service.


<R05>
Sec. 762.28   Release of original disbursement postal money orders.

    An original Disbursement Postal Money Order may be released to a 
responsible endorser only upon receipt of a properly authorized request 
showing the reason it is required.


<R05>
Sec. 762.29   Endorsement of disbursement postal money orders by payees.

    (a) General requirements. Disbursement Postal Money Orders shall be 
endorsed by the payee or the payees named, or by another on behalf of 
such payee or payees as set forth in this subpart B. The forms of 
endorsement shall conform to those recognized by general principles of 
law and commercial usage for the negotiation, transfer, or collection of 
negotiable instruments.
    (b) Endorsement of disbursement postal money orders by a financial 
organization under the payee's authorization. When a Disbursement Postal 
Money Order is credited by a financial organization to the payee's 
account under his authorization, the financial organization may use an 
endorsement substantially as follows:

    Credit to the account of the within-named payee in accordance with 
payee's or payees' instructions. Absence of endorsement guaranteed.

A financial organization using this form of endorsement shall be deemed 
to guarantee to all subsequent endorsers and to the Postal Service that 
it is acting as an attorney in fact for the payee or payees, under his 
or their authorization.

[[Page 192]]

    (c) Endorsement of disbursement postal money orders drawn in favor 
of financial organizations. All Disbursement Postal Money Orders drawn 
in favor of financial organizations, for credit to the accounts of 
persons designating payment so to be made, shall be endorsed in the name 
of the financial organization as payee in the usual manner.


<R05>
Sec. 762.30   Disbursement postal money orders issued to incompetent payees.

    (a) If the Disbursement Postal Money Order is endorsed by a legal 
guardian or other fiduciary and presented for payment by a bank it will 
be paid by the Postal Service without submission to the Postal Service 
of documentary proof of authority of the guardian or other fiduciary.
    (b) If a guardian has not been or will not be appointed, the 
Disbursement Postal Money Order shall be forwarded to the Money Order 
Division, Postal Data Center, P.O. Box 14963, St. Louis, MO 63182, with 
a full explanation of the circumstances.


<R05>
Sec. 762.31   Disbursement postal money orders issued to deceased payees.

    (a) If the Disbursement Postal Money Order is endorsed by an 
Executor or Administrator and presented for payment by a bank it will be 
paid by the Postal Service without submission to the Postal Service of 
documentary proof of the authority of the Executor or Administrator.
    (b) If an Executor or Administrator has not been appointed or if 
there is doubt as to whether the proceeds of the Disbursement Postal 
Money Order pass to the estate of the deceased payee, the instrument 
should be returned to the Money Order Division, Postal Data Center, P.O. 
Box 14963, St. Louis, MO 63182, for determination whether, under 
applicable laws, payment is due, and for reissuance to the appropriate 
payee.


<R04>
 Subpart C--Issuance of Substitutes for Lost, Destroyed, Mutilated, and 
                Defaced Disbursement Postal Money Orders


<R05>
Sec. 762.41   Advice of non-receipt or loss, destruction, or mutilation.

    (a) In the event of the non-receipt, loss, or destruction of a 
Disbursement Postal Money Order, or the mutilation or defacement of a 
Disbursement Postal Money Order to an extent which renders it non-
negotiable, the owner should immediately contact the Money Order 
Division, Postal Data Center, P.O. Box 14963, St. Louis, MO 63182, 
describing the Disbursement Postal Money Order, stating the purpose for 
which it was issued, giving, if possible, its date, number, and amount, 
and requesting that payment be stopped. In cases involving mutilated or 
defaced Disbursement Postal Money Orders the owner should enclose the 
mutilated or defaced item with his communication.
    (b) If the Disbursement Postal Money Order, which is the basis of 
the owner's claim, is determined to be outstanding, the Money Order 
Division shall furnish the claimant an appropriate application form for 
obtaining a substitute Disbursement Postal Money Order. However, the 
execution of an application shall not be required in the event the 
original written statement submitted by the claimant substantially meets 
the requirements of the prescribed application form.


<R05>
Sec. 762.42   Request for substitute disbursement postal money orders; requirements for undertaking of indemnity.

    In the case of a request for a substitute Disbursement Postal Money 
Order:
    (a) An undertaking of indemnity in penal sum equal to the amount of 
the Disbursement Postal Money Order shall, unless otherwise provided in 
this section, be executed by the claimant,

[[Page 193]]

as may be required by the Postal Service, and submitted to the Money 
Order Division.
    (b) Unless the Postal Service determines that an undertaking of 
indemnity is essential in the public interest, no undertaking of 
indemnity shall be required in the following classes of cases:
    (1) If the Postal Service is satisfied that the loss, theft, 
destruction, mutilation or defacement occurred without fault of the 
owner or holder, and while the Disbursement Postal Money Order was in 
the custody or control of the Postal Service;
    (2) If substantially the entire Disbursement Postal Money Order is 
presented and surrendered by the owner or holder and the Postal Service 
is satisfied as to the identity of the Disbursement Postal Money Order 
presented and that any missing portions are not sufficient to form the 
basis of a valid claim against the Postal Service;
    (3) If the Postal Service is satisfied that the original 
Disbursement Postal Money Order is not negotiable and cannot be made the 
basis of a valid claim against the Postal Service; or
    (4) If the amount of the Disbursement Postal Money Order is not more 
than $200.


<R05>
Sec. 762.43   Issuance of substitute disbursement postal money order.

    Upon approval of the undertaking of indemnity, application, or 
statement of claim, the Money Order Division shall issue to the claimant 
a substitute Disbursement Postal Money Order showing such information as 
may be necessary to identify the original instrument.


<R05>
Sec. 762.44   Receipt or recovery of original disbursement postal money order.

    (a) If the original Disbursement Postal Money Order is received or 
recovered by the owner after he has requested the Postal Service to stop 
payment on the original but before a substitute has been received, he 
should immediately advise the Money Order Division and hold such 
original Disbursement Postal Money Order until receipt of instructions 
with respect to its negotiability.
    (b) If the original Disbursement Postal Money Order is received by 
the owner after a substitute has been received by him, the original 
shall not be cashed, but shall be immediately forwarded to the Money 
Order Division. Under no circumstances shall both the original and 
substitute be cashed.


<R05>
Sec. 762.45   Removal of stoppage of payment.

    Requests for removal of stoppage of payment shall be addressed to 
the Money Order Division. No request for removal of stoppage of payment 
shall be accepted after issuance of a substitute Disbursement Postal 
Money Order has been approved.

[[Page 194]]


<R03>
                    SUBCHAPTER K--SPECIAL REGULATIONS

<R05>


<R03>
PART 775--ENVIRONMENTAL PROCEDURES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
775.1  Purpose.
775.2  Policy.
775.3  Responsibilities.
775.4  Typical classes of action.
775.5  Environmental evaluation guidelines.
775.6  Environmental evaluation process.
775.7  Environmental assessments.
775.8  Environmental impact statements.
775.9  Time frames for environmental impact statement actions.
775.10  Public notice and information.
775.11  Hearings.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401; 42 U.S.C.4331 et seq.; 40 CFR 1500.4(p).

    Source: 44 FR 63525, Nov. 5, 1979, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 775.1  Purpose.

    These procedures implement the National Environmental Policy Act 
(NEPA) Regulations (43 FR 55978) issued by the Council on Environmental 
Quality (CEQ). These procedures are adopted pursuant to the Postal 
Reorganization Act rather than the NEPA insofar as the NEPA and its 
Regulations do not apply to the Postal Service under 39 U.S.C. 410(a).


<R05>
Sec. 775.2  Policy.

    It is the policy of the Postal Service to:
    (a) Interpret and administer applicable policies, regulations, and 
public laws of the United States in accordance with the policies set 
forth in the National Environmental Policy Act, as amended, and the NEPA 
Regulations.
    (b) Make the NEPA process useful to Postal Service decision makers 
and the public.
    (c) Emphasize environmental issues and alternatives in the 
consideration of proposed actions.
    (d) Encourage and facilitate public involvement in decisions which 
affect the quality of the human environment.
    (e) Use the NEPA process to identify and assess reasonable 
alternatives to proposed actions in order to avoid or minimize adverse 
effects on the environment.
    (f) Use all practicable means to protect, restore, and enhance the 
quality of the human environment.
    (g) Reduce paperwork.
    (h) Reduce delay.


<R05>
Sec. 775.3  Responsibilities.

    (a) The Assistant Postmaster General, Real Estate and Buildings 
Department, is responsible for overall review of NEPA compliance. 
Requests for information or status reports on environmental impact 
statements and other elements of the NEPA process should be addressed 
to:

Assistant Postmaster General, Real Estate & Buildings Department, U.S. 
Postal Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza, West, SW., Washington, DC 20260.

    (b) Heads of affected Headquarters Departments and Regional 
Postmasters General must designate ``Environmental Coordinators'' to be 
specifically responsible for compliance with these procedures.


<R05>
Sec. 775.4  Typical classes of action.

    (a) Normally assessed kinds of action. These procedures apply to the 
following typical classes of actions:
    (1) Those which normally require environmental impact statements: 
None.
    (2) Those which do not normally require environmental impact 
statements, but do normally require environmental assessment except as 
excluded by paragraph (b) of this section:
    (i) Postal facility actions:
    (A) New construction, including lease-construction.
    (B) The purchase or lease of an existing building if a new or 
substantially enlarged occupancy is involved.
    (C) The expansion or improvement of an existing facility.
    (ii) Real property disposals.
    (iii) Postal facility function changes.
    (iv) Initiation of legislative proposals.
    (b) Categorical exclusions. The classes of action in paragraphs 
(b)(1) through (b)(15) of this section normally do not require either an 
environmental assessment or an environmental impact

[[Page 195]]

statement. However, the responsible official must be alert to unusual 
conditions that would require an environmental assessment or an 
environmental impact statement notwithstanding the applicability of a 
categorical exclusion to particular action.
    (1) New construction, Postal Service owned, including site 
acquisition by any method, or Postal Service leased, of less than 30,000 
net interior square feet.
    (2) Acquisition by purchase, lease, or exchange, of existing 
buildings containing less than 50,000 net interior square feet with 
occupancy of greater than 90 days where planned postal uses do not 
differ significantly from past uses of the site.
    (3) Lease of existing buildings of any size for occupancy of 90 days 
or less.
    (4) Expansion or improvement of an existing facility where the 
expansion does not exceed 30,000 net interior square feet.
    (5) Acquisition of unimproved real property not connected to 
specific facility plans or when necessary to protect the interests of 
the Postal Service in advance of final project approval. This 
categorical exclusion applies only to the acquisition. Any subsequent 
use of the property for a facility project must be considered under this 
part without regard to ownership of the real property.
    (6) Routine actions normally conducted to protect and maintain 
properties and which do not alter the configuration of the building.
    (7) Repair to, or replacement-in-kind of, building equipment or 
components (e.g., electrical distribution, HVAC systems, doors, windows, 
roofs, etc.).
    (8) Obtaining, granting, disposing, or changing of easements, 
licenses and permits, rights-of-way and similar interests.
    (9) Disposal through sale or outlease of unimproved real property of 
any size or improved real estate under 30,000 net interior square feet.
    (10) Purchase of Postal Service occupied leased property where 
planned postal uses do not differ significantly from past uses of the 
site.
    (11) Extension, renewal, renegotiation, or termination of existing 
lease agreements.
    (12) Joint development and/or joint-use projects involving 
construction under 30,000 net interior square feet.
    (13) Procurement or disposal of motor vehicles not involving a 
substantial increase in the concentration of vehicles in a geographic 
impact area. Procurement or disposal of mail handling equipment.
    (14) Postal rate or mail classification actions.
    (15) Postal facility function changes not involving construction, 
the relocation of a substantial number of employees, or a substantial 
increase in the number of motor vehicles at a facility.


[44 FR 63525, Nov. 5, 1979, as amended at 47 FR 5716, Feb. 8, 1982; 49 
FR 23181, June 5, 1984; 55 FR 10454, Mar. 21, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 775.5  Environmental evaluation guidelines.

    (a) Approach. When dealing with proposals which may have an impact 
on the human environment, environmental coordinators, planners, decision 
makers, and other officials responsible for actions, will, as 
appropriate:
    (1) Use a systematic approach that integrates natural and social 
sciences and environmental design in planning and making decisions.
    (2) Identify environmental effects and values in detail, and 
appraise them in conjunction with economic and technical analyses.
    (3) Consider environmental documents at all decision points at which 
other planning documents are considered. (Plans and decisions are to 
reflect environmental values. Proposed actions should be assessed as 
soon as their effects can be meaningfully evaluated, to provide the 
bases for early decision on whether detailed environmental impact 
statements must be prepared.)
    (4) Study, develop, describe, and evaluate at all decision points, 
reasonable alternatives to recommended actions which may have a 
significant effect on the environment.
    (b) Proposal requirements. When an environmental impact statement 
has been prepared, it must accompany the

[[Page 196]]

proposal through and be used in the decision-making process. Any other 
proposal must refer to applicable environmental documents (e.g., 
determination of categorical exclusion; finding of no significant 
impact; notice of intent to prepare an impact statement), and relevant 
comments and responses.
    (c) Lead agency arrangements. If the Postal Service and another 
Federal agency become involved in a lead agency arrangement for the 
preparation of an environmental impact statement, the Service will 
cooperate fully.


<R05>
Sec. 775.6  Environmental evaluation process.

    (a) All actions--(1) Assessment of actions. An environmental 
assessment must be made of each proposed action, except that an 
assessment need not be made if a written determination is made that:
    (i) The action is one of a class listed in Sec. 775.4(b), 
Categorical Exclusions, and
    (ii) The action is not affected by extraordinary circumstances which 
may cause it to have a significant environmental effect. This part of 
the determination may be supported by completion of an environmental 
checklist (referred to as a level I environmental review in the Handbook 
RE-6) for certain types of categorical exclusions.
    (2) Findings of no significant impact. If an environmental 
assessment indicates that there is no significant impact of a proposed 
action on the environment, an environmental impact statement is not 
required. A ``finding of no significant impact'' is prepared and 
published in accordance with Sec. 775.10. When the proposed action is 
approved, it may be accomplished without further environmental 
consideration. A ``finding of no significant impact'' document briefly 
presents the reasons why an action will not have a significant effect on 
the human environment and states that an environmental impact statement 
will not be prepared. It must refer to the environmental assessment and 
any other environmentally pertinent documents related to it. The 
assessment may be included in the finding if it is short, in which case 
the discussion in the assessment need not be repeated in the finding.
    (3) Impact statement preparation decision and notices. If an 
environmental assessment indicates that a proposed major action would 
have a significant impact on the environment, a notice of intent to 
prepare an impact statement is published (see Sec. 775.10) and an 
environmental impact statement is prepared.
    (4) Role of impact statement in decision making. An environmental 
impact statement is used, with other analyses and materials, to decide 
which alternative should be pursued, or whether a proposed action should 
be abandoned or other courses of action pursued. See Sec. 775.9 for 
restrictions on the timing of this decision.
    (5) Record of decision. For actions requiring environmental impact 
statements, a concise public record of decision is prepared when a 
decision, or a proposal for legislation, is made. The record, which may 
be integrated into any other record, or notice, including that required 
by Postal Serivce regulations and procedures governing intergovernmental 
review of Postal Service facility project actions, must:
    (i) State what the decision was.
    (ii) Identify all alternatives considered in reaching a decision, 
specifying alternatives considered to be environmentally preferable; 
identify and discuss all significant factors, including any essential 
considerations of national policy, which were weighed in making the 
decision and state how those considerations entered into the decision.
    (iii) State whether all practicable means to avoid or minimize 
environmental harm from the alternative selected have been or will be 
adopted, and if not, why not.
    (6) Actions prohibited prior to issuance of record of decision. 
Until a record of decision is issued, no action may be taken on a 
proposal on which an environmental impact statement is made if the 
action would:
    (i) Have an adverse environmental impact, or
    (ii) Limit the choice of reasonable alternatives.
    (7) Mitigation measures. Practicable mitigation measures identified 
in an

[[Page 197]]

environmental assessment must be implemented. Mitigation measures 
described in an environmental impact statement and accepted in a 
decision must be implemented. Upon request, the Postal Service informs 
federal, state, and local agencies and the public of the progress in 
carrying out adopted mitigation measures.
    (b) Additional requirements for facility actions. (1) The 
environmental assessment of any action which involves the choice of 
contending sites for a facility must be started early in the planning of 
the action. An environmental assessment report, however, is not required 
until the contending project sites have been determined. The information 
contained in the environmental assessment report must be used, together 
with other site planning information, in the selection of the final 
site.
    (2) When an environmental assessment indicates that an environmental 
impact statement may be needed for a proposed facility action, a 
decision analysis report reflecting the results of the assessment is 
presented to the Capital Investment Committee, and to the Board of 
Governors if the Board considers the proposal (see 39 CFR 3.4(f)), so 
that they may decide if an impact statement is to be prepared.
    (3) If the Committee or the Board is requested to authorize the 
preparation of an environmental impact statement, and an analysis 
indicates that it would be more cost-effective to proceed immediately 
with continued control of sites, (including advance acquisition, if 
necessary, and where authorized by postal procedures), environmental 
impact statement preparation, and project designs, the request will 
include authorization of funds to permit:
    (i) The preparation of an impact statement encompassing all 
reasonable site alternatives,
    (ii) The continued control of specified competing sites (including 
advance acquisition, if necessary, and where authorized by postal 
procedures), chosen to preserve environmental or other options, and
    (iii) The development of limited designs of facilities for each 
competing site.
    (4) A completed environmental impact statement will be presented to 
the Capital Investment Committee, and to the Board of Governors if the 
Board considers the proposal, for use in deciding whether a proposed 
project should proceed, be restudied, or be abandoned. If the decision 
is to proceed with a proposed project, the Committee, or the Board if it 
considers the proposal, decides which alternative site is to be used for 
project development, and authorizes the project.

[44 FR 63525, Nov. 5, 1979, as amended at 48 FR 29378, June 24, 1983; 50 
FR 32411, Aug. 12, 1985; 50 FR 33036, Aug. 16, 1985; 55 FR 10454, Mar. 
21, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 775.7  Environmental assessments.

    (a) An environmental assessment must contain:
    (1) A summary of major considerations and conclusions,
    (2) A description of the proposed action,
    (3) For each reasonable alternative, a description of the affected 
environment, the environmental consequences, the mitigation measures, if 
any, and a comparison to all alternatives considered.
    (b) Those preparing an environmental assessment must solicit 
information and views from Federal, State, and local agencies and, where 
there is a substantial likelihood of significant effects on the 
environment, the public. All responsible views and information must be 
considered.


<R05>
Sec. 775.8  Environmental impact statements.

    (a) Determining scope. Before an environmental impact statement is 
prepared, the following procedures must be followed to determine what 
issues are to be addressed and in what depth:
    (1) Affected Federal, State, and local agencies and other interested 
persons are invited to participate by furnishing written views and 
information, or at a hearing if appropriate. Notice is given in 
accordance with Sec. 775.10.
    (2) The significance of issues to be analyzed in depth in the 
environmental impact statement is determined through consideration of:
    (i) Actions which are closely related, or similar, or have 
cumulative significant impacts.

[[Page 198]]

    (ii) Alternatives, which must include the ``no action'' alternative, 
other reasonable courses of action, and mitigation measures.
    (iii) Impacts, which may be direct, indirect, or cumulative.
    (3) Issues which are not significant are identified and eliminated.
    (4) The determinations made must be revised if substantial changes 
are made later in the proposed action, or if significant new 
circumstances or information arise which bear on the proposal or its 
impacts.
    (b) Preparation. (1) Except for proposals for legislation, 
environmental impact statements are prepared in two stages:
    (i) Draft environmental impact statement, prepared in accordance 
with the scope decided upon under paragraph (a) of this section.
    (ii) Final environmental impact statement, responding to comments on 
the draft statement and discussing and responding to any responsible 
opposing view which was not adequately discussed in the draft statement.
    (2) Environmental impact statements must:
    (i) Be analytic rather than encyclopedic.
    (ii) Contain discussions of impacts in proportion to their 
significance. Insignificant impacts eliminated during the process under 
Sec. 775.8(a) to determine the scope of issues must be discussed only to 
the extent necessary to state why they will not be significant.
    (iii) Be concise, and not longer than is necessary to comply with 
NEPA. They must not contain repeated statements of the same basic 
points.
    (iv) Contain discussions of alternatives considered and of how 
alternatives chosen will meet the requirements of NEPA and other 
environmental laws and policies.
    (v) Encompass the range of alternatives to be considered by the 
decision makers.
    (vi) Serve to assess the environmental impact of proposed actions, 
rather than to justify decisions already made.
    (3) The text of final environmental impact statements normally 
should be less than 150 pages. Statements on proposals of unusual scope 
or complexity normally should be less than 300 pages.
    (4) Staged or ``tiered'' environmental impact statements must not 
contain repetitive discussions of the same issues. Each document must 
state where each earlier document is available.
    (5) Material may be incorporated into an environmental impact 
statement by reference only when the material is reasonably available 
for inspection by potentially interested persons within the time allowed 
for comment.
    (6) If information relevant to reasonably foreseeable adverse 
impacts cannot be obtained because the overall cost of obtaining it is 
exorbitant or the means to obtain it are not known, the fact that such 
information is incomplete or unavailable must be stated clearly. In 
addition, the relevance of the incomplete or unavailable information to 
the evaluation of the impacts must be stated, and a summary of existing 
credible scientific evidence relevant to evaluation of the impacts must 
be included, as well as an evaluation of such impacts on the basis of 
theoretical approaches or generally accepted research methods. For 
purposes of this subsection, ``reasonably foreseeable'' includes impacts 
which have catastrophic consequences, even if their probability of 
occurrence is low, provided that the analysis of the impacts is 
supported by credible scientific evidence, is not based on pure 
conjecture, and is within the rule of reason.
    (7) If a cost-benefit analysis relevant to the choice among 
environmentally different alternatives was prepared for the proposed 
action, it must be incorporated by reference or appended to the 
statement to aid in evaluating the environmental consequences. The 
relationship between the cost-benefit analysis and any analysis of 
unquantified environmental impacts, values, and amenities must be 
discussed.
    (8) Methods used must be identified, and footnote references must be 
made to scientific and other sources relied on for conclusions. 
Analytical techniques may be incorporated in appendices.
    (9) Permits, licenses, and other authorizations needed to implement 
a proposal must be listed in the draft environmental impact statement 
and the prospects for obtaining them must be

[[Page 199]]

assessed. Where there is uncertainty as to the need for an authorization 
it must be indicated.
    (10) An environmental impact statement must contain a discussion of 
any inconsistency between the proposed action and any State or local 
law, ordinance, or approved plan; and must contain a description of the 
manner and extent to which the proposed action will be reconciled with 
the law, ordinance, or approved plan.
    (11) Where State laws or local ordinances impose environmental 
impact statement requirements which are not in conflict with those in 
NEPA, an environmental impact statement made by the Postal Service 
should satisfy pertinent State and local requirements to the extent 
practicable.
    (c) Format. The standard format for environmental statements is:
    (1) Cover Sheet. The cover sheet, not to exceed one page, must 
include:
    (i) A list of the responsible agencies including the lead agency and 
any cooperating agencies.
    (ii) The title of the proposed action that is the subject of the 
statement (and if appropriate, the titles of related cooperating agency 
actions), together with any city, state, and county where the action is 
to take place.
    (iii) The name, address, and telephone number of a person at the 
agency who can supply further information.
    (iv) A designation of the document as a draft or final statement or 
a draft or final supplement.
    (v) A one-paragraph abstract of the statement.
    (vi) The date by which comments must be received.
    (2) Summary. The summary must stress the major conclusions, areas of 
controversy (including issues raised by agencies and the public), and 
the issues to be resolved (including the choice among alternatives).
    (3) Table of Contents.
    (4) Purpose of and Need for Action.
    (5) Alternatives and Mitigation. This portion of the environmental 
impact statement is vitally important. Based on the analysis in the 
Affected Environment and Environmental Consequences section (see 
Sec. 775.8(c) (6)), the environmental impacts and the alternatives are 
presented in comparative form, thus sharply defining the issues and 
providing a clear basis for choosing alternatives. Those preparing the 
statement must:
    (i) Explore and evaluate all reasonable alternatives, including the 
``no action'' alternative, and briefly discuss the reasons for 
eliminating any alternatives.
    (ii) Devote substantial treatment to each alternative considered in 
detail, including the proposed action, so that reviewers may evaluate 
their comparative merits.
    (iii) Identify the preferred alternative or alternatives in the 
draft and final statements.
    (iv) Describe appropriate mitigation measures not considered to be 
an integral part of the proposed action or alternatives. See 
Sec. 775.6(a)(7).
    (6) Affected Environment and Environmental Consequences. For each 
reasonable alternative, each affected element of the environment must be 
described, followed immediately by an analysis of the impacts 
(environmental consequences). The analysis must include, among others, 
the following:
    (i) Any adverse environmental effects which cannot be avoided should 
the action be implemented.
    (ii) The relationship between short-term uses of the environment and 
the maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity,
    (iii) Any irreversible or irretrievable commitments of resources 
should the action be implemented, and
    (iv) Energy requirements and conservation; and natural, or 
depletable, resource requirements and conservation.
    (7) List of Mitigation Measures.
    (8) List of Preparers. List the names, together with the 
qualifications (expertise, professional disciplines), of persons who 
were primarily responsible for preparing the environmental impact 
statement or significant background papers.
    (9) List of Agencies, Organizations and Persons to Whom Copies of 
the Statement Are Sent.
    (10) Index.
    (11) Appendices. Include comments on draft statement in final 
statement.
    (d) Distribution. (1) Any completed draft environmental impact 
statement

[[Page 200]]

which is made the subject of a public hearing, must be made available to 
the public as provided in Sec. 775.10 of this part at least 15 days in 
advance of the hearing.
    (2) Draft and final environmental impact statements must be filed 
with the Environmental Protection Agency. Five copies are filed with 
EPA's headquarters addressed to the Office of Federal Activities (A-
104), Environmental Protection Agency, 401 M Street SW., Washington, DC 
20460; five copies are also filed with the responsible EPA region. 
Statements may not be filed with the EPA earlier than they are 
transmitted to commenting agencies and made available to the public.
    (3) Copies of draft and final environmental impact statements must 
be furnished to:
    (i) Any Federal agency which has jurisdiction by law or special 
expertise with respect to any environmental impact involved.
    (ii) Any appropriate Federal, state, or local agency authorized to 
develop and enforce environmental standards.
    (iii) The appropriate review officials identified in the Postal 
Service regulations and procedures governing intergovernmental review of 
Postal Service facility project actions, the State Historic Preservation 
Officer, and, when National Register or eligible properties may be 
affected, the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation.
    (iv) Any person, organization or agency requesting them.
    (4) Copies of final environmental impact statements must be 
furnished to any person who, or organization or agency which, submitted 
substantive comments on the draft.
    (e) Responses to comments. (1) A final statement responds to 
comments on a draft statement in one or more of the following ways:
    (i) Modification of alternatives, including the proposed action.
    (ii) Development and evaluation of alternatives not previously given 
serious consideration.
    (iii) Supplementation, improvement, or modification of analyses.
    (iv) Correction of facts.
    (v) Explanation of why a comment does not warrant a direct response, 
citing supporting sources, authorities, or reasons. Relevant 
circumstances which may trigger reappraisal or further response must be 
indicated.
    (2) Substantive comments received on a draft statement must be 
attached to the final statement.
    (3) If all of the changes are minor and are confined to responses 
described in paragraphs (e)(1) (iv) and (v) of this section, errata 
sheets may be written, and only the comments and errata sheets need be 
recirculated. In such a case, the draft statement with the comments, 
errata sheets, and a new cover, must be filed as the final statement.
    (f) Supplements. (1) A supplement to a draft or final environmental 
impact statement must be issued if:
    (i) Substantial changes are made in the proposed action that are 
relevant to environmental concerns; or
    (ii) Significant new circumstances or information bearing on 
environmental impacts of the proposed action arise or are discovered.
    (2) The decision on a proposed action involving an environmental 
impact statement, must be delayed until any necessary supplement has 
been circulated and has gone through the commenting period. A supplement 
is prepared, circulated, and filed in the same manner (except for 
determining scope) as draft and final statements, unless alternative 
procedures are approved by CEQ.
    (g) Contracting. A contractor employed to prepare an environmental 
impact statement must certify that it has no financial or other interest 
in the outcome of the project.
    (h) Proposals for Legislation. Legislative environmental impact 
statements must be prepared and transmitted as follows:
    (1) A legislative environmental impact statement is considered part 
of the formal transmittal of a legislative proposal to the Congress. It 
may be transmitted to the Congress up to 30 days after the proposal. The 
statement must be available in time for Congressional hearings and 
deliberations.
    (2) Preparation and processing of a legislative statement must 
conform to the requirements for impact statements, except as follows:

[[Page 201]]

    (i) It is not necessary to determine the scope of issues.
    (ii) A draft is considered to be a final statement. Both draft and 
final statements are needed only when:
    (A) A Congressional committee with jurisdiction over the proposal 
has a rule requiring both.
    (B) Both are specifically required by statute for proposals of the 
type being submitted.
    (3) Comments received on a legislative statement, and the Postal 
Service's responses, must be forwarded to the Congress.

[44 FR 63525, Nov. 5, 1979, as amended at 48 FR 29378, June 24, 1983; 55 
FR 10455; Mar. 21, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 775.9  Time frames for environmental impact statement actions.

    (a) Each week the EPA publishes in the Federal Register a notice of 
the draft and final environmental impact statements received in that 
office during the preceding week. The minimum time periods for decision 
on an action, specified in paragraphs (b) through (d) of this section, 
are calculated from the date of publication of an EPA notice of receipt 
of the relevant impact statement.
    (b) A decision on a proposed action may not be made or recorded 
until the later of the following dates: 90 days after publication of the 
notice described in paragraph (a) of this section for a draft statement 
or 30 days after publication of the notice for a final statement.
    (c) If a final statement is filed with the EPA within 90 days after 
a draft statement is filed, the 30 day period and the 90 day period may 
run concurrently.
    (d) A minimum of 45 days must be allowed for comments on draft 
statements.


<R05>
Sec. 775.10  Public notice and information.

    (a) Public notice is given of NEPA-related hearings, intent to 
undertake environmental assessments and environmental impact statements, 
and the availability of environmental documents (that is, environmental 
assessments, findings of no significant impact, and environmental impact 
statements), as follows:
    (1) Notices must be mailed to those who have requested them.
    (2) Notices concerning a proposal of national concern must be mailed 
to national organizations reasonably expected to be interested. Any such 
notice must be published in the Federal Register. (See paragraph (a)(4) 
of this section.
    (3) Notices of any proposed action having effects primarily of local 
concern are given as follows:
    (i) Any such notice, including a copy of any pertinent environmental 
document, must be mailed to the appropriate review officials identified 
in the Postal Service regulations and procedures governing 
intergovernmental review of Postal Service facility project actions, to 
the State Historic Preservation Officer, and to local public officials.
    (ii) Any such notice must be published in one or more local 
newspapers.
    (iii) Any such notice must be posted on and near any proposed and 
alternate sites for an action.
    (iv) Any such notice may be mailed to potentially interested 
community organizations, including small business associations.
    (v) Any such notice may be mailed to owners and occupants of nearby 
or affected property.
    (4) A copy of every notice of intent to prepare an environmental 
impact statement must be furnished to the Assistant General Counsel, 
Legislative Division, Law Department, who will have it published in the 
Federal Register.
    (b) All notices must give the name, address, and telephone number of 
a postal official who may be contacted for information. Environmental 
documents are made available to the public on request. Inspection, 
copying, and the furnishing of copies will be in accordance with 39 CFR 
Part 265, ``Release of Information.''

[44 FR 63525, Nov. 5, 1979, as amended at 47 FR 19992, May 10, 1982; 48 
FR 29378, June 24, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 775.11  Hearings.

    (a) Public hearings must be held whenever there is:
    (1) Substantial environmental controversy concerning a proposed 
action

[[Page 202]]

and a request for a hearing by any responsible individual or 
organization;
    (2) A request for a hearing by an agency with jurisdiction over or 
special expertise concerning the proposed action; or
    (3) A reasonable expectation that a hearing will produce significant 
information not likely to be obtained without a hearing.
    (b) The distribution and notice requirements of Secs. 775.8(d)(1) 
and 775.10 must be complied with whenever a hearing is to be held.


<R03>
PART 776--FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION OF WETLANDS PROCEDURES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
776.1  Purpose and policy.
776.2  Responsibility.
776.3  Scope.
776.4  Definitions.
776.5  New construction.
776.6  Existing buildings, owned or leased.
776.7  Disposal, lease, easement to non-Federal public or private 
          parties.
776.8  Public notice.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401.

    Source: 46 FR 22366, Apr. 17, 1981, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 776.1  Purpose and policy.

    (a) Executive Order 11988, Floodplain Management, was issued on May 
24, 1977, under authority of the National Environmental Policy Act of 
1969, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4321, et seq.) (NEPA), the National Flood 
Insurance Act of 1968, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4001), and the Flood 
Disaster Protection Act of 1973 (Pub. L. 93-234, 87 Stat. 9451). 
Executive Order 11990, Protection of Wetlands, was issued on May 24, 
1977, under authority of NEPA. The purpose of these Orders was to avoid 
adverse impacts associated with the occupancy and/or modification of 
floodplains; or the modification and destruction of wetlands.
    (b) These procedures implement Executive Orders 11988 and 11990 and 
are adopted under the Postal Reorganization Act rather than the statutes 
listed in paragraph (a) of this section, to the extent these statutes do 
not apply to the Postal Service under 39 U.S.C. 410(a).
    (c) These procedures provide guidance:
    (1) To avoid direct or indirect, long or short term adverse impact 
on floodplains and wetlands;
    (2) To reduce the risk of flood loss;
    (3) To minimize the impact of floods on human safety, health, and 
welfare;
    (4) To restore and preserve the natural and beneficial values served 
by floodplains;
    (5) To minimize the destruction, loss, or degradation of wetlands;
    (6) To preserve and enhance the natural and beneficial values of 
wetlands; and
    (7) To avoid direct or indirect support of floodplain development.
    (d) These procedures are general in nature. Postal Service Handbook 
RE-6, Environmental Procedures, provides detailed procedures for 
implementing these executive orders.


<R05>
Sec. 776.2  Responsibility.

    The Assistant Postmaster General, Facilities Department, is 
responsible for overall compliance with these procedures.

[46 FR 22366, Apr. 17, 1981, as amended at 51 FR 40170, Nov. 5, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 776.3  Scope.

    These procedures are applicable to every proposed postal facility 
project which involves:
    (a) New contruction, for ownership or lease;
    (b) Existing buildings, owned or leased, except the acquisition of 
existing leased facilities when no substantial external change in the 
configuration of the facility will occur;
    (c) Modernization or improvement of an existing facility where the 
external configuration of the building or the use of the facility is 
changed substantially and significantly;
    (d) Disposal or lease of owned, excess property;
    (e) Proposals for granting a property easement or right-of-way to 
non-federal public or private parties.


<R05>
Sec. 776.4  Definitions.

    (a) A floodplain, for the purposes of these procedures, is the area 
in which a

[[Page 203]]

flood has a one percent chance of occurrence in any given year (also 
known as a 100-year flood).
    (b) A wetland, for the purposes of these procedures, is an area that 
is inundated by surface or ground water frequently enough to support a 
prevalence of vegetable or aquatic life requiring saturated or 
seasonally saturated soil conditions for growth and reproduction.

[46 FR 22366, Apr. 17, 1981, as amended at 55 FR 10455, Mar. 21, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 776.5  New construction.

    (a) Construction in floodplain/wetland. During the evaluation of 
contending sites for a proposed project, information concerning impacts 
on wetlands and floodplains will be collected and considered. If use of 
a site would require construction in a floodplain or wetland, the site 
may be considered only when there is no practicable alternative site.
    (b) Floodplain/Wetland Information. Floodplain and wetland 
information must be compiled and considered throughout the facility 
planning process. If a proposed action will occur in or impact a 
floodplain or wetland site, specific floodplain or wetland information 
must be developed. As a minimum, the information should:
    (1) Document whether the proposed action will directly or indirectly 
support floodplain development.
    (2) Document the impacts a proposed action would have on the 
floodplain or wetland, including positive and negative; concentrated and 
dispersed; short-term and long-term.
    (3) Document the flood hazard and risk to lives and property.
    (4) Present the natural and beneficial floodplain values.
    (5) Present measures which will preserve the floodplain, minimize 
harm to it, or restore it. Minimization of harm is assessed in terms of:
    (i) The amount of investment at risk or the flood loss potential of 
the action itself,
    (ii) The impact the action may have on others, and
    (iii) The impact the action may have on floodplain values.
    (c) Environmental Assessment/Impact Statement. Information developed 
concerning the floodplain or wetland must be evaluated in an 
Environmental Impact Statement or an Environmental Assessment, if either 
is prepared, and made available to the public under 39 CFR part 775.
    (d) Site planning. During site evaluation, a determination must be 
made whether any of the identified site alternatives would require 
construction in, or appear to have an impact on, a floodplain or 
wetland. This information will be included as part of any required 
Environmental Assessment.
    (e) Analysis of alternatives. If any of the site alternatives 
identified under paragraph (d) of this section would involve 
construction within a floodplain or wetland, an analysis of alternatives 
must be prepared, and must include:
    (1) Alternate sites as identified in the site planning process;
    (2) Other means which accomplish the same purpose as the proposed 
action; and
    (3) A no-action alternative.
    (f) Reevaluation. If, after consideration of information and 
analyses produced under paragraphs (b), (d), and (e) of this section, 
and (if required) review through an Environmental Assessment or 
Environmental Impact Statement, the determination is that there appears 
to be no practicable alternative to constructing in a floodplain or 
wetland, a final reevaluation of alternatives must be conducted. The 
Facilities Service Center Director is responsible for this reevaluation. 
To facilitate this reevaluation, the following data must be submitted to 
the Facilities Service Center Director:
    (1) A summary of reasons why the rejected alternatives and 
alternative sites, if any, were considered impracticable.
    (2) Detailed descriptions of all rejected alternatives and 
alternative sites.
    (3) A summary of comments received from the public and the 
appropriate review officials identified in the Postal Service 
regulations and procedures governing intergovernmental review of Postal 
Service facility project actions as a result of proper public notices.
    (4) Documentation from the site evaluation and planning process.

[[Page 204]]

    (5) The Environmental Assessment or Environmental Impact Statement, 
if either was required.
    (6) The floodplain or wetland location map from which the 
determination was made. The map or other information should indicate 
appropriate site elevations (contours), base floor elevation, and the 
floodplain elevation at the site.
    (7) The facility functional design specifications or site utlization 
drawings, if available.
    (8) Other information pertinent to the proposal as determined by the 
stage of development of the project.
    (g) Alternative Available. If the Facilities Service Center 
Director, determines that there may be a practicable site alternative to 
the one selected, the appropriate Postal Service organization is advised 
to abandon the selected course and pursue other alternatives.
    (h) No alternative. If the Facilities Service Center Director 
determines that there is not a practicable alternative to constructing 
in a floodplain or wetland, the appropriate Postal Service organization 
is so advised. The Director may provide instructions for mandatory 
measures to be accomplished during design and construction to minimize 
harm to the floodplain or wetland.
    (i) Public Notice. If there is no practicable alternative to 
constructing in a floodplain or wetland, the Facilities Service Center 
Director, must provide a public notice (see Sec. 776.8) as soon as 
possible for the proposed action. The notice includes:
    (1) A description of why the proposed action must be located in a 
floodplain or wetland;
    (2) A description of all significant facts considered in making the 
determination, including alternative sites and actions;
    (3) A statement indicating whether the actions conform to applicable 
state or local floodplain/wetland protection standards;
    (4) If applicable, a statement indicating why the National Flood 
Insurance Program criteria are demonstrably inappropriate for the 
proposed action;
    (5) A description of measures that will be taken to minimize harm to 
the floodplain or wetland;
    (6) A statement indicating how the action affects natural or 
beneficial floodplain values; and
    (7) A list of any other involved agencies or individuals.
    (j) Design Requirements. If structures impact, are located in, or 
support development of a floodplain or wetland, the design must include 
measures necessary (1) to minimize harm to the floodplain or wetland; 
(2) to reduce the risk of flood loss; (3) to minimize destruction, loss, 
or degradation of wetlands; (4) to minimize the impact on human safety, 
health, and welfare; and (5) to restore and preserve the natural and 
beneficial floodplain and wetland values. Construction must conform, at 
a minimum, to the standards and criteria of the National Flood Insurance 
Program, except where those standards are demonstrably inappropriate for 
postal purposes.

[46 FR 22366, Apr. 17, 1981, as amended at 48 FR 29378, June 24, 1983; 
50 FR 32411, Aug. 12, 1985; 51 FR 40170, Nov. 5, 1986; 55 FR 10455, Mar. 
21, 1990; 55 FR 12822, Apr. 6, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 776.6  Existing buildings, owned or leased.

    (a) Installing Markers for Flood Hazards. If property used by the 
general public has suffered flood damage or is located in a floodplain 
or flood hazard area, conspicuous markers must be installed on 
structures and other appropriate places to show past flood record height 
and the probable 100-year flood height. These must be installed where 
they will be readily visible to the general public visiting or using the 
facility.
    (b) Warning Procedures for Floods. The Regional Director, Mail 
Processing Department, must develop warning and evacuation procedures 
for properties subject to flash floods or rapid rise floods.


<R05>
Sec. 776.7  Disposal, lease, easement to non-federal public or private parties.

    For actions involving a lease, easement right-of-way, or disposal to 
non-federal public or private parties, a determination whether the 
proposed action will occur in a floodplain or wetland must be made. If 
the action will

[[Page 205]]

occur in a floodplain or wetland, the Postal Service must:
    (a) Reference in the conveyance those uses that are restricted under 
identified federal, state, or local floodplain or wetland regulations; 
and
    (b) Attach other appropriate restrictions to the use of properties 
by the Grantee or purchaser and any successors, which assure (1) that 
harm to lives, property, and the floodplain or wetland values are 
identified and are minimized, and (2) that floodplain or wetland values 
are restored and preserved, except where prohibited by law; or
    (c) Withhold the property from conveyance.


<R05>
Sec. 776.8  Public notice.

    (a) Public notice of Postal Service plans for locating a proposed 
project in a floodplain or a wetland will be sent to: the appropriate 
review officials identified in the Postal Service regulations and 
procedures governing intergovernmental review of Postal Service facility 
project actions; local public officials; local newspapers; and other 
parties who express interest in the project.
    (b) The notice must contain the information described in 
Sec. 776.5(i).
    (c) The public notice also must contain a provision for a 30-day 
public commenting period before any action is taken to acquire the site.

[46 FR 22366, Apr. 17, 1981, as amended at 48 FR 29378, June 24, 1983]


<R03>
PART 777--RELOCATION ASSISTANCE AND REAL PROPERTY ACQUISITION POLICIES--Table of Contents

<R05>


           Subpart A--General Policy, Purpose and Definitions

Sec.
777.11  General policy.
777.12  Purpose.
777.13  Definitions.
777.14  Certain indirect actions prohibited.

                Subpart B--Uniform Relocation Assistance

777.21  General procedures.
777.22  Relocation assistance advisory services.
777.23  Moving expenses.
777.24  Replacement housing payments.
777.25  Additional rules for replacement housing payments.
777.26  Mobile homes.
777.27  Last resort housing.
777.28  Claims and appeals.

                         Subpart C--Acquisition

777.31  Acquisition procedures.
777.32  Acquisition of tenant-owned improvements.
777.33  Expenses incidental to transfer of title to the Postal Service.

                    Subpart D--Voluntary Acquisitions

777.41  Acquisition procedures.

                          Subpart E--Donations

777.51  Acceptance of donations.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401.

    Source: 51 FR 6983, Feb. 27, 1986, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
           Subpart A--General Policy, Purpose and Definitions


<R05>
Sec. 777.11  General policy.

    It is the policy of the Postal Service to comply voluntarily with 
the provisions of the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property 
Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 (Pub. L. 91-646; 84 Stat. 1894), 
hereinafter referred to as the Act.


<R05>
Sec. 777.12  Purpose.

    The purpose of these regulations is to update policy and procedures 
for the Postal Service's voluntary compliance with the Act.


<R05>
Sec. 777.13  Definitions.

    (a) The Act. The Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property 
Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 (Pub. L. 91-646; 84 Stat. 1894).
    (b) Business. Any lawful activity, except a farm operation, that is:
    (1) Conducted primarily for the purchase, sale, lease, and/or rental 
of personal and/or real property, and for the manufacturing, processing, 
and/or marketing of products, commodities, and/or any other personal 
property; or
    (2) Conducted primarily for the sale of services to the public; or
    (3) Solely for the purposes of reimbursing moving and related 
expenses,

[[Page 206]]

conducted primarily for outdoor advertising display purposes, when the 
display(s) must be moved as a result of the project; or
    (4) Conducted by a nonprofit organization that has established its 
nonprofit status under applicable Federal or State law.
    (c) Small business. A business having at least one but not more than 
500 employees working at the location being acquired.
    (d) Comparable Replacement Dwelling. A dwelling which is:
    (1) Decent, safe, and sanitary.
    (2) Functionally similar to the displacement dwelling with 
particular attention to the number of rooms and living space.
    (3) In an area that is not subject to unreasonably adverse 
environmental conditions, is not generally less desirable than the 
location of the displacement dwelling with respect to public utilities 
and commercial and public facilities, and is reasonably accessible to 
the displaced person's place of employment.
    (4) On a site that is typical in size for residential development 
with normal site improvements including customary landscaping. The site 
need not include special improvements such as outbuildings, fences, 
swimming pools, and greenhouses.
    (5) Currently available to the displaced person.
    (6) Within the financial means of the displaced person.
    (e) Decent, Safe, and Sanitary Dwelling. A dwelling which meets 
local housing and occupancy codes and the following standards, unless 
they are waived for good cause by the Postal Service. The dwelling must:
    (1) Be structurally sound, weathertight, and in good repair.
    (2) Contain a safe electrical wiring system adequate for lighting 
and other electrical devices.
    (3) Contain a heating system capable of sustaining a healthful 
temperature of approximately 70 degrees except in those areas where 
local climatic conditions do not require such a system.
    (4) Be adequate in size with respect to the number of rooms and 
areas of living space needed to accommodate the displaced persons. There 
shall be a separate, well-lighted and ventilated bathroom that provides 
privacy to the user and contains a bathtub or shower stall, sink, and 
toilet, all in good working order and properly connected to appropriate 
sources of water and to a sewage drainage system. In the case of a 
housekeeping unit--as opposed to, for example, a room in a boarding 
house--there shall be a kitchen area that contains a fully usable sink, 
properly connected to potable hot and cold water and to a sewage 
draining system, and adequate space and utility service connections for 
a stove and a refrigerator.
    (5) Contain unobstructed egress to safe, open space at ground level.
    (6) For displaced persons who are handicapped, be free of any 
barriers which would preclude their reasonable ingress, egress, or use 
of the dwelling.
    (f) Displaced Person. (1) Subject to the additional definitions, 
limitations and exceptions in paragraph (f)(2) of this section, the term 
``displaced person'' is defined as follows. (``Displaced persons'' are 
entitled to receive benefits only as specifically provided for elsewhere 
in these regulations.)
    (i) A person who owns real property, and who is required to move or 
to move personal property from the real property following Postal 
Service action to obtain title to, or a leasehold interest in, such real 
property by the exercise or the threat of the exercise of eminent 
domain.
    (ii) A person who is a tenant and who is required to move or to move 
his or her personal property from real property:
    (A) Following Postal Service action to obtain the tenant's leasehold 
interest in such real property by the exercise or the threat of the 
exercise of eminent domain, or,
    (B) Where the Postal Service acquires a fee interest in the property 
(including long-term leases of 50 years or more), as a result of a 
Postal Service notice of displacement or notice to vacate such real 
property, provided the tenant was lawfully in possession on the date 
title to such property transfers to the Postal Service. (The requirement 
that the tenant occupy such real property on the date title in such real 
property transfers to the Postal

[[Page 207]]

Service may be waived for good cause by the Postal Service.)
    (C) Where such real property was used to construct a new building 
for the express purpose of leasing to the Postal Service under 
circumstances where such tenant would have been a ``displaced person'' 
hereunder had the Postal Service itself acquired the land and required 
the removal of the tenant to undertake construction of the building for 
Postal Service ownership.
    (iii) Where the Postal Service acquires either a fee interest or a 
leasehold interest in the property, a person who is a residential tenant 
and is or will be required to move or to move his or her property from 
the real property, in order for the Postal Service to accomplish the 
project for which the property was acquired, provided such tenant 
occupies such real property on the date title in such real property 
transfers to the Postal Service or the date the Postal Service leases or 
contracts to lease such property, and further provided such tenant was 
lawfully in possession at the time of the initiation of negotiations. 
(The requirement that the tenant occupy such real property on the date 
title in such real property transfers to the Postal Service may be 
waived for good cause by the Postal Service.)
    (2) The term ``displaced person'' covers only persons meeting the 
requirements in paragraph (f)(1) of this section. The term ``displaced 
person'' does not cover the following non-exclusive list of examples.
    (i) An owner who voluntarily sells his or her real property to the 
Postal Service, or,
    (ii) A tenant who voluntarily transfers his or her leasehold 
interest to the Postal Service without the exercise or the threat of the 
exercise of eminent domain, or,
    (iii) A tenant who is not lawfully in possession at the times for 
which lawful possession is specified in paragraphs (f)(1)(ii)(B) and 
(f)(1)(iii) of this section. A tenant who was legally required by the 
lease or otherwise to have moved from the property at the times 
specified in such paragraphs shall not be considered to be lawfully in 
possession.
    (iv) A person who, at the determination of the Postal Service, is 
not required to relocate permanently, or,
    (v) A person who, after receiving a notice of displacement or notice 
to vacate by the Postal Service, is notified in writing that he or she 
will not be displaced. Such later notification shall not be issued if 
the person has already moved. If such latter notification is issued, the 
Postal Service shall reimburse the person for any reasonable expenses 
incurred to satisfy any binding contractual relocation obligations 
entered into after the effective date of the notice of displacement or 
the notice to vacate or,
    (vi) A person who is required to temporarily vacate the premises in 
order to permit fumigation, repair, painting, or other maintenance or 
code of enforcement work or,
    (vii) A tenant who is required to move from real property as a 
result of a notice from the Postal Service to vacate such real property 
where such notice to vacate is issued five years or more after the date 
of the acquisition of such real property. A tenant who is given a notice 
to vacate as a result of failure to comply with the terms of his/her 
lease with the Postal Service or failure to renew his/her lease under 
prevailing market conditions is not considered to be a displaced person.
    (viii) A mobile home occupant who owns the site on which the mobile 
home is located and who voluntarily sells the site to the Postal 
Service, regardless of whether such person owns or rents the mobile 
home.
    (ix) A person whose property is acquired through a ``friendly 
condemnation action'' where price is not an issue.
    (g) Displacement Dwelling. The dwelling acquired by the Postal 
Service from which a displaced person is required to move.
    (h) Dwelling. The place of permanent or customary and usual 
residence of a person including a single family house; a single family 
unit in a two-family, multi-family, or multi-purpose property; a unit of 
a condominium or cooperative housing project; a non-housekeeping unit 
(i.e. room in a boarding house); a mobile home; or any other residential 
unit.

[[Page 208]]

    (i) Family. Two or more individuals who are related by blood, 
adoption, marriage, or legal guardianship who live together as a family 
unit. If the Postal Service considers that circumstances warrant, others 
who live together as a family unit may be treated as if they are a 
family for the purpose of determining assistance under these 
regulations.
    (j) Farm Operation. Any activity conducted solely or primarily for 
the production of one or more types of agricultural products or 
commodities, including timber, for sale or home use, and customarily 
producing such products or commodities in sufficient quantity to be 
capable of contributing materially to the operator's support.
    (k) Financial Means. A comparable replacement dwelling is within the 
financial means of the displaced family or individual if the average 
monthly rental or housing cost (e.g., monthly mortgage payments, 
insurance for the dwelling unit, property taxes, and other reasonable 
recurring related expenses) which the displaced person will be required 
to pay does not exceed the greater of 25 percent of the monthly gross 
income of the displaced family or individual or the ratio of the present 
monthly rental or housing cost to the gross income of the displaced 
family or individual. (Supplemental payments made by public agencies are 
to be included in gross income for purposes of these comparisons.)
    (l) Initiation of Negotiations. In the case where eminent domain is 
neither exercised nor threatened to be exercised, the initiation of 
negotiations is the initial written communication stating a price by the 
owner or the owner's representative to the Postal Service, or by the 
Postal Service to the owner or the owner's representative, regarding a 
proposed acquisition (by purchase or lease) or an interest in a specific 
piece of real property. In the case where eminent domain is either 
exercised or threatened to be exercised, the initiation of negotiations 
is the date the Postal Service makes a written offer of just 
compensation.
    (m) Notice of Displacement. A notice given in writing by the Postal 
Service to a person that he or she will be displaced from his or her 
place of residence, business or farm, as a result of a facility action 
by the Postal Service. A notice of displacement may be combined with or 
in a notice to vacate.
    (n) Notice to Vacate. A notice given in writing by the Postal 
Service to a person that he or she is to vacate postal owned property on 
or before a certain date. A notice to vacate may be combined with or in 
a notice of displacement.
    (o) Owner of Displacement Dwelling. A person is considered to be an 
owner, if, at the initiation of negotiations, the person holds any of 
the following interests in real property acquired for a postal project:
    (1) Fee title, a life estate, a 99-year lease, or a lease, including 
any options for extension, with at least 50 years to run from the date 
of acquisition; or
    (2) An interest other than leasehold interest in a cooperative 
housing project which includes the right to occupy a dwelling; or
    (3) A contract to purchase any of the interests or estates described 
in paragraph (o)(1) or (o)(2) of this section; or
    (4) Any other interest, including a partial interest, which in the 
judgment of the Postal Service, warrants consideration as ownership.
    (p) Person. Any individual, family, partnership, corporation, 
association, business or farm operation.
    (q) Personal Property. Any tangible property, not considered part of 
the real property, for which payment has not been included in the 
acquisition cost.
    (r) Tenant. A person who has the legal right to temporary use and 
occupancy of real property owned by another. In some cases, these 
regulations also use the term ``tenant'' to refer to a person who 
occupies real property owned by another but whose legal right was 
terminated due to a timely notice to vacate the real property used and 
occupied.

[51 FR 6983, Feb. 27, 1986, as amended at 54 FR 10666, Mar. 15, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 777.14  Certain indirect actions prohibited.

    Postal employees shall take no indirect, coercive, or deceptive 
actions to

[[Page 209]]

cause persons to move from real property in an effort to avoid the 
circumstances under which such persons would be eligible to receive 
relocation benefits as displaced persons under these regulations. If a 
claimant demonstrates that such prohibited action caused him or her to 
move, he or she will be treated as a displaced person hereunder, if he 
or she otherwise meets the definition of a displaced person.


<R04>
                Subpart B--Uniform Relocation Assistance


<R05>
Sec. 777.21  General procedures.

    (a) Planning Prior to Site Selection. When acquisition of a site 
under consideration would likely involve displacement of a person 
eligible under Sec. 777.13 for relocation assistance, the Postal Service 
representative shall prepare a relocation needs and availability 
analysis. The Postal Service representative shall include in the 
analysis a complete inventory of persons who may be displaced and 
specifically identify their needs.
    (b) Planning Subsequent to Site Selection. Subsequent to site 
selection, the Postal Service must review the relocation needs and 
availability analysis and establish a specific plan for providing the 
assistance covered by these regulations to any eligible displaced 
persons. It will further determine the necessity of establishing an on-
site relocation office which would be accessible to displaced persons 
and would be staffed with relocation personnel qualified to render all 
relocation services. The Postal Service will assure that cost estimates 
reflect current market conditions and that funding is available for all 
relocation assistance and activities.
    (c) Contracting for Relocation Services. When the Postal Service 
determines it to be advantageous, it may enter into a relocation 
assistance service contract with a public agency or private firm having 
expertise in relocation assistance. The contract must require the 
contractor to follow Postal Service relocation assistance regulations.
    (d) Notice to Vacate, Ninety Day Requirement. Postal Service notices 
to vacate must be issued at least 90 days prior to the date the property 
must be vacated. Any such notice must be in writing and delivered in 
person with receipt acknowledged, or by certified mail, return receipt 
requested. The 90-day requirement does not apply to any such notice 
issued subsequent to a valid notice to vacate issued by the prior owner 
of the property. A 90-day notice may be given with, or such notice may 
be combined with, but such notice must not be given before, the notice 
of displacement referred to in paragraph (f) of this section.
    (e) Shorter Notice Period, Unusual Circumstances. An occupant may be 
required to vacate the property on less than 90 days advance written 
notice if the Postal Service determines that a 90-day notice is 
impracticable. An example of such a situation is when the person's 
continued occupancy of the property would constitute a substantial 
danger to the person's health or safety.
    (f) Notice of Displacement. Normally, a notice of displacement will 
be given at the time of acquisition or later. Such notice must not be 
given earlier than the time of contracting, except in the case of 
acquisitions by eminent domain or by the threat of eminent domain. Such 
notice may be given at the time of contracting or between the time of 
contracting and the time of acquisition if the Postal Service considers 
it wise to start the displacement process then and if, in the judgment 
of the Postal Service, it is clear that person will in fact be a 
displaced person.
    (g) Notice of Availability of Advisory Services. The notice of 
displacement will state that relocation assistance advisory services 
will be available to the displaced person and will designate who will 
provide such services.
    (h) Eviction for cause. Any person occupying real property and not 
in unlawful occupancy on the date of initiation of negotiations is 
presumed to be entitled to relocation payments and other assistance 
unless the Postal Service determines that:
    (1) The person received an eviction notice prior to initiation of 
negotiations and, as a result of that notice, is later evicted; or

[[Page 210]]

    (2) The person is evicted after initiation of negotiations for 
serious or repeated violation of material terms of the lease or 
occupancy agreement; and
    (3) In either case the eviction is not undertaken for the purpose of 
evading the obligation to make the relocation payments and other 
assistance available.

[51 FR 6983, Feb. 27, 1986, as amended at 54 FR 10667, Mar. 15, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 777.22  Relocation assistance advisory services.

    (a) General. The Postal Service carries out an advisory assistance 
program for displaced persons.
    (b) Relocation Information. The Postal Service must contact each 
displaced person to provide an informational statement outlining the 
assistance available to the particular person. If it is impracticable to 
contact the displaced persons personally, the informational statement 
must be mailed to the persons, certified mail, return receipt requested.
    (c) Time of Initial Contact to Provide Relocation Information. The 
initial contact to provide relocation information must take place by the 
following dates:
    (1) Where acquisition of the property is to occur as a result of the 
exercise or the threat of the exercise of eminent domain, at the time of 
initiation of negotiation or within 30 days thereafter.
    (2) In any other instance such contact must be made prior to 
acquisition and prior to the notice of displacement or the notice to 
vacate, but it should normally not be made prior to contracting for the 
acquisition.
    (d) Service to be Provided. The advisory program shall include such 
services as may be necessary or appropriate to:
    (1) Provide current information on the availability, purchase 
prices, financing, and rental costs of replacement dwellings.
    (2) For displaced persons eligible for replacement housing payments, 
explain that the displaced person cannot be required to move unless at 
least one comparable replacement dwelling is made available.
    (i) At the request of the displaced person, the Postal Service must 
inform that person, in writing, of the specific comparable replacement 
dwelling used as the basis for the replacement housing payment offer, 
the price or rent used to establish the upper limit of that offer, the 
basis for the determination, and the amount of the replacement housing 
payment to which he or she may be entitled.
    (ii) Where feasible, housing must be inspected by the Postal Service 
representative prior to its being made available to assure that it is a 
comparable replacement dwelling and meets the decent, safe, and sanitary 
standard. The displaced person must be notified that a replacement 
housing payment will not be made unless the replacement dwelling is 
inspected and determined to be decent, safe, and sanitary.
    (iii) Whenever possible, minority displaced persons must be given 
reasonable opportunities to relocate to comparable dwellings, not 
located in a an area of minority concentration, that are within their 
financial means. This policy, however, does not require the Postal 
Service to provide a person a larger payment than is necessary to enable 
that person to relocate to a comparable replacement dwelling.
    (iv) All displaced persons, especially the elderly and handicapped, 
must be offered transportation to inspect housing to which they are 
referred.
    (3) Provide current and continuing information on the availability, 
purchase prices, and rental costs of comparable and suitable commercial 
and farm properties and locations, and assist any person displaced from 
a business or farm operation to obtain and become established in a 
suitable replacement location.
    (4) Minimize hardships to displaced persons in adjusting to 
relocation by providing counseling, advice about other sources of 
assistance that may be available, and such other help as may be 
appropriate.
    (5) Supply displaced persons with appropriate information concerning 
Federal, State, and local housing programs, disaster loan and other 
programs administered by the Small Business Administration, and other 
Federal, State, and local programs offering assistance to displaced 
persons.

[[Page 211]]

    (6) Upon selection of a replacement property by a displaced person, 
the Postal Service may arrange for a representative to assist the 
displaced person with necessary arrangements for the move.


<R05>
Sec. 777.23  Moving expenses.

    (a) Eligibility. (1) Residential displaced persons are entitled to 
benefits under paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section.
    (2) Business and farm displaced persons are entitled to benefits 
under paragraphs (d) through (k) of this section.
    (3) Those business or farm displaced persons who reside on the 
property where the business or farm operation is conducted are eligible 
for applicable benefits both as residents and as business or farm 
displaced persons, but no duplicate payments are allowed.
    (4) Persons who are required to move or to move personal property 
from real property, an interest in which is not acquired by the Postal 
Service, when it is determined by the Postal Service that such move is 
necessary or reasonable because of the Postal Service's having acquired 
an interest in other real property owned or leased by such persons and 
on which such persons conduct a business or farm operation, under 
circumstances where such persons are displaced persons with regard to 
such other real property or would have been displaced persons with 
regard to such other real property had they been required to move or to 
move personal property from such other real property, are entitled to 
benefits as residential, business or farm displaced persons under 
paragraphs (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section.
    (5) Eligibility for moving expenses does not depend upon the owner's 
or tenant's actual occupancy of the displacement real property.
    (b) Allowable Expenses, Residential Moves. Allowable moving expenses 
include:
    (1) Transportation of the displaced person and his or her personal 
property. Transportation costs are limited to the costs of a move up to 
a distance of 50 miles unless the Postal Service determines that 
relocation beyond 50 miles is justified.
    (2) Packing, crating, unpacking, and uncrating of the personal 
property.
    (3) Disconnecting, dismantling, removing, reassembling, and 
reinstalling relocated household appliances and other personal property.
    (4) Storage of the personal property not to exceed 12 months unless 
the Postal Service determines that a longer period is necessary.
    (5) Reasonable costs for insurance for the replacement value of the 
personal property being moved or stored.
    (6) When determined to be fair and reasonable by the Postal Service 
the replacement value of property lost, stolen, or damaged in the 
process of moving (not through the fault or negligence of the displaced 
person, his or her agent, or employee), but only where insurance 
covering such loss, theft, or damage is not reasonably available.
    (7) Other moving related expenses that are not listed as non-
allowable under paragraph (l)(3) of this section and which the Postal 
Service determines to be reasonable and necessary.
    (c) Fixed payment for moving expenses. residential moves. Any person 
displaced from a dewlling or a seasonal residence is entitled to receive 
an expense and dislocation allowance as an alternative to a payment for 
actual moving and related expenses. This allowance shall be determined 
according to the applicable schedule approved by the Federal Highway 
Administration. This includes a provision that the expense and 
dislocation allowance to a person with minimal personal possessions who 
is in occupancy of a dormitory style room shared by two or more other 
unrelated persons or a person whose residential move is performed by an 
agency at no cost to the person shall be limited to $50.
    (d) Allowable Expenses, Business and Farm Operations. Allowable 
expenses include:
    (1) The expenses allowed under paragraphs (b) (2), (4), (5) and (6) 
of this section;
    (2) Transportation of personal property. Transportation costs are 
limited to a distance up to 50 miles unless the Postal Service makes a 
finding that relocation beyond 50 miles is justified.

[[Page 212]]

    (3) Disconnecting, dismantling, removing, reassembling, and 
reinstalling relocated machinery, equipment, and other personal 
property, and substitute personal property as described in paragraph 
(d)(8) of this section. This includes connection to utilities available 
at the replacement site or building and minor modifications to personal 
property to adapt it to the replacement site or building. Excluded are 
expenses for providing utilities to or installing utilities at the 
replacement site or building and expenses for repair, alteration, 
improvement or modification of the replacement site or building. This 
exclusion includes, but is not limited to, any repairs, alterations, 
improvements, or modifications required by local code to bring the 
building up to standard.
    (4) Any license, permit, or certification fee required of the 
displaced person by a governmental authority at the replacement 
location. However, this payment is limited to the pro rata value for the 
remaining useful life of any existing license, permit, or certification.
    (5) Reasonable professional services necessary for planning the move 
of the personal property. Such professional services must be approved in 
advance by the Postal Service and shall not exceed the lowest of three 
acceptable bids.
    (6) Relettering signs and replacing stationary on hand at the time 
of displacement that are made obsolete as a result of the move.
    (7) Actual direct loss of tangible personal property incurred as a 
result of moving or discontinuing the business or farm operation. The 
payment will consist of the reasonable costs incurred in attempting to 
sell the item plus the lesser of:
    (i) The fair market value of the item for continued use at the 
displacement site, less the proceeds from its sale. (To be eligible for 
this payment the claimant must make a good faith effort to sell the 
personal property, unless the Postal Service determines that such effort 
is not necessary. When payment for property loss is claimed for goods 
held for sale, the fair market value must be based on the cost of the 
goods to the business, not the potential selling price.); or
    (ii) The estimated cost of moving the item no more than 50 miles, 
but with no allowance for storage.
    (8) If an item of personal property which is used as part of a 
business or farm operation is not moved, is promptly replaced with a 
substitute item that performs a comparable function at the replacement 
site, the displaced person is entitled to payment of the lesser of:
    (i) The cost of the substitute item, including installation costs at 
the replacement site, less any proceeds from the sale. (To be eligible 
for payments under paragraph (d)(8) of this section, the claimant must 
make a good faith effort to sell the personal property, unless the 
Postal Service determines that such effort is not necessary.)
    (ii) The estimated cost of moving and reinstalling the replaced 
item, based on the lowest acceptable bid or estimate obtained by the 
Postal Service for eligible moving and related expenses, but with no 
allowance for storage.
    (9) A displaced business or farm operation is entitled to 
reimbursement for actual expenses, not to exceed $1,000, which the 
Postal Service determines to be reasonable and which are incurred in 
searching for a replacement location. These expenses include 
transportation, meals and lodging away from home, time spent searching 
(based on reasonable salary or earnings) and fees paid to a real estate 
agent or broker to locate a replacement site, exclusive of any fees or 
commissions related to the purchase of such site.
    (10) Other moving-related expenses, not listed as non-allowable 
under paragraph (l)(3) of this section, which the Postal Service 
determines to be reasonable and necessary.
    (e) Fixed Payment in Lieu of Moving Expenses, Business Moves. Any 
displaced business, other than an outdoor advertising display business, 
or a non-profit organization, is eligible for a fixed payment in lieu of 
actual moving and related expenses. This payment must be in an amount 
equal to the average annual net earnings of the business at that 
location, as computed under paragraph (i) of this section, but not less 
than $1,000 nor more than $20,000. For a displaced person to qualify for 
this

[[Page 213]]

payment, the Postal Service must determine that:
    (1) The business owns or rents personal property which must be moved 
in connection with such displacement and for which an expense would be 
incurred in such move; and, the business vacates or relocates from its 
displacement site; and
    (2) The business cannot be relocated without a substantial loss of 
its existing patronage (clientele or net earnings). A business is 
assumed to meet this test unless the Postal Service determines that it 
will not suffer a substantial loss of its existing patronage; and
    (3) The business is not part of a commercial enterprise having more 
than three other entities which are not being acquired by the Postal 
Service, and which are under the same ownership and engaged in the same 
or similar business activities.
    (4) The business contributed materially to the income of the 
displaced person during the 2 taxable years prior to displacement (see 
paragraph (h) of this section). However, the Postal Service may waive 
this test for good cause.
    (5) The business is not operated at a displacement dwelling solely 
for the purpose of renting such dwelling to others.
    (f) Determining the Number of Businesses. In determining whether two 
or more displaced legal entities constitute a single business which is 
entitled to only one fixed payment, all pertinent factors shall be 
considered, including the extent to which:
    (1) The same premises and equipment are shared;
    (2) Substantially identical or interrelated business functions are 
carried out and business and finacial affairs are commingled;
    (3) The entities are held out to the public, and to those 
customarily dealing with them, as one business; and
    (4) The same person or closely related persons own, control, or 
manage the affairs of the entities.
    (g) Fixed Payment in Lieu of Moving Expenses, Farm Operation. Any 
displaced farm operation may choose a fixed payment in lieu of a payment 
for actual moving and related expenses in an amount equal to its average 
annual net earnings as computed in accordance with paragraph (i) of this 
section, but not less than $1,000 nor more than $20,000. For a displaced 
person to qualify for this payment, the Postal Service must determine 
that the farm operation contributed materially to the income of the 
displaced person during the two taxable years prior to the displacement 
(see paragraph (h) of this section). In the case of acquisition of land 
which was part of a farm operation before the acquisition, the fixed 
payment shall be made only if the Postal Service determines that:
    (1) The acquisition of part of the land caused the operator to be 
displaced from the operation on the remaining land; or
    (2) The partial acquisition caused a substantial change in the 
nature of the farm operation.
    (h) Contributes materially. The term ``contributes materially,'' as 
used in paragraphs (e) and (g) of this section means that, during the 2 
taxable years prior to the taxable year in which displacement occurs, or 
during such other period as the Postal Service determines to be more 
equitable, a business or farm operation:
    (1) Had average annual gross receipts of at least $5,000; or
    (2) Had average annual net earnings of at least $1,000; or
    (3) Contributed at least 33\1/3\ percent of the owner's or 
operator's average annual gross income from all sources.
    (4) If the application of the above criteria creates an inequity or 
hardship in any given case, the Postal Service may approve the use of 
other criteria as determined appropriate.
    (i) Average Annual Net Earnings of a Business or Farm Operation. The 
average annual net earnings of a business or farm operation are one-half 
of its net earnings before Federal, State, and local income taxes during 
the 2 taxable years immediately prior to the taxable year in which it 
was displaced. If the business or farm was not in operation for the full 
2 taxable years prior to displacement, net earnings shall be based on 
the actual period of operation at the displacement site during the 2 
taxable years prior to displacement, projected to an annual rate. 
Average annual net earnings may be based upon a different

[[Page 214]]

period of time when the Postal Service determines it to be more 
equitable. Net earnings include any compensation obtained from the 
business or farm operation by its owner, the owner's spouse, and 
dependents. The displaced person shall furnish the Postal Service proof 
of net earnings through income tax returns, certified financial 
statements, or other reasonable evidence which the Postal Service 
determines is satisfactory.
    (j) Nonprofit Organizations. Any displaced nonprofit organization 
may choose a fixed payment in lieu of a payment for actual moving and 
related expenses in an amount of $2,500, if the Postal Service 
determines that it:
    (1) Cannot be relocated without a substantial loss of existing 
patronage (membership or clientele). A nonprofit organization is assumed 
to meet this test, unless the Postal Service demonstrates otherwise; and
    (2) Is not part of an enterprise having at least one other 
establishment engaged in the same or similar activity which is not being 
acquired by the Postal Service.
    (k) Relocation of Outdoor Advertising Signs. The amount of a payment 
for direct loss of an advertising sign which is personal property is the 
lesser of:
    (1) The depreciated replacement cost of the sign, as determined by 
the Postal Service, less the proceeds from its sale; (To be eligible for 
payments under this paragraph (k)(1), the claimant must make a good 
faith effort to sell the sign, unless the Postal Service determines that 
such effort is not necessary.) or
    (2) The estimated cost of moving the sign, no more than 50 miles, 
but with no allowance for storage.
    (l) Payment for actual reasonable reestablishment expenses, 
nonresidential moves. In addition to the payments available as allowable 
expenses for nonresidential moves, a small business, farm or non-profit 
organization may be eligible to receive a payment, not to exceed $10,000 
for expenses actually incurred in relocating and reestablishing such 
small business, farm or non-profit organization at a replacement site.
    (1) Allowable expenses. Reestablishment expenses must be reasonable 
and necessary, as determined by the Postal Service. They may include the 
following:
    (i) Repairs or improvements to the replacement real property as 
required by federal, state, local law, code or ordinance.
    (ii) Modifications to the replacement property to accommodate the 
business operation or make replacement structures suitable for 
occupancy.
    (iii) Construction and installation costs not to exceed $1,500 for 
exterior signing to advertise the business.
    (iv) Installation of security or fire protection devices.
    (v) Provision of utilities from right-of-way to improvements on the 
replacement site.
    (vi) Redecoration or replacement of soiled or worn surfaces at the 
replacement site, such as paint, panelling or carpeting.
    (vii) Licenses, fees and permits when not paid as part of the moving 
expenses.
    (viii) Feasibility surveys, soil testing and marketing studies.
    (ix) Advertisement of replacement location, not to exceed $1,500
    (x) Professional services in connection with the purchase or lease 
of a replacement site.
    (xi) Increased costs of operation during the first two years at the 
replacement site, not to exceed $5,000, for such items as lease or 
rental charges, personal or real property taxes, insurance premiums, 
utility charges including impact fees or one time assessments for 
anticipated heavy utility usage.
    (xii) Other items that the Postal Service considers essential to the 
reestablishment of the business.
    (2) Non-allowable expenses. Following is a non-exclusive listing of 
restablishment expenditures not considered to be reasonable, necessary 
or otherwise allowable.
    (i) Purchase of capital assets such as office furniture, filing 
cabinets, machinery, or trade fixtures.
    (ii) Purchase of manufacturing materials, production supplies, 
product inventory, or other items used in the normal course of the 
business operation.
    (iii) Interior or exterior refurbishment at the replacement site 
which are for cosmetic purposes only.

[[Page 215]]

    (iv) Interest on money borrowed to make the move or purchase the 
replacement property.
    (v) Payment to a part-time business in the home which does not 
contribute materially to the household income.
    (vi) Payment to a person whose sole business at a replacement 
dwelling is the rental of such dwelling to others.
    (m) General Provisions--(1) Self moves. If the displaced person 
elects to take full responsibility for all or a part of the move, the 
Postal Service may approve a payment for the person's moving expenses in 
an amount not to exceed the lowest of three bids acceptable to the 
Postal Service. Bids may be obtained by either the displaced person or 
the Postal Service.
    (2) Transfer of Ownership. Upon request by the Postal Service and in 
accordance with applicable law, the displaced person may transfer to the 
Postal Service ownership of any personal property that is not to be 
moved, sold, or traded-in by executing a disclaimer of all rights or 
interest in the property.
    (3) Non-Allowable Expenses. Except as specifically otherwise 
provided herein, a displaced person is not entitled to payment for:
    (i) The cost of moving any structure or other real property 
improvement.
    (ii) Loss of goodwill.
    (iii) Loss of profits.
    (iv) Loss of trained employees.
    (v) Any additional operating expenses of a business or farm 
operation caused by operating in a new location.
    (vi) Personal injury.
    (vii) Any legal fee or other cost for perparing a claim for a 
relocation payment or for representing the displaced person before the 
Postal Service.
    (viii) Expenses for searching for a replacement dwelling.
    (ix) Costs for storage of personal property on real property owned 
or leased by the displaced person.

[51 FR 6983, Feb. 27, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 48029, Dec. 17, 1987; 54 
FR 10667, Mar. 15, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 777.24  Replacement housing payments.

    (a) Residential displaced persons are eligible for replacement 
housing payments as follows:
    (1) Residential displaced persons who lawfully and continuously 
owned and occupied a displacement dwelling for not less than 180 days 
prior to the initiation of negotiations are entitled to the benefits set 
out in paragraph (b) of this section. Such displaced persons may 
alternately choose the benefits under paragraph (f) of this section.
    (2) Residential displaced persons who lawfully and continuously 
owned and occupied, and residential displaced persons who were tenants 
and lawfully and continously occupied, a displacement dwelling for not 
less than 90 days prior to the initiation of negotiations are entitled 
to the benefits set out in paragraph (e) of this section.
    (3) Where the replacement housing payment provided hereunder does 
not provide for housing within the financial means (see Sec. 777.13(j)) 
of the displaced person, see Sec. 777.27, Last Resort Housing.
    (b) Benefits for 180 Day Owner Occupants. Displaced persons eligible 
under paragraph (a)(1) of this section are entitled to benefits as set 
out below:
    (1) An amount which is the sum of:
    (i) The amount which must be added to the acquisition cost of the 
displacement dwelling to provide a total amount equal to the lesser of:
    (A) The reasonable cost of a comparable replacement dwelling as 
determined by paragraph (c) of this section; or
    (B) The purchase price of a decent, safe and sanitary replacement 
dwelling actually purchased and occupied by the displaced person; plus
    (ii) Interest Cost (see paragraph (d) of this section); plus
    (iii) Incidental Expenses (see paragraph (h) of this section).
    (2) The benefits in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, are limited to 
a maximum payment of $22,500.
    (3) The benefits in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, are available 
only if a decent, safe and sanitary replacement dwelling is purchased 
within 12 months after the latter of:
    (i) The date of acquisition or, in the case of condemnation, the 
date the required amount is deposited in a court for the displaced 
person's benefit, or
    (ii) The date the person moves from the displacement dwelling.

[[Page 216]]

    (c) Determining the Cost of a Comparable Replacement Dwelling. The 
cost of a comparable replacement dwelling for purposes of benefits to be 
paid to 180 day owner occupants will be determined by applying the 
following:
    (1) If available, at least three representative comparable 
replacement dwellings must be examined and the payment offer computed on 
the cost of the fair market value of the dwelling most closely 
comparable to the displacement dwelling.
    (2) To the extent, feasible, comparable replacement dwellings will 
be selected from the neighborhood in which the displacement dwelling was 
located. If this is not possible, comparable replacement dwellings will 
be selected from nearby or similar neighborhoods where housing costs are 
similar.
    (d) Increased Mortgage Interest Costs. The amount to be paid to a 
displaced 180 day owner occupant for increased mortgage interest costs 
is the amount, if any, by which the present value of the interest on the 
mortgage loan(s) on the replacement dwelling plus any other debt service 
costs exceeds the present value of the interest on the mortgage loan(s) 
on the displacement dwelling plus purchaser's points and loan 
origination fees, subject to the following:
    (1) The payment must be based only on bona fide mortgages that were 
a valid lien on the displacement dwelling for at least 180 days prior to 
the initiation of negotiations. All such mortgages on the displacement 
dwelling must be used to compute the payment.
    (2) The payment must be based on the unpaid mortgage balance on the 
displacement dwelling or the new mortgage amount, whichever is less.
    (3) The payment must be based on the remaining term of the mortgage 
on the displacement dwelling or the actual term of the new mortgage, 
whichever is shorter.
    (4) The new mortgage must be a bona fide mortgage and its interest 
rate must not exceed the prevailing interest rate currently charged by 
mortgage lending institutions in the area in which the replacement 
dwelling is located.
    (5) The discount rate used to compute the present value of the 
increased interest cost must be the prevailing interest rate paid on 
demand savings deposits by commercial banks in the area in which the 
replacement dwelling is located.
    (6) Purchaser's points and loan origination fees, but not seller's 
points, are reimbursable to the extent they are not paid as incidental 
expenses, they do not exceed rates normal to similar real estate 
transactions in the area, and the Postal Service determines them to be 
necessary. The computation of such points and fees shall be based on the 
unpaid mortgage balance on the displacement dwelling, or the new 
mortgage amount, whichever is less.
    (e) Benefits for 90 Day Owner Occupant and Tenants. Displaced 
persons eligible under paragraph (a)(2) of this section are entitled to 
benefits as set out below:
    (1) Rental assistance benefits, as set out in paragraph (f) of this 
section or downpayment assistane benefits, as set out in paragraph (g) 
of this section.
    (2) The benefits in paragraph (e)(1) of this section, are limited to 
$5,250.
    (3) The benefits in (e)(1) above are available only if a decent, 
safe and sanitary replacement dwelling is purchased or rented within 12 
months after the latter of:
    (i) The date of acquisition or, in the case of condemnation, the 
date the required amount is deposited in the court for the displaced 
person's benefit, or
    (ii) The date the person moves from the displacement dwelling.
    (f) Rental Assistance. The rental assistance benefits, not to exceed 
$5,250, for 90 day owner occupants and tenants will be computed as 
follows:
    (1) The amount which must be added to 42 times the average monthly 
rental paid at the displacement dwelling (or, if the displaced person is 
an owner occupant, the fair market rental value had the displacement 
dwelling been rented) for the three-month period prior to displacement 
to provide a total amount equal to the lesser of:
    (i) 42 times the reasonable monthly rental of a comparable 
replacement dwelling; or
    (ii) 42 times the actual monthly rental cost of the decent, safe, 
and sanitary

[[Page 217]]

dwelling actually rented and occupied by the displaced person.
    (2) If utilities are included in either the replacement dwelling or 
the displacement dwelling rent, appropriate utilities must be factored 
into both rentals. If utilities are not included in either monthly 
rental then the payment will be computed using the base rental rates.
    (3) If, in the opinion of the Postal Service, the monthly rental at 
the displacement dwelling is significantly below the fair market rent of 
the displacement dwelling, such fair market rent must be used in 
computing the rental assistance payment.
    (4) The payment under this section must be disbursed in a lump-sum 
amount unless the Postal Service determines on a case-by-case basis, for 
good cause, that the payment should be made in installments. Where the 
rental assistance payment exceeds $5,250 under the provisions of Last 
Resort Housing, (Sec. 777.27), installment payments or payments through 
escrow accounts may be considered.
    (g) Downpayment assistance. Downpayment assistance, not to exceed 
$5,250, is available to 90 day owner occupants and 90 day tenants. This 
$5,250 amount may be considered to include the full amount of the 
required downpayment and incidental expenses.
    (h) Incidental Expenses. Incidental expenses covered under paragraph 
(b)(1)(iii) or (g) of this section are those reasonable costs actually 
incurred by the displaced person incident to the purchase of a 
replacement dwelling and customarily paid by the buyer (not to exceed 
the costs of such for a comparable replacement dwelling). They include:
    (1) Legal, closing, and related costs, including those for title 
search and insurance, preparing conveyance instruments, notary fees, 
preparing surveys and plats, and recording fees.
    (2) Lender, FHA, or VA appraisal fees.
    (3) FHA or VA application fee.
    (4) Certification of structural soundness when required by the 
lender.
    (5) Credit report.
    (6) Owner's and mortgagee's evidence or assurance of title.
    (7) Escrow agent's fee.
    (8) State revenue or documentary stamps, sales or transfer taxes.
    (9) Such other costs as the Postal Service determines to be 
incidental to the purchase.

[51 FR 6983, Feb. 27, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 48029, Dec. 17, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 777.25  Additional rules for replacement housing payments.

    (a) Multiple Owners. When a single family dwelling is owned by more 
than one person and occupied by only some of the 180 day owners (for 
example, when the dwelling is owned by an estate and only one of the 
heirs is in occupancy), the occupant(s) is (are) eligible to receive a 
maximum total price differential which is the lesser of:
    (1) The difference between (i) the reasonable cost of a comparable 
replacement dwelling, as determined under Sec. 777.24(c) and (ii) the 
acquisition cost of the displacement dwelling; or
    (2) The difference between (i) the occupant's share of the 
acquisition cost of the displacement dwelling and (ii) the purchase 
price of a decent, safe, and sanitary replacement dwelling actually 
purchased and occupied by the displaced person.
    (b) Multiple Occupants of One Displacement Dwelling. If two or more 
occupants of the displacement dwelling move to separate replacement 
dwellings, each occupant is entitled to a reasonable prorated share, as 
determined by the Postal Service, of any relocation payments that would 
have been made if the occupants moved together to a comparable 
replacement dwelling. However, if the Postal Service determines that two 
or more occupants maintained separate households within the same 
dwelling, such occupants have separate entitlements to relocation 
payments.
    (c) Mixed Use and Multi-Family Properties Acquired. If the 
displacement dwelling was part of a property that contained another 
dwelling unit or space used for non-residential purposes, or if it is 
located on a lot larger than that typical for residential purposes, only 
that portion of the acquisition payment which is actually attributable 
to the displacement dwelling and site can be considered its acquisition 
cost when computing the price differential.

[[Page 218]]

    (d) Disaster-Related Insurance Proceeds. To the extent necessary to 
avoid duplicate compensation, the amount of any insurance proceeds 
received by a person in connection with a disaster related loss to the 
displacement dwelling must be included in the acquisition cost of the 
displacement dwelling when computing the price differential.
    (e) Inspection of Replacement Dwelling. Before making a replacement 
housing payment or releasing a payment from escrow, the Postal Service 
must inspect the replacement dwelling and determine that it is a decent, 
safe, and sanitary dwelling.
    (f) Purchase of Replacement Dwelling. A displaced person is 
considered to have met the requirement to purchase a replacement 
dwelling if the person has purchased an existing dwelling; purchased and 
rahabilitated or moved and restored an existing dwelling; or constructed 
a new dwelling, provided in each instance the dwelling is determined to 
be decent, safe and sanitary.
    (g) Conversion of Payment. A displaced person who initially rents a 
replacement dwelling and receives a rental assistance payment may, 
within the required 12 month eligibility period, purchase a decent, safe 
and sanitary replacement dwelling. In such case, he or she is eligible 
to revise his or her original claim, and claim any additional assistance 
for which he or she was originally eligible. However, any portion of the 
rental assistance payment that has been disbursed must be deducted from 
the resultant replacement housing payment or downpayment assistance 
payment.
    (h) Payment After Death. A replacement housing payment is personal 
to the displaced person. Upon his or her death, the undisbursed portion 
of any such payment shall not be paid to the heirs or assigns, except 
that:
    (1) The amount attributable to the displaced person's period of 
actual occupancy of the replacement housing will be paid.
    (2) The full payment must be disbursed in any case in which a member 
of a displaced family dies and other family members continue to occupy 
the replacement dwelling selected in accordance with these regulations.
    (3) Any portion of a replacement housing payment necessary to 
satisfy the legal obligation of an estate in connection with the 
selection of a replacement dwelling by or on behalf of a deceased person 
must be disbursed to the estate.
    (i) 180 Day Owner Retention of Displacement Dwelling. If a 180 day 
owner occupant retains ownership of his or her dwelling or the right to 
move his or her dwelling from the displacement site, and he or she moves 
it and reoccupies it on a replacement site, the cost of the actual 
replacement dwelling to be computed for purposes of 
Sec. 777.24(b)(1)(i)(A) (not to exceed the purchase price of a 
comparable replacement dwelling) will be the sum of:
    (1) The expenses of moving and restoring the retained dwelling to a 
condition comparable to that prior to the move; and
    (2) The salvage or other value deducted from the acquisition cost 
for the retained ownership; and
    (3) Additional costs, if necessary, incurred to make the unit a 
decent, safe, and sanitary replacement dwelling; and
    (4) The cost of the replacement site, not to exceed the cost of a 
comparable available and suitable replacement site.
    (j) 90 Day Owner/Retention of Displacement Dwelling. A 90 day owner 
occupant who retains ownership of his or her dwelling or the right to 
remove his or her dwelling may receive the benefits as if he or she were 
a 180 day owner occupant subject, however, to a limitation of $5,250 on 
maximum benefits in lieu of the $22,500 limitation set out in paragraph 
Sec. 777.24(b)(2).

[51 FR 6983, Feb. 27, 1986, as amended at 54 FR 10668, Mar. 15, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 777.26  Mobile homes.

    (a) Moving Expenses. Displaced persons who are occupants of mobile 
homes are eligible for moving expenses under Sec. 777.23 subject to the 
following:
    (1) If the person owns the mobile home, moving expenses may, at the 
owner's option, include any reasonable costs incurred to move the mobile 
home to a replacement site, plus the reasonable cost of disassembling, 
moving, and reassembling any attached appurtenances (such as porches, 
decks,

[[Page 219]]

skirting, and awnings) which were not acquired, anchoring of the unit, 
and utility ``hook-up charges.''
    (2) If the person rents the mobile home, the Postal Service may 
allow the person moving expense benefits for moving the mobile home as 
if the person were an owner of the mobile home under paragraph (a)(1) of 
this section.
    (3) If costs of moving a mobile home are paid as moving expenses 
under paragraph (a)(1) or (2) of this section, the person may not 
receive housing assistance benefits hereunder, other than any benefits 
to which they are entitled that are limited to the site of the mobile 
home.
    (4) Displaced occupants of mobile homes are eligible for moving 
expenses for personal property other than the mobile home and its 
appurtenances, but only to the extent the Postal Service does not pay 
the costs of moving the mobile home (either as moving expenses or 
replacement housing payments or, if it does pay such costs, the personal 
property is of a type that is customarily moved separately from the 
mobile home.)
    (b) Replacement Housing Payments. Displaced persons who are 180 day 
or 90 day occupants of mobile homes qualify for replacement housing 
payments under Sec. 777.24 subject to the following:
    (1) If the displaced person owns the mobile home and owns the site, 
the person is eligible for benefits under either Sec. 777.24 (b) or (e).
    (2) If the displaced person rents the mobile home and rents the site 
the person is eligible for benefits under Sec. 777.24(e).
    (3) If the displaced person rents the mobile home and owns the site 
the person is eligible for benefits under Sec. 777.24(e), with regard to 
the mobile home and to benefits under Sec. 777.24(b) with regard to the 
site, subject to a limitation on the home and site benefits combined of 
$22,500. (Persons who voluntarily sell mobile home sites are not 
displaced persons and are not entitled to benefits under Subpart B. See 
Sec. 777.13(e)(2)(viii)).
    (4) If the displaced person owns the mobile home and rents the site 
the person is eligible for benefits under either Sec. 777.24 (b) or (e) 
with regard to the mobile home and to benefits as a tenant under 
Sec. 777.24(e) with regard to the site, subject to a limitation on home 
and site benefits combined of $5,250.
    (c) Special Rules for Mobile Homes. (1) In computing replacement 
housing payments for mobile home owners under paragraph (b) of this 
section, apply the terms of Sec. 777.25 (i) and (j) as appropriate, to 
transactions involving moving the mobile home to a new site.
    (2) The acquisition of a portion of a mobile home park may leave a 
remainder that is not adequate to continue the operation of the park. 
When the Postal Service determines that its acquisition of the real 
property has had this effect and that for this reason a mobile home 
occupant located on the remaining part of the property is required to 
move, such occupant shall be considered a displaced person under these 
regulations and shall be entitled to such benefits hereunder as the 
person would otherwise qualify.

[[51 FR 6983, Feb. 27, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 48029, Dec. 17, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 777.27  Last resort housing.

    (a) Basic Determination to Provide Last Resort Housing. A displaced 
person cannot be required to move from his or her dwelling unless at 
least one comparable replacement dwelling is made available to him or 
her which is within his or her financial means. When such comparable 
replacement dwelling is not available, additional measures may be taken 
to provide for ``last resort'' housing for eligible displaced persons.
    (b) Basic Rights of Persons to be Displaced. The provisions of this 
section do not deprive any displaced person of any rights the person may 
have under these regulations such as the right to accept the maximum 
replacement housing payment available under these regulations and to 
move to a decent, safe and sanitary replacement dwelling even if such 
dwelling is beyond the person's financial means.
    (c) Methods of Providing Replacement Housing. The Postal Service has 
broad latitude in implementing this section, but implementation must be 
on a reasonable cost basis. The Postal Service may provide last resort 
housing using the following methods:
    (1) Rehabilitation of and/or additions to an existing replacement 
dwelling.

[[Page 220]]

    (2) The construction of a new replacement dwelling.
    (3) The provision of a direct loan which requires regular 
amortization or deferred repayment. Terms of such loan will be at the 
discretion of the Postal Service.
    (4) A replacement housing payment in excess of the $5,250 and 
$22,500 limitations contained in Sec. 777.24. A rental subsidy under 
this section may be provided in installments.
    (5) The relocation and any needed rehabilitation of a replacement 
dwelling.
    (6) The purchase or lease of land and/or a replacement dwelling by 
the Postal Service and subsequent sale or lease to, or exchange with, a 
displaced person.
    (7) The removal of barriers to the handicapped.
    (8) Any other method determined by the Postal Service to be 
reasonable.
    (d) Proof of Financial Need. Last Resort Housing benefits exceeding 
the limitations under Sec. 777.24(b)(2) and Sec. 777.24(e)(2) will not 
be paid unless required to provide housing within the displaced person's 
financial means. To establish financial means, the displaced person must 
furnish the Postal Service proof of gross monthly income through income 
tax returns, certified financial statements or other reasonable evidence 
which the Postal Service determines is satisfactory.

[51 FR 6983, Feb. 27, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 48029, Dec. 17, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 777.28  Claims and appeals.

    (a) Preparation of Claim. The relocation representative should 
assist eligible displaced persons in the preparation of claims for 
moving assistance and relocation housing assistance. Preliminary review 
should be conducted in the field by the relocation representative with 
the displaced person, to preclude technical difficulties in processing 
the claim at a higher level.
    (b) Documentation. Any claim for a relocation payment must be 
supported by such documentation as may be required to support the claim, 
for example the length of occupancy at the displacement dwelling, the 
rent paid at the displacement dwelling, expenses incurred in relocating, 
etc. A displaced person must be provided reasonable assistance to 
complete and file any required claim.
    (c) Time for Filing. All claims must be filed with the Postal 
Service within 18 months after the date of the actual move from the 
displacement property.
    (d) Review, Approval and Payment. The Postal Service will review 
claims within 60 days of submission and approve or disapprove payment. 
Upon approval or partial approval of the displaced person's claim, the 
Postal Service will promptly authorize payment of the approved amount. 
The certification that the claimant has occupied decent, safe, and 
sanitary housing must be completed prior to final payment of replacement 
housing payments.
    (e) Relocation Payments Not Considered as Income. Upon approval of 
the claim and delivery of the relocation payment, the displaced person 
must be advised that no relocation payment made under these procedures 
shall be considered as income for the purpose of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1954, or for the purpose of determining the eligibility or the 
extent of eligibility of any person for assistance under the Social 
Security Act or any other Federal Law.
    (f) Certification. Certification that a person is displaced will be 
provided any agency requiring such information to assist that person 
under any Federal law or program.
    (g) Advance of Funds. If the displaced person cannot arrange for the 
acquisition of a replacement property because of financial problems and 
the problems would be solved by an advance of funds, the Postal Service 
may determine the estimated amount of the actual claim and authorize an 
advance of that amount or a portion thereof. The displaced person will 
be fully informed in writing that his or her final claim will then be 
subject to adjustment. Advance payments should not be made to persons 
with a history of financial irresponsibility.
    (h) Money Owed to the Postal Service. In cases of Postal Service 
leasing the acquired property to a displaced persons, or in cases of 
advance moving cost payments, any monies due the Postal Service by the 
displaced person and not paid before the remainder of the relocation 
payments are made

[[Page 221]]

must be deducted from such payments and the relocation file so 
documented.
    (i) Notice of Denial of Claim. If the Postal Service disapproves all 
or part of a payment claimed, of refuses to consider the claim on its 
merits because of untimely filing or other grounds, it must promptly 
notify the claimant in writing of the determination, the basis for the 
determination, and the procedures for appealing the determination.
    (j) Appeal Procedure. If a displaced person wishes to file an 
appeal:
    (1) The appeal must be in writing.
    (2) The appeal must be directed to the General Manager, Real Estate 
Division, and must set forth the displaced person's reasons for the 
appeal. (The General Manager shall not have taken part in the decision 
which led to the appeal. Appeals misdirected to others must be forwarded 
immediately to the General Manager with notification of the forwarding 
to the appellant.)
    (3) The appeal must be submitted within 60 days after the displaced 
person receives written notification of the Postal Service's original 
determination concerning the displacee's claim. The Postal Service may 
extend this time limit for good cause.
    (k) Right of Representation. A displaced person has a right to be 
represented by legal counsel or other representative in connection with 
his or her appeal, but solely at the person's own expense.
    (l) Review of Files by Appellant. The Postal Service must permit a 
person to inspect and copy all materials pertinent to his or her appeal, 
except materials which are confidential. Such inspection will be 
permitted as allowed under the Freedom of Information Act, 39 CFR Part 
265.
    (m) Scope of Review. In deciding an appeal, the Postal Service must 
consider all pertinent justification and other material submitted by the 
displaced person and all other available information that is needed to 
ensure a fair and full review of the appeal.
    (n) Determination and Notification After Appeal. Promptly after 
receipt of all supporting information submitted by the appellant, the 
General Manager, Real Estate Division, must make a written determination 
on the appeal, including the basis on which the decision was made, and 
furnish the appellant a copy. If the full relief requested is not 
granted at the Service Center level, the General Manager, Real Estate 
Division, must advise the person of his or her right to appeal the 
decision to the Director, Office of Real Estate. The rules stated here 
for appeals to the General Manager apply as well as to appeals to the 
Director, Office of Real Estate.

[51 FR 6983, Feb. 27, 1986, as amended at 54 FR 10668, Mar. 15, 1989]


<R04>
                         Subpart C--Acquisition


<R05>
Sec. 777.31  Acquisition procedures.

    (a) Policy; Application of Section. The Postal Service, as a matter 
of policy, acquires interests in real property through voluntary 
agreements with owners. Only under unusual and compelling circumstances, 
and on a case-by-case basis, does the Postal Service acquire real 
property through the exercise or the threat of the exercise of eminent 
domain. This policy does not, however, prevent the Postal Service from 
occasionally entering into mutually agreeable condemnation proceedings 
with an owner, where price is not an issue, and for such purposes as to 
clear title or to acquire property from certain elected officials. For 
the purposes of this section, the Postal Service does not consider such 
voluntary and mutually agreeable uses of condemnation proceedings as the 
exercise or the threat of the exercise of eminent domain. The following 
regulations apply only to acquisitions by the exercise or the threat of 
the exercise of eminent domain:
    (1) Notice to Owner. As soon as feasible after deciding to acquire a 
specific property through the exercise of eminent domain, the Postal 
Service must notify the owner of its intent to acquire the property.
    (2) Expeditious Negotiations. The Postal Service must make every 
reasonable effort to acquire real property expeditiously by negotiation.
    (3) Appraisal and Invitation to Owner. Before the initiation of 
negotiations, the real property shall be appraised in accordance with 
Postal Service appraisal standards as outlined in RE-1

[[Page 222]]

and the owner or the owner's designated agent shall be given an 
opportunity to accompany the appraiser during the appraiser's inspection 
of the property.
    (4) Establishment of Offer of Just Compensation. Prior to the 
initiation of negotiations (see Sec. 777.13(k) for definition) the 
Postal Service must establish an amount which it believes is just 
compensation for the real property rights be acquired. The amount must 
not be less than the approved appraisal of the fair market value, 
including damages or benefits to the remaining property. Appraisers 
shall not give consideration to, or include in their real property 
appraisals, any allowances for the benefits provided by title II of the 
Act.
    (5) Summary Statement. Promptly after determining fair market value, 
the Postal Service shall make a written offer to acquire the property 
for the full amount believed to be just compensation. Along with the 
written purchase offer, the owner must be given a written statement of 
the basis for the offer of just compensation. This statement must 
include:
    (i) A statement of the amount offered as just compensation. In the 
case of a partial acquisition, the compensation for the real property to 
be acquired and the compensation for damages, if any, must be separately 
stated.
    (ii) The location and description of the real property and the 
interest(s) to be acquired.
    (iii) An identification of the buildings, structures, and other 
improvements (including removable building equipment and trade fixtures) 
which are considered part of the real property for which the offer of 
just compensation is made. Where appropriate, the statement shall 
identify and separately held ownership interest in the improvement(s), 
for example, a tenant-owned improvement.
    (6) Basic Negotiation Procedures. The Postal Service must make every 
reasonable effort to contact the owner or the owner's representative 
and:
    (i) Discuss the Postal Service's offer to purchase the property 
including the basis for the offer of just compensation, and;
    (ii) Explain Postal Service acquisition policies and procedures 
including the provisions for the payment of incidental expenses as 
described under Sec. 777.33.
    (7) Opportunity to Consider Offer. The owner must be given a 
reasonable opportunity to consider the Postal Service's offer, to 
present material which he or she believes is relevant to determining the 
value of the property, and to suggest modification in the proposed terms 
and conditions of the purchase. The Postal Service must consider the 
owner's presentation.
    (8) Updating Offer of Just Compensation. If the information 
presented by the owner or a material change in the character or 
condition of the property indicates the need for new appraisal 
information, or if a significant delay has occurred since the time of 
the appraisal(s) of the property, the Postal Service must have the 
appraisal(s) updated or obtain a new appraisal(s). If the latest 
appraisal information indicates that a change in the purchase offer is 
warranted, the Postal Service must promptly reestablish just 
compensation and offer the revised amount to the owner in writing.
    (9) Contracts and Options. Contracts to purchase shall cover only 
those items related to the acquisition of the property, and not 
incorporate provisions for making payments for relocation costs or 
related costs under title II of these regulations.
    (10) Title II Benefits Not To Be Considered. In the event of 
condemnation, estimated compensation shall be determined solely on the 
basis of the appraised value of the real property with no consideration 
being given to or reference contained therein to the payments to be made 
under title II.
    (11) Coercive Action. The Postal Service shall not advance the time 
of condemnation, or defer negotiations or condemnation, or the deposit 
of funds with the court, or take any other coercive action in order to 
induce an agreement on the price to be paid for the property.
    (12) Inverse Condemnation. If the Postal Service intends to acquire 
any interest in real property by exercise of the

[[Page 223]]

power of eminent domain, it must institute formal condemnation 
proceedings and not intentionally make it necessary for the owner to 
institute proceedings to prove the fact of the taking of the real 
property.
    (13) Payment Before Taking Possession. Before requiring the owner to 
surrender possession of the real property, the Postal Service must 
either:
    (i) Pay the agreed purchase price to the owner; or
    (ii) In the case of a condemnation proceeding, deposit with the 
court for the benefit of the owner an amount not less than the amount of 
the approved appraised value of the property or the amount of the award 
of compensation in the condemnation proceeding for the property.
    (14) Right-of-Entry. With the prior approval of the owner, the 
Postal Service may obtain a right-of-entry before making payment to the 
owner.


<R05>
Sec. 777.32  Acquisition of tenant-owned improvements.

    (a) Acquisition of Improvements. When acquiring any interest in real 
property, the Postal Service must acquire at least an equal interest in 
all buildings, structures, or other improvements located upon the real 
property. This must include any improvement of a tenant owner who has 
the right or obligation to remove the improvement at the expiration of 
the lease term.
    (b) Special Conditions. Payment for tenant-owned improvements will 
be made to the tenant only if he or she meets the following conditions:
    (1) In consideration for the payment the tenant-owner assigns, 
transfers, and releases to the Postal Service all of the tenant-owner's 
rights, title, and interests in the improvement;
    (2) The owner of the real property on which the improvement is 
located disclaims all interest in the improvement; and
    (3) The payment does not result in the duplication of any 
compensation otherwise authorized by law.
    (c) Preservation of Tenant's Rights. Nothing in this section shall 
be construed to deprive the tenant-owner of any rights to reject payment 
under this section and to obtain payment for such property interests in 
accordance with other applicable law.


<R05>
Sec. 777.33  Expenses incidental to transfer of title to the Postal Service.

    (a) Reimbursement. When property is acquired through the exercise or 
the threat of the exercise of eminent domain, the owner shall be 
reimbursed for all reasonable expenses he or she necessarily incurred in 
conveying the real property to the Postal Service for:
    (1) Recording fees, transfer taxes, documentary stamps, evidence of 
title, boundary surveys, legal descriptions of the real property, and 
similar incidental expenses. However, the Postal Service will not pay 
costs solely required to perfect the owner's title to the real property.
    (2) Penalty costs and other charges for prepayment of any 
preexisting recorded mortgage, entered into in good faith, encumbering 
the real property.
    (3) The pro rata portion of any prepaid real property taxes which 
are allocable to the period after the Postal Service obtains title to 
the property or effective possession of it, whichever is earlier.
    (b) Direct Payment. Whenever feasible the Postal Service must pay 
these costs directly and thus avoid the need for an owner to pay such 
costs and then seek reimbursement from the Postal Service.
    (c) Certain Litigation Expenses. The owner of the real property 
acquired must be reimbursed any reasonable expenses, including 
reasonable attorney, appraisal, and engineering fees which the owner 
actually incurred because of a condemnation proceeding if:
    (1) The final judgment of the court is that the Postal Service 
cannot acquire the real property by condemnation; or
    (2) The condemnation proceeding is abandoned by the Postal Service 
other than under an agreed-upon settlement; or
    (3) The court having jurisdiction renders a judgment in favor of the 
owner in an inverse condemnation proceeding or the Postal Service 
effects a settlement of such a proceeding.

[[Page 224]]


<R04>
                    Subpart D--Voluntary Acquisitions


<R05>
Sec. 777.41  Acquisition procedures.

    (a) Voluntary Acquisitions. Acquisition rules for voluntary 
purchases are set out in Handbook RE-1, Realty Acquisition and 
Management and cover such areas as appraisal and negotiation procedures.
    (b) Tenant-Owned Improvements. In general the Postal Service deals 
exclusively with the fee owner on the acquisition of all real property 
interest at the site. The Postal Service may, however, in exceptional 
cases deal directly with a tenant on a leasehold improvements matter. 
Should the Postal Service acquire the fee interest without acquiring 
rights in a leasehold improvement under circumstances in which the 
tenant would be entitled to compensation under Sec. 777.32 of this part, 
if the acquisition were by eminent domain or the under threat thereof, 
the tenant will be entitled to the benefits that would, under such 
circumstances, have been paid under Sec. 777.32 of this part, unless the 
tenant has formally disclaimed further right in the real property 
improvement beyond the time of the expiration of his or her tenancy.


<R04>
                          Subpart E--Donations


<R05>
Sec. 777.51  Acceptance of donations.

    Nothing in these regulations shall prevent a person from making a 
gift or donation of real property or any part thereof, or any interest 
therein, or of any compensation paid therefor, to the Postal Service. 
The Postal Service may obtain an appraisal of the real property for 
income tax or other purposes if the owner thereof requests the Postal 
Service to do so.


<R03>
PART 778--INTERGOVERNMENTAL REVIEW OF POSTAL SERVICE FACILITY ACTIONS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
778.1  What is the purpose of these regulations?
778.2  What definitions apply to these regulations?
778.3  What categories of facility project actions of the Postal Service 
          are subject to these regulations?
778.4  What are the Postal Service's general responsibilities under the 
          Order?
778.5  What is the Postal Service's obligation with respect to federal 
          interagency coordination?
778.6  What procedures apply to a state's choice of facility action 
          categories under these regulations?
778.7  How does the Postal Service communicate with state and local 
          officials concerning the Postal Service's facility project 
          actions?
778.8  How does the Postal Service provide states an opportunity to 
          comment on proposed facility project actions?
778.9  How does the Postal Service receive and respond to comments?
778.10  How does the Postal Service make efforts to accommodate 
          intergovernmental concerns?
778.11  What are the Postal Service's obligations in interstate 
          situations?
778.12  [Reserved]
778.13  May the Postal Service waive any provision of these regulations?

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401.

    Source: 48 FR 29376, June 24, 1983, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 778.1  What is the purpose of these regulations?

    (a) The regulations in this part implement Executive Order 12372, 
``Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs,'' issued July 14, 1982 
and amended on April 8, 1983. These regulations also implement 
applicable provisions of section 401 of the Intergovernmental 
Cooperation Act of 1968, which the Postal Service follows as a matter of 
policy.
    (b) These regulations are intended to foster an intergovernmental 
partnership and a strengthened Federalism by relying on state processes 
and on state, areawide, regional and local coordination for review of 
proposed direct federal development projects.
    (c) These regulations are not intended to create any right or 
benefit enforceable at law by a party against the Postal Service or its 
officers.
    (d) These regulations implement Executive Order 12372 and are 
adopted under the Postal Reorganization Act rather than the statute and 
Executive Order listed in paragraph (a) of this section to the extent 
the statute and Executive Order do not apply to the Postal Service under 
39 U.S.C. 410(a).

[[Page 225]]


<R05>
Sec. 778.2  What definitions apply to these regulations?

    Order means Executive Order 12372, issued July 14, 1982, and amended 
April 8, 1983, and titled ``Intergovernmental Review of Federal 
Programs.''
    State means any of the 50 states, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the U.S. Virgin Islands, or the Trust 
Territory of the Pacific Islands.


<R05>
Sec. 778.3  What categories of facility project actions of the Postal Service are subject to these regulations?

    The Postal Service publishes in the Federal Register a list of its 
categories of facility project actions that are subject to these 
regulations.


<R05>
Sec. 778.4  What are the Postal Service's general responsibilities under the Order?

    (a) The Postal Service provides opportunities for consultation by 
elected officials of those state and local governments that would be 
directly affected by the Postal Service's facility project actions.
    (b) If a state adopts a process under the Order to review and 
coordinate proposed direct Federal development projects, the Postal 
Service, to the extent permitted by law:
    (1) Uses the state process to determine official views of state and 
local elected officials;
    (2) Communicates with state and local elected officials as early in 
a facility project action's planning cycle as is reasonably feasible to 
explain specific plans and actions;
    (3) Makes efforts to accommodate state and local elected officials' 
concerns with proposed direct Federal development projects that are 
communicated through the state process; and
    (4)-(5) [Reserved]
    (6) Seeks the coordination of views of affected state and local 
elected officials in one state with those of another state when a 
proposed direct Federal development project has an impact on interstate 
metropolitan urban centers or other interstate areas.


<R05>
Sec. 778.5  What is the Postal Service's obligation with respect to federal interagency coordination?

    The Postal Service, to the extent practicable, consults with and 
seeks advice from other federal departments and agencies substantially 
affected by Postal Service facility project actions covered under these 
regulations.


<R05>
Sec. 778.6  What procedures apply to a state's choice of facility action categories under these regulations?

    (a) A state may select any categories of facility project actions 
published in the Federal Register in accordance with Sec. 778.3 for 
intergovernmental review under these regulations. Each state, before 
selecting categories of facility project actions, shall consult with 
local elected officials.
    (b) Each state that adopts a process shall notify the Postal Service 
of the Postal Service's categories of facility actions selected for that 
process.
    (c) A state may notify the Postal Service of changes in its 
selections at any time. For each change, the state shall submit to the 
Postal Service an assurance that the state has consulted with local 
elected officials regarding the change. The Postal Service may establish 
deadlines by which states are required to inform the Postal Service of 
changes in their facility action category selections.
    (d) The Postal Service uses a state's process as soon as feasible, 
after the Postal Service is notified of the state's selections.


<R05>
Sec. 778.7  How does the Postal Service communicate with state and local officials concerning the Postal Service's facility project actions?

    (a) [Reserved]
    (b) The Postal Service provides notice directly to affected state, 
areawide, regional, and local entities in a state of a proposed direct 
Federal development project if:
    (1) The state has not adopted a process under the Order; or
    (2) The development project involves a facility project action 
category not selected for the state process.
This notice may be made by publication in local newspapers and/or by 
letter.

[[Page 226]]


<R05>
Sec. 778.8  How does the Postal Service provide states an opportunity to comment on proposed facility project actions?

    (a) Except in unusual circumstances, the Postal Service gives state 
processes or directly affected state, areawide, regional and local 
officials and entities:
    (1) [Reserved]
    (2) At least 60 days from the date established by the Postal Service 
to comment on proposed facility project actions (except as noted in 
paragraph (a)(3) of this section).
    (3) For facility project actions in the Washington, DC National 
Capital Region, coordination also is accomplished with the National 
Capital Planning Commission (NCPC). The Postal Service gives the NCPC 90 
days to comment on projects in the Maryland and Virginia portions of the 
National Capital Region.
    (b) This section also applies to comments in cases in which the 
review, coordination, and communication with the Postal Service have 
been delegated.


<R05>
Sec. 778.9  How does the Postal Service receive and respond to comments?

    (a) The Postal Service follows the procedures in Sec. 778.10 if:
    (1) A state office or official is designated to act as a single 
point of contact between a state process and all federal agencies, and
    (2) That office or official transmits a state process recommendation 
for a facility project action of a category selected under Sec. 778.6.
    (b)(1) The single point of contact is not obligated to transmit 
comments from state, areawide, regional or local officials and entities 
where there is no state process recommendation.
    (2) If a state process recommendation is transmitted by a single 
point of contact, all comments from state, areawide, regional, and local 
officials and entities that differ from it must also be transmitted.
    (c) If a state has not established a process, or does not submit a 
state process recommendation, state, areawide, regional and local 
officials and entities may submit comments directly to the Postal 
Service.
    (d) If a facility project action is not selected for a state 
process, state, areawide, regional and local officials and entities may 
submit comments directly to the Postal Service. In addition, if a state 
process recommendation for a nonselected facility project action is 
transmitted to the Postal Service by the single point of contact, the 
Postal Service follows the procedures of Sec. 778.10.
    (e) The Postal Service considers comments which do not constitute a 
state process recommendation submitted under these regulations and for 
which the Postal Service is not required to apply the procedures of 
Sec. 778.10 when such comments are provided by a single point of contact 
or directly to the Postal Service by a commenting party.


<R05>
Sec. 778.10  How does the Postal Service make efforts to accommodate intergovernmental concerns?

    (a) If a state process provides a state process recommendation to 
the Postal Service through its single point of contact, the Postal 
Service either:
    (1) Accepts the recommendation;
    (2) Reaches a mutually agreeable solution with the state process; or
    (3) Provides the single point of contact with such written 
explanation of its decision as the Postal Service in its discretion 
deems appropriate. The Postal Service may also supplement the written 
explanation by providing the explanation to the single pont of contact 
by telephone, other telecommunication, or other means.
    (b) In any explanation under paragraph (a)(3) of this section, the 
Postal Service informs the single point of contact that:
    (1) The Postal Service will not implement its decision for at least 
ten days after the single point of contact receives the explanation; or
    (2) The Postal Service has reviewed the decision and determined that 
because of unusual circumstances, the waiting period of at least ten 
days is not feasible.
    (c) For purposes of computing the waiting period under paragraph 
(b)(1) of this section, a single point of contact is presumed to have 
received written notification 5 days after the date of mailing of such 
notification.

[[Page 227]]


<R05>
Sec. 778.11  What are the Postal Service's obligations in interstate situations?

    (a) The Postal Service is responsible for:
    (1) Identifying proposed direct federal development projects that 
have an impact on interstate areas;
    (2) Notifying appropriate officials and entities in states which 
have adopted a process and which select the Postal Service's facility 
project action for review;
    (3) Making efforts to identify and notify the affected state, 
areawide, regional, and local officials and entities in those states 
that have not adopted a process under the Order or do not select the 
Postal Service's facility project action for review;
    (4) Responding pursuant to Sec. 778.10 if the Postal Service 
receives a recommendation from a designated areawide agency transmitted 
by a single point of contact in cases in which the review, coordination, 
and communication with the Postal Service have been delegated.
    (b) The Postal Service uses the procedures in Sec. 778.10 if a state 
process provides a state process recommendation to the Postal Service 
through a single point of contact.
Sec. 778.12  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 778.13  May the Postal Service waive any provision of these regulations?

     In an emergency, the Postal Service may waive any provision of 
these regulations.

[[Page 228]]


<R03>
                     SUBCHAPTERS L AND M--[RESERVED]

<R05>


<R03>
                        SUBCHAPTER N--PROCEDURES

<R05>


<R03>
Rules of Procedure Before the Office of General Counsel--Table of Contents

<R05>



<R03>
PART 912--PROCEDURES TO ADJUDICATE CLAIMS FOR PERSONAL INJURY OR PROPERTY DAMAGE ARISING OUT OF THE OPERATION OF THE U.S. POSTAL SERVICE--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
912.1  Claims responsibility.
912.2  Applicability of Federal Tort Claims Act.
912.3  Time limit for filing.
912.4  Place of filing.
912.5  Administrative claim; when presented.
912.6  Administrative claim; who may file.
912.7  Evidence and information to be submitted.
912.8  Sufficiency of evidence and information submitted.
912.9  Final denial of claim.
912.10  Action on approved claims.
912.11  Exclusiveness of remedy.
912.12  Review by legal officers.
912.13  Attorneys' fees.
912.14  Conclusiveness of remedy.

    Authority: 28 U.S.C. 2671-2680; 28 CFR 14.1 through 14.11; 39 U.S.C. 
409.


<R05>
Sec. 912.1   Claims responsibility.

    The General Counsel is responsible for settlement of claims made 
against the U.S. Postal Service under the Federal Tort Claims Act and 39 
U.S.C. 2603, with authority to redelegate the functions to General 
Counsel staff members and other Postal Service employees.

[36 FR 12448, June 30, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 912.2  Applicability of Federal Tort Claims Act.

    (a) The provisions of chapter 171 and all other provisions of title 
28, U.S.C., relating to tort claims shall apply to tort claims arising 
out of the activities of the Postal Service. (39 U.S.C. 409(c)).
    (b) Where the General Counsel, or his designee, finds a claim for 
damage to persons or property resulting from operation of the U.S. 
Postal Service to be a proper charge against the United States and it is 
not cognizable under 28 U.S.C. 2672, he may adjust and settle it under 
authority of 39 U.S.C. 2603.

[45 FR 43719, June 30, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 912.3  Time limit for filing.

    (a) Claim. A claim under the Federal Tort Claims Act must be 
presented within two years from the date the claim accrues.
    (b) Suit. Suit must be filed within six months after the date of 
mailing by certified or registered mail of notice of final denial of the 
claim by the Postal Service.

[45 FR 43720, June 30, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 912.4  Place of filing.

    A claim is usually filed with the postmaster of the office within 
the delivery limits of where the accident happened, but may be filed at 
any office of the Postal Service, or sent directly to the Assistant 
General Counsel, Claims Division, U.S. Postal Service, Washington, DC 
20260.

[45 FR 43720, June 30, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 912.5   Administrative claim; when presented.

    (a) For purposes of this part, a claim shall be deemed to have been 
presented when the U.S. Postal Service receives from a claimant, his 
duly authorized agent or legal representative, an executed Standard Form 
95, Claim for Damage or Injury, or other written notification of an 
incident, accompanied by a claim for money damages in a sum certain for 
injury to or loss of property, personal injury, or death alleged to have 
occurred by reason of the incident. Standard Form 95 may be obtained 
from postmaster, postal inspectors, or other local Postal Service 
establishments.
    (b) A claim presented in compliance with paragraph (a) of this 
section may be amended by the claimant at any time prior to final Postal 
Service action or prior to the exercise of the claimant's option under 
28 U.S.C. 2675(a). A claim may not be amended

[[Page 229]]

after the Postal Service has issued payment of the full amount of the 
claim or has issued a written denial of the claim in accordance with 
Sec. 912.9. Amendments shall be submitted in writing and signed by the 
claimant or his duly authorized agent or legal representative. Upon the 
timely filing of an amendment to a pending claim, the Postal Service 
shall have six months in which to make final disposition of the claim as 
amended, and the claimant's option under 28 U.S.C. 2675(a) shall not 
accrue until six months after the filing of an amendment.

[36 FR 12448, June 30, 1971, as amended at 45 FR 43720, June 30, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 912.6   Administrative claim; who may file.

    (a) A claim for injury to or loss of property may be presented by 
the owner of the property, his duly authorized agent, or legal 
representative.
    (b) A claim for personal injury may be presented by the injured 
person, his duly authorized agent, or legal representative.
    (c) A claim based on death may be presented by the executor or 
administrator of the decedent's estate, or by any other person legally 
entitled to assert such a claim in accordance with applicable State law.
    (d) A claim for loss wholly compensated by an insurer with the 
rights of a subrogee may be presented by the insurer. A claim for loss 
partially compensated by an insurer with the rights of a subrogee may be 
presented by the parties individually as their respective interests 
appear, or jointly.
    (e) A claim presented by an agent or legal representative shall be 
presented in the name of the claimant, be signed by the agent or legal 
representative, show the title or legal capacity of the person signing, 
and be accompanied by evidence of his authority to present a claim on 
behalf of the claimant as agent, executor, administrator, parent, 
guardian, or other representative.

[36 FR 12448, June 30, 1971, as amended at 45 FR 43720, June 30, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 912.7   Evidence and information to be submitted.

    (a) Death. In support of a claim based on death, the claimant may be 
required to submit the following evidence or information:
    (1) An authenticated death certificate or other competent evidence 
showing cause of death, date of death, and age of the decedent.
    (2) Decedent's employment or occupation at time of death, including 
monthly or yearly salary or earnings, if any, and the duration of his 
last employment or occupation.
    (3) Full names, addresses, birth dates, kinship, and marital status 
of the decedent's survivors, including identification of those survivors 
who were dependent for support upon the decedent at the time of his 
death.
    (4) Degree of support afforded by the decedent to each survivor 
dependent upon him for support at the time of his death.
    (5) Decedent's general physical and mental condition before death.
    (6) Itemized bills for medical and burial expenses incurred by 
reason of the incident causing death, or itemized receipts of payment 
for such expenses.
    (7) If damages for pain and suffering prior to death are claimed, a 
physician's detailed statement specifying the injuries suffered, 
duration of pain and suffering, any drugs administered for pain, and the 
decedent's physical condition in the interval between injury and death.
    (8) Any other evidence or information which may have a bearing on 
either the responsibility of the United States for the death or the 
damages claimed.
    (b) Personal injury. In support of a claim for personal injury, 
including pain and suffering, the claimant may be required to submit the 
following evidence or information:
    (1) A written report by his attending physician or dentist setting 
forth the nature and extent of the injury, nature and extent of 
treatment, any degree of temporary or permanent disability, the 
prognosis, period of hospitalization, and any diminished earning 
capacity. In addition, the claimant may be required to submit to a 
physical or mental examination by a physician employed by the agency or 
another Federal agency. A copy of the report of the examining physician 
shall be made available to the claimant upon the claimant's written 
request, provided

[[Page 230]]

that he has, upon request, furnished the report referred to in the first 
sentence of this paragraph and has made, or agrees to make available to 
the agency or another Federal agency. A copy previously or thereafter 
made of the physical or mental condition which is the subject matter of 
his claim.
    (2) Itemized bills for medical, dental, and hospital expenses 
incurred, or itemized the report referred to in the first expenses.
    (3) If the prognosis reveals the necessity for future treatment, a 
statement of expected expenses for such treatment.
    (4) If a claim is made for loss of time for employment, a written 
statement from his employment, whether he is a full- or part-time 
employee, and wages or salary actually lost.
    (5) If a claim is made for loss of income and the claimant is self-
employed, documentary evidence showing the amount of earnings actually 
lost.
    (6) Any other evidence or information which may have a bearing on 
either the responsibility of the United States for the personal injury 
or the damages claimed.
    (c) Property damage. In support of a claim for injury to or loss of 
property, real or personal, the claimant may be required to submit the 
following evidence or information:
    (1) Proof of ownership.
    (2) A detailed statement of the amount claimed with respect to each 
item of property.
    (3) An itemized receipt of payment for necessary repairs or itemized 
written estimates of the cost of such repairs.
    (4) A statement listing date of purchase, purchase price and salvage 
value, where repair is not economical.

[36 FR 12449, June 30, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 912.8  Sufficiency of evidence and information submitted.

    In order to exhaust the administrative remedy provided, a claimant 
shall submit substantial evidence to prove the extent of any losses 
incurred and any injury sustained, so as to provide the Postal Service 
with sufficient evidence for it to properly evaluate the claim.

[45 FR 43720, June 30, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 912.9   Final denial of claim.

    (a) Final denial of an administrative claim shall be in writing and 
sent to the claimant, his attorney, or legal representative by certified 
or registered mail. The notification of final denial may include a 
statement of the reasons for the denial and shall include a statement 
that, if the claimant is dissatisfied with the agency action, he may 
file suit in an appropriate U.S. District Court not later than 6 months 
after the date of mailing of the notation.
    (b) Prior to the commencement of suit and prior to the expiration of 
the 6 month period provided in 28 U.S.C. 2401(b), a claimant, his duly 
authorized agent, or legal representative, may file a written request 
with the postal official who issued the final denial or with the 
Assistant General Counsel, Claims Division, U.S. Postal Service, 
Washington, DC 20260, for a reconsideration of a final denial of a claim 
under paragraph (a) of this section. Upon the timely filing of a request 
for reconsideration, the Postal Service shall have 6 months from the 
date of filing in which to make a disposition of the claim and the 
claimant's option under 28 U.S.C. 2675(a) shall not accrue until 6 
months after the filing of a request for reconsideration. Final Postal 
Service action on a request for reconsideration shall be effected in 
accordance with this part.

    (c) For purposes of this section, a request for reconsideration of a 
final denial of a claim shall be deemed to have been filed when received 
in the office of the official who issued the final denial or in the 
office of the Assistant General Counsel, Claims Division, U.S. Postal 
Service, Washington, DC 20260-1111.
    (d) Only one request for reconsideration of a final denial may be 
filed. A claimant shall have no right to file a request for 
reconsideration of a final

[[Page 231]]

denial issued in response to a request for reconsideration.

(28 U.S.C. 2671-2680; 28 CFR 14.1-14.11; 39 U.S.C. 401, 409, 2008)

[36 FR 12448, June 30, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 16868, June 27, 1973; 
49 FR 19478, May 8, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 912.10   Action on approved claims.

    In any case where the General Counsel or his designee, upon 
consideration of all the evidence submitted, finds that compensation is 
due a claimant, payment will be made by the U.S. Postal Service and in 
due course a settlement check will be forwarded to the claimant or his 
representative.

[36 FR 12450, June 30, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 912.11  Exclusiveness of remedy.

    The provisions of 28 U.S.C. 2679(b) provide that the remedy against 
the United States, as provided by sections 1346(b) and 2672 of title 28, 
for injury or loss or personal injury or death resulting from the 
operation by an employee of the Government of any motor vehicle while 
acting within the scope of his employment is exclusive of any other 
civil action or proceeding by reason of the same subject matter against 
the employee or his estate whose act or omission gave rise to the claim.

[45 FR 43720, June 30, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 912.12  Review by legal officers.

    The authority of the Postal Service to adjust, determine, 
compromise, and settle a claim under the provisions of the Federal Tort 
Claims Act shall, if the amount of a proposed compromise, settlement, or 
award exceeds $2,500, be exercised only after review by a legal officer 
of the Postal Service.

[45 FR 43720, June 30, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 912.13   Attorneys' fees.

    The provisions of 28 U.S.C. 2678 should be consulted in determining 
the amount of the attorneys' fees.

[36 FR 12448, June 30, 1971. Redesignated at 45 FR 43720, June 30, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 912.14  Conclusiveness of remedy.

    Payment by the Postal Service of the full amount claimed or 
acceptance by the claimant, his agent, or legal representative, of any 
award, compromise, or settlement made pursuant to the provisions of the 
Federal Tort Claims Act, shall be final and conclusive on the claimant, 
his agent, or legal representative, and any other person on whose behalf 
or for whose benefit the claim has been presented, and shall constitute 
a complete release of any claim against the United States and against 
any employee of the Government whose act or omission gave rise to the 
claim by reason of the same subject matter.

[45 FR 43720, June 30, 1980]


<R03>
PART 916--[RESERVED]

<R05>



<R03>
Rules of Procedure Before the Mail Processing Department--Table of Contents

<R05>



<R03>
PART 927--RULES OF PROCEDURE RELATING TO FINES, DEDUCTIONS, AND DAMAGES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
927.1  Noncontractual carriage of mail by vessel.
927.2  Noncontractual air service.
927.3  Other remedies.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 401, 2601, 5401-5403, 5603, 5604; 49 U.S.C. 
1375, 1471.

    Source: 45 FR 12418, Feb. 26, 1980, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 927.1  Noncontractual carriage of mail by vessel.

    (a) Report of infraction. Where evidence is found or reported that a 
carrier of mail by vessel which has transported or been required to 
transport mail pursuant to the provisions of section 19-504, Postal 
Contracting Manual or 39 U.S.C. 5603, has failed or refused to transport 
the mail when required to do so, has unreasonably or unnecessarily 
delayed the mails, has committed other delinquencies in the 
transportation of mail, has failed to carry the mail in a safe and 
secure manner, or has caused loss or damage to the mail, the facts will 
be reported to the General Manager, Logistics Division, of the region in 
which the mail was dispatched or received or was required to be 
dispatched or received.
    (b) Review, investigation, recommendation. The General Manager, 
Logistics

[[Page 232]]

Division, will investigate the matter. The Manager will record findings 
of fact and make a recommendation concerning the need for imposition of 
fine or penalty with the reasons for the recommendation. The Manager 
will then forward the file to the Director, Office of Transportation and 
International Services, and will advise the carrier of the 
recommendation.
    (c) Penalty action. The Director, Office of Transportation and 
International Services, upon review of the record, may impose a fine or 
penalty against a carrier for any irregularity properly documented, 
whether or not penalty action has been recommended. A tentative decision 
of the Director, Office of Transportation and International Services, to 
take penalty action will set forth in detail the facts and reasons upon 
which the determination is based. The Director will send the tentative 
decision, including notice of the irregularities found and the amount of 
fine or penalty proposed, to the carrier. The carrier may present a 
written defense to the proposed action within 30 days after receipt of 
the tentative decision. The Director, after review of the record, will 
advise the carrier of the final decision.
    (d) Appeal. If the final decision includes a penalty, the Director 
will advise the carrier that it may, within 30 days, appeal the action 
in writing to the Assistant Postmaster General, Mail Processing 
Department, U.S. Postal Service, and that its written appeal should 
include all facts and arguments upon which the carrier relies in support 
of the appeal. If an appeal is not received, the Director will close the 
record. When an appeal is taken, the Assistant Postmaster General, Mail 
Processing Department, will review the complete record and decide the 
appeal. He will advise the carrier of the decision in writing and will 
take action consistent with that decision. The Assistant Postmaster 
General, Mail Processing Department, may sustain, rescind, or compromise 
a fine or penalty. The decision of the Assistant Postmaster General, 
Mail Processing Department, on appeal shall be the final decision of the 
Postal Service. The Postal Service may, in its discretion, deduct from 
pay otherwise due the carrier an amount necessary to satisfy the penalty 
action taken under this section.
    (e) Details of administration. For further administrative details, 
see section 19-504, Postal Contracting Manual (Publication 41).

[45 FR 12418, Feb. 26, 1980, as amended at 51 FR 6914, Feb. 27, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 927.2  Noncontractual air service.

    (a) Report of infraction. Each mail handling irregularity will be 
reported on a prescribed form by the cognizant postal official or 
designated representative. As soon as possible the reporting authority 
will ask the local representative of the air carrier to provide an 
explanation of the irregularity. A summary of the explanation, if any, 
will be entered on the form. A copy of the form will be provided to the 
local station manager of the carrier concerned at the close of each tour 
and not less frequently than each 24 hours.
    (b) Carrier conferences. At least once per month, postal officials 
will schedule a meeting with the local representatives of the affected 
air carriers to discuss the reported irregularities. The carrier's 
representative will be advised of any irregularity for which the 
reporting authority will recommend penalty action. The carrier's 
representative will be offered the opportunity to comment on any 
irregularity, and any comments will be attached to the form. The form on 
which penalty action is recommended will then be forwarded to the 
General Manager, Logistics Division, of the appropriate postal region.
    (c) Review, investigation, recommendation. The General Manager, 
Logistics Division, will review the matter. In those instances in which 
a monetary fine or penalty appears warranted but the carrier has 
disputed the facts alleged by the reporting authority, the General 
Manager, Logistics Division, will investigate the matter to resolve the 
differences. The Manager will record findings of fact and make a 
recommendation concerning the need for imposition of a fine or penalty, 
with the reasons for the recommendation. The Manager will then forward 
the file to the Director, Office of Transportation and International 
Services, U.S.

[[Page 233]]

Postal Service, and will advise the carrier of the recommendation.
    (d) Penalty action. The Director, Office of Transportation and 
International Services, upon review of the record, may impose a fine or 
penalty against an air carrier for any irregularity properly documented, 
whether or not penalty action has been recommended. A tentative decision 
of the Director, Office of Transportation and International Services, to 
take penalty action will set forth in detail the facts and reasons upon 
which the determination is based. The Director will send the tentative 
decision, including notice of the irregularities alleged and the amount 
of fine or penalty proposed, to the carrier. The carrier may present a 
written defense to the proposed action within 30 days after the receipt 
of the tentative decision. The Director, after review of the record, 
will advise the carrier of the final decision.
    (e) Appeal. If the final decision includes a penalty, the Director 
will advise the carrier that it may, within 30 days, appeal the action 
in writing to the Assistant Postmaster General, Mail Processing 
Department, U.S. Postal Service, and that its written appeal should 
include all facts and arguments upon which the carrier relies in support 
of the appeal. If an appeal is not received, the Director will close the 
file. When an appeal is taken, the Assistant Postmaster General, Mail 
Processing Department, will review the complete record and decide the 
appeal. He will advise the carrier of the decision in writing and will 
take action consistent with that decision. The Assistant Postmaster 
General, Mail Processing Department, may sustain, rescind, or compromise 
a fine or penalty. The decision of the Assistant Postmaster General, 
Mail Processing Department, on appeal shall be the final decision of the 
Postal Service. The Postal Service may, in its discretion, deduct from 
pay otherwise due the air carrier an amount necessary to satisfy the 
penalty action taken under the section.
    (f) Details of administration. For further administrative details, 
forms, and other implementing materials adapted to the respective modes 
of transportation, see Transportation Handbook T-1, International 
Airmail, Exchange Office Procedures, Part 4, for foreign air 
transportation; and Transportation Handbook T-7, Handling, Dispatch, and 
Transportation of Military Mail, Part 10, for overseas air 
transportation.

[45 FR 12418, Feb. 26, 1980, as amended at 51 FR 6914, Feb. 27, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 927.3  Other remedies.

    The procedures and other requirements of this part apply only where 
the Postal Service proposes to assess penalties, fines, deductions, or 
damages. This part does not limit other remedies available to the Postal 
Service, including such remedies as summary action to withhold tender of 
the mail to protect the public interest in the event of major 
irregularities such as theft, deliberate loss, damage, or abandonment of 
the mail.


<R03>
PART 931--RULES OF PROCEDURE GOVERNING THE COMPROMISE OF OBLIGATIONS--Table of Contents

<R05>



<R05>
Sec. 931.1   Compromise of obligations.

    Any proposition of compromise shall be submitted in writing, and the 
amount offered in compromise shall be deposited with the Manager, 
Accounting Division or the appropriate postal data center. If the offer 
in compromise is rejected the amount deposited will be returned. The 
amount of a compromise offer must be tendered unconditionally for 
deposit pending the consideration of acceptance. Checks and drafts 
cannot be accepted as offers in compromise when they bear endorsements 
or instructions to the effect that the acceptance of such checks or 
drafts constitutes settlement in full of the claim, fine, penalty, or 
liability in connection with which the offer is made, except that such 
checks or drafts may be accepted when they are accompanied with a 
written waiver of the endorsements or instructions printed thereon. 
Offers in compromise should be transmitted or delivered to the office or 
officer of the Postal Service from whom demand is received for payment 
of the amount due.

(39 U.S.C. 401)

[26 FR 11662, Dec. 6, 1961. Redesignated at 33 FR 6291, April 25, 1968]

[[Page 234]]


<R03>
Rules of Procedure Before the Postal Inspection Service--Table of Contents

<R05>



<R03>
PART 946--RULES OF PROCEDURE RELATING TO THE DISPOSITION OF STOLEN MAIL MATTER AND PROPERTY ACQUIRED BY THE POSTAL INSPECTION SERVICE FOR USE AS EVIDENCE--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
946.1  Scope of part.
946.2  Disposition of property of apparent owners.
946.3  Contraband and property subject to court order.
946.4  Disposition of property of unknown owners.
946.5  Disposition of property having a value of less than $200.
946.6  Disposition of abandoned property; additional period for filing 
          claims.
946.7  Submission of claims.
946.8  Determination of claims.
946.9  Reconsideration of claims.
946.10  Record retention.
946.11  Disposition of property declared abandoned.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 552(a); 39 U.S.C. 401(2), (5), (8), 404(a)(7), 
2003, 3001.

    Source: 53 FR 6986, Mar. 4, 1988, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 946.1  Scope of part.

    This part prescribes procedures governing the disposition of 
recovered stolen mail matter and any other property (real, personal, 
tangible or intangible) obtained by the Postal Inspection Service for 
possible use as evidence after the need to retain such property no 
longer exists. Property obtained by Postal Inspectors which appears to 
have been loose in the mails but is not retained for use as evidence, 
except unlawful matter, must be treated in accordance with postal 
regulations concerning disposition of dead mail (see Domestic Manual 
(DMM) 159.4). Unlawful matter must be disposed of in accordance with 
Sec. 946.3.


<R05>
Sec. 946.2  Disposition of property of apparent owners.

    Where an apparent owner of property subject to this part is known, 
the Chief Postal Inspector or delegate will mail, by certified mail to 
the apparent owner's last known address, written notice describing the 
property and the procedure for filing a claim for its return (see 
Secs. 946.3 and 946.7). Such claims must be filed within 30 days from 
the date the notice is postmarked. If the apparent owner of the property 
fails to file a timely claim, the property is considered abandoned and 
must be disposed of as provided in Sec. 946.6.


<R05>
Sec. 946.3  Contraband and property subject to court order.

    Claims submitted with respect to property subject to this part, 
possession of which is unlawful, must be denied, in writing, by 
certified mail and the person submitting the claim must be accorded 45 
days from the postmarked date to institute judicial proceedings to 
challenge the denial. If judicial proceedings are not instituted within 
45 days, or any extension of time for good cause shown, the contraband 
property must be destroyed unless the Chief Postal Inspector or delegate 
determines that it should be placed in official use by the Postal 
Inspection Service. Property subject to this part, the disposition of 
which is involved in litigation or is subject to an order of court, must 
be disposed of as determined by the court.


<R05>
Sec. 946.4  Disposition of property of unknown owners.

    (a) Where no apparent owner of property subject to this part is 
known, except property described in Sec. 946.3, and the Chief Postal 
Inspector or delegate estimates that the fair market value of the 
property exceeds $200, and the property is not needed as evidence, the 
Chief Postal Inspector or delegate must publish notice providing the 
following information:
    (1) A description of the property including model or serial numbers, 
if known;
    (2) The name, address, and telephone number of the Postal Inspector 
in Charge who has custody of the property; and
    (3) A statement inviting any person who believes that he or she is 
fully entitled to the property to submit a claim for its return with the 
Postal Inspector in Charge who is identified in the notice. Such claim 
must be submitted within 30 days from the date of

[[Page 235]]

first publication of the notice (See Sec. 946.7).
    (b) The notice under Sec. 946.4(a) must be published once a week for 
three consecutive weeks in a publication of general circulation within 
the judicial district where the Postal Inspection Service took 
possession of the property.


<R05>
Sec. 946.5  Disposition of property having a value of less than $200.

    Where the owner of property subject to this part is unknown and the 
Chief Postal Inspector or delegate estimates that fair market value of 
such property is $200 or less, title to the property vests in the United 
States Postal Service, subject to the right of the owner to submit a 
valid claim as provided in Sec. 946.6.


<R05>
Sec. 946.6  Disposition of abandoned property; additional period for filing claims.

    (a) Upon expiration of the time provided in Secs. 946.2 and 
946.4(a)(3) for the filing of claims or any extension thereof, and 
without the receipt of a timely claim, the property described in the 
notice is considered abandoned and becomes the property of the United 
States Postal Service. However, if the owner satisfies the requirements 
of Sec. 946.6(b), except for property described in Sec. 946.3, such 
abandoned property must be returned to the owner if a valid claim is 
filed within 3 years from the date the property became abandoned, with 
the following qualifications:
    (1) Where property has been placed in official use by the Postal 
Inspection Service, a person submitting a valid claim under this section 
must be reimbursed the fair market value of the property at the time 
title vested in the United States Postal Service, less costs incurred by 
the Postal Service in returning or attempting to return such property to 
the owner and;
    (2) Where property has been sold, a person submitting a valid claim 
under this section must be reimbursed the amount of proceeds realized 
from the sale of such property less costs incurred by the Postal Service 
in selling the property and in returning or attempting to return such 
property to the owner.
    (b) In order to present a valid claim under Sec. 946.6(a), the 
claimant must establish that he or she had no actual or constructive 
notice prior to the date the property became abandoned that he or she 
was entitled to file a claim pursuant to Sec. 946.2 or Sec. 946.4. 
Publication of notice pursuant to Sec. 946.4 provides constructive 
notice unless a claimant can demonstrate circumstances which reasonably 
precluded his access to the published notice.


<R05>
Sec. 946.7  Submission of claims.

    Claims submitted pursuant to this part must be submitted on Postal 
Service Form 1503 which may be obtained from the Inspector in Charge who 
has custody of the property.


<R05>
Sec. 946.8  Determination of claims.

    Upon receipt of a claim under this part, the Postal Inspection 
Service must conduct an investigation to determine the merits of the 
claim. The results of the investigation must be submitted to the Chief 
Postal Inspector or delegate who must approve or deny the claim by 
written decision, a copy of which must be forwarded to the claimant by 
certified mail. If the claim is approved, the procedures to be followd 
by the claimant to obtain return of the property, or its determined 
value, must be stated. If the claim is denied, the decision must state 
the reasons therefor.


<R05>
Sec. 946.9  Reconsideration of claims.

    A written request for reconsideration of denied claims may be 
submitted within 10 days of the postmarked date of the mailing denying 
the claim. Such requests must be addressed to the Chief Postal Inspector 
or delegate and must be based on evidence recently developed or not 
previously presented.


<R05>
Sec. 946.10  Record retention.

    Records regarding property subject to this part will be retained for 
a period of 3 years following return of the property to its owner or a 
determination that the property is abandoned.


<R05>
Sec. 946.11  Disposition of property declared abandoned.

    Property declared abandoned, including cash, and proceeds from the 
sale of property subject to this part may be

[[Page 236]]

shared by the Postal Inspection Service with federal, state, or local 
law enforcement agencies. Unless the Chief Postal Inspector determines 
that cash or the proceeds of the sale of the abandoned property are to 
be shared with other law enforcement agencies, such cash or proceeds 
shall be deposited in the Postal Service Fund established by 39 U.S.C. 
2003. The authority to make this determination may be delegated by the 
Chief Postal Inspector.

[59 FR 29372, June 7, 1994]


<R03>
Rules of Procedure Before the Judicial Officer--Table of Contents

<R05>



<R03>
PART 951--PROCEDURE GOVERNING THE ELIGIBILITY OF PERSONS TO PRACTICE BEFORE THE POSTAL SERVICE--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
951.1  Authority for rules.
951.2  Eligibility to practice.
951.3  Persons ineligible for admission to practice.
951.4  Authorization of appearance may be required.
951.5  Complaint of misconduct.
951.6  Censure, suspension or disbarment; grounds.
951.7  Notice of disbarment; exclusion from practice.
951.8  Ex parte communications.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 204, 401.

    Source: 36 FR 11562, June 16, 1971, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 951.1   Authority for rules.

    The Judicial Officer promulgates these rules pursuant to authority 
delegated by the Postmaster General.


<R05>
Sec. 951.2   Eligibility to practice.

    (a) Any individual who is a party to any proceeding before the 
Judicial Officer, the Board of Contract Appeals or an Administrative Law 
Judge may appear for himself or by an attorney at law.
    (b) The head of any department of the Postal Service may establish 
such special rules and regulations pertaining to eligibility to practice 
before such department as he may deem to be necessary or desirable.
    (c) Generally, except as provided in Sec. 951.3, any attorney at law 
who is a member in good standing of the Bar of the Supreme Court of the 
United States or of the highest court of any State, District, Territory, 
Protectorate or Possession of the United States, or of the District of 
Columbia, and is not under any order of any court or executive 
department of one of the foregoing governmental entities suspending, 
enjoining, restraining, disbarring, or otherwise restricting him in the 
practice of law may represent others before the U.S. Postal Service.
    (d) When any person acting in a representative capacity appears in 
person or signs a paper in practice before the Postal Service his 
personal appearance or signature shall constitute a representation to 
the Postal Service that under the provisions of this part and the law he 
is authorized and qualified to represent the particular party in whose 
behalf he acts. The Postal Service does not generally take formal action 
or issue any certificate to show that an individual is eligible to 
practice before it. (See Sec. 951.4.)


<R05>
Sec. 951.3   Persons ineligible for admission to practice.

    (a) No person disbarred from practice before the Postal Service or 
in any other executive department of any of the governmental entities 
mentioned in Sec. 951.2(c) will be eligible to practice before the 
Postal Service until said order of disbarment shall have been revoked.
    (b) Any person who, subsequently to being admitted to practice 
before the Postal Service, is disbarred by any governmental entity 
mentioned in Sec. 951.2(c) shall be deemed suspended from practice 
before the Postal Service during the pendency of said order or 
disbarment.
    (c) No person who has been an attorney, officer, clerk, or employee 
in the Postal Service will be recognized as attorney for prosecuting 
before it or any office thereof any case or matter which he was in 
anywise connected while he was such attorney, officer, clerk, or 
employee.
    (d) No person coming within the prohibitions of 18 U.S.C. 203, 205, 
or 207, will be recognized as attorney before

[[Page 237]]

the Postal Service or any office thereof.


<R05>
Sec. 951.4   Authorization of appearance may be required.

    The Judicial Officer, the head of any department of the Postal 
Service or any Administrative Law Judge may require any person to 
present satisfactory evidence of his authority to represent the person 
for whom he appears.


<R05>
Sec. 951.5   Complaint of misconduct.

    (a) If the head of any department of the Postal Service has reason 
to believe, or if complaint be made to him, that any person is guilty of 
conduct subjecting him to suspension or disbarment, the head of such 
office shall report the same to the Judicial Officer.
    (b) Whenever any person submits to the Judicial Officer a complaint 
against any person who has practiced, is practicing or holding himself 
out as entitled to practice before the Postal Service, the Judicial 
Officer may refer such complaint to the Chief Inspector for a complete 
investigation and report.
    (c) At any time, the Judicial Officer may refer the complaint to the 
General Counsel for the preparation of formal charges to be lodged 
against and served upon the person against whom the complaint has been 
made.


<R05>
Sec. 951.6   Censure, suspension or disbarment; grounds.

    (a) The Judicial Officer may censure, suspend or disbar any person 
against whom a complaint has been made and upon whom charges have been 
served as provided in Sec. 951.5 if he finds that such person:
    (1) Does not possess the qualifications required by Sec. 951.2;
    (2) Has failed to conform to standards of ethical conduct required 
of practitioners at the Bar of any court of which he is a member;
    (3) Represents, as an associate, an attorney who, known to him, 
solicits practice by means of runners or other unethical methods;
    (4) By use of his name, personal appearance, or any device, aids or 
abets an attorney to practice during the period of his suspension or 
disbarment, such suspension or disbarment being known to him;
    (5) Displays toward the Judicial Officer, Board of Contract Appeals 
or any Administrative Law Judge assigned to the Postal Service, conduct 
which, if displayed toward any court of any State, the United States, 
any of its Territories or the District of Columbia, would be cause for 
censure, suspension or disbarment; or
    (6) Is otherwise guilty of misconduct or lacking in character or 
professional integrity.
    (b) Before any person shall be censured, suspended or disbarred, he 
shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard by the Judicial Officer on 
the charges made against him. The General Counsel or his designee shall 
prosecute such cases.
    (c) In the event the Judicial Officer is unavailable for any reason, 
he may assign complaints of misconduct to the Associate Judicial 
Officer, an Administrative Law Judge appointed pursuant to the 
provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act, an Administrative Judge 
appointed pursuant to the provisions of the Contract Disputes Act of 
1978, or some other disinterested member of the headquarters staff of 
the Postal Service recommended by the Deputy Postmaster General, for the 
determinations required by Sec. 951.5, the conduct of the hearings, and 
the decision to censure, suspend, or debar persons as provided herein.

[36 FR 11562, June 16, 1971, as amended at 51 FR 16517, May 5, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 951.7   Notice of disbarment; exclusion from practice.

    Upon the disbarment of any person, notice thereof will be given to 
the heads of the departments of the Postal Service and to the other 
Executive Departments, and thereafter, until otherwise ordered, such 
disbarred persons will not be entitled to practice before the Postal 
Service or any department thereof.


<R05>
Sec. 951.8   Ex parte communications.

    The provisions of 5 U.S.C. 551(14), 556(d) and 557(d) prohibiting ex 
parte communications are made applicable

[[Page 238]]

to proceedings under these rules of practice.

[42 FR 5357, Jan. 28, 1977]


<R03>
PART 952--RULES OF PRACTICE IN PROCEEDINGS RELATIVE TO FALSE REPRESENTATION AND LOTTERY ORDERS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
952.1  Authority for rules.
952.2  Scope of rules.
952.3  Informal dispositions.
952.4  Office business hours.
952.5  Complaints.
952.6  Interim impounding.
952.7  Notice of answer and hearing.
952.8  Service.
952.9  Filing documents for the record.
952.10  Answer.
952.11  Default.
952.12  Amendment of pleadings.
952.13  Continuances and extensions.
952.14  Hearings.
952.15  Change of place of hearings.
952.16  Appearances.
952.17  Presiding officers.
952.18  Evidence.
952.19  Subpoenas.
952.20  Witness fees.
952.21  Depositions, interrogatories, requests for admission of fact and 
          production of documents.
952.22  Transcript.
952.23  Proposed findings and conclusions.
952.24  Decisions.
952.25  Exceptions to initial decision or tentative decision.
952.26  Judicial Officer.
952.27  Motion for reconsideration.
952.28  Orders.
952.29  Modification or revocation of orders.
952.30  Supplemental orders.
952.31  Computation of time.
952.32  Official record.
952.33  Public information.
952.34  Ex parte communications.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 204, 401, 3005.

    Source: 36 FR 11563, June 16, 1971, unless otherwise noted.

    Editorial Note: For nomenclature changes to this part, see 37 FR 
23422, Nov. 3, 1972.


<R05>
Sec. 952.1   Authority for rules.

    These rules of practice are issued by the Judicial Officer of the 
U.S. Postal Service (See Sec. 952.26) pursuant to authority delegated by 
the Postmaster General.


<R05>
Sec. 952.2   Scope of rules.

    These rules of practice shall be applicable in all formal 
proceedings before the Postal Service, 39 U.S.C. 3005, including such 
cases instituted under prior rules of practice pertaining to these or 
predecessor statutes, unless timely shown to be prejudicial to the 
respondent.

[36 FR 11563, June 16, 1971, as amended at 52 FR 36763, Oct. 1, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 952.3   Informal dispositions.

    These rules do not preclude the disposition of any matter by 
agreement between the parties either before or after the filing of a 
complaint when time, the nature of the proceeding, and the public 
interest permit.


<R05>
Sec. 952.4   Office business hours.

    The offices of the officials mentioned in these rules are located at 
the Headquarters of the U.S. Postal Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza, West, 
SW., Washington, DC 20260, and are open Monday through Friday except 
holidays from 8:15 a.m. to 4:45 p.m.

[38 FR 17216, June 29, 1973, as amended at 42 FR 7955, Feb. 8, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 952.5  Complaints.

    When the General Counsel of the Postal Service or his designated 
representative believes that a person is using the mails in a manner 
requiring formal administrative action under 39 U.S.C. 3005, he shall 
prepare and file with the Recorder a complaint which names the person 
involved; states the name, address and telephone number of the attorney 
representing Complainant; states the legal authority and jurisdiction 
under which the proceeding is initiated; states the facts in a manner 
sufficient to enable the person named therein to make answer thereto; 
and requests the issuance of an appropriate order or orders. Complainant 
shall attach to the complaint a copy of the order or orders requested 
which may, at any time during the proceedings, be modified. The person 
named in the complaint shall be know as the ``Respondent'', and the 
General Counsel shall be known as the ``Complainant.''


[[Page 239]]


The term ``person'' (1 U.S.C. 1) shall include any name, address, number 
or other designation under or by use of which the Respondent seeks 
remittances of money or property through the mail.

[48 FR 55126, Dec. 9, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 952.6   Interim impounding.

    In preparation for or during the pendency of a proceeding initiated 
under 39 U.S.C. 3005, mail addressed to a respondent may be impounded 
upon obtaining an appropriate order from a U.S. District Court, as 
provided in 39 U.S.C. 3007.


<R05>
Sec. 952.7  Notice of answer and hearing.

    (a) When a complaint is filed against a Respondent whose mailing 
address is within the United States, the Recorder shall issue a notice 
of answer and hearing stating the date for filing an answer which shall 
not exceed 15 days from the service of the complaint, the time and place 
of the hearing and a reference to the effect of failure to file an 
answer or appear at the hearing. (See Secs. 952.10 and 952.11.) Whenever 
practicable, the hearing date shall be within 30 days of the date of the 
notice.
    (b) Where a complaint is filed against a Respondent whose mailing 
address is not within the United States, the Judicial Officer shall 
review the complaint and any supporting information and determine 
whether a prima facie showing has been made that Respondent is engaged 
in conduct warranting issuance of the orders authorized by 39 U.S.C. 
3005(a). Where he concludes that a prima facie showing has not been made 
he shall dismiss the complaint. Where he concludes that a prima facie 
showing has been made, he shall issue a tentative decision and orders 
which: set forth findings of fact and conclusions of law; direct 
Respondent to cease and desist from engaging in conduct warranting the 
issuance of an order authorized by 39 U.S.C. 3005(a); direct that postal 
money orders drawn to the order of Respondent not be paid for 45 days 
from date of the tentative decision; direct that mail addressed to 
Respondent be forwarded to designated facilities and detained for 45 
days from the date of the tentative decision subject to survey by 
Respondent and release of mail unrelated to the matter complained of; 
and provide that unless Respondent presents, within 45 days of the date 
of the tentative decision, good cause for dismissing the complaint, or 
modifying the tentative decision and orders, the tentative decision and 
orders shall become final. The Judicial Officer may, upon a showing of 
good cause made within 45 days of the date of the tentative decision, 
hold a hearing to determine whether the tentative decision and orders 
should be revoked, modified or allowed to become final. Should a hearing 
be granted, the Judicial Officer may modify the tentative decision and 
orders to extend the time during which the payment of postal money 
orders payable to Respondent is suspended and mail addressed to 
Respondent is detained.

[44 FR 61959, Oct. 29, 1979, as amended at 48 FR 55126, Dec. 9, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 952.8   Service.

    (a) Where the Respondent's mailing address is within the United 
States, the Recorder shall cause a notice of answer and hearing and a 
copy of the complaint to be transmitted to the postmaster at any office 
of address of the Respondent or to the inspector in charge of any 
division in which the Respondent is doing business, which shall be 
delivered to the Respondent or his agent by said postmaster or a 
supervisory employee of his post office or a postal inspector. A receipt 
acknowledging delivery of the notice shall be secured from the 
Respondent or his agent and forwarded to the Recorder, U.S. Postal 
Service, Washington, DC 20260, to become a part of the official record.
    (b) If, after 5 days, the postmaster or his agent can find no person 
to accept service of the notice of answer and hearing and complaint 
pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section, the notice may be delivered 
in the usual manner as other mail addressed to the respondent. A 
statement, showing the time and place of delivery, signed by the postal 
employee who delivered the notice of answer and hearing and complaint 
shall be forwarded to the Recorder and such statement shall constitute 
evidence of service.

[[Page 240]]

    (c) Where the only address against which Complainant seeks relief is 
outside the United States, a copy of the complaint, the tentative 
decision, and a copy of these rules of practice shall be sent by 
registered air mail, return receipt requested, by the Recorder to the 
address cited in the complaint. A written statement by the Recorder 
noting the time and place of mailing shall be accepted as evidence of 
service in the event a signed return receipt is not returned to the 
Recorder.

[36 FR 11563, June 16, 1971, as amended at 37 FR 7321, Apr. 13, 1972; 44 
FR 61959, Oct. 29, 1979; 44 FR 65399, Nov. 13, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 952.9   Filing documents for the record.

    (a) Each party shall file with the Recorder pleadings, motions, 
proposed orders and other documents for the record. The Recorder shall 
cause copies to be delivered promptly to other parties to the proceeding 
and to the presiding officer.
    (b) The parties shall submit four copies of all documents unless 
otherwise ordered by the presiding officer. One copy shall be signed as 
the original.
    (c) Documents shall be dated and state the docket number and title 
of the proceeding. Any pleading or other document required by order of 
the presiding officer to be filed by a specified date shall be delivered 
to the Recorder on or before such date. The date of filing shall be 
entered thereon by the Recorder.

[36 FR 11563, June 16, 1971, as amended at 44 FR 61960, Oct. 29, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 952.10   Answer.

    (a) The answer shall contain a concise statement admitting, denying, 
or explaining each of the allegations set forth in the complaint.
    (b) Any facts alleged in the complaint which are not denied or are 
expressly admitted in the answer may be considered as proved, and no 
further evidence regarding these facts need be adduced at the hearing.
    (c) The answer shall be signed personally by an individual 
respondent, or in the case of a partnership by one of the partners, or, 
in the case of a corporation or association, by an officer thereof.
    (d) The answer shall set forth the Respondent's address and 
telephone number or the name, address and telephone number of its 
attorney.
    (e) The answer shall affirmatively state whether the respondent will 
appear in person or by counsel at the hearing.
    (f) If the respondent does not desire to appear at the hearing in 
person or by counsel he may request that the matter be submitted for 
determination pursuant to paragraph (b) of Sec. 952.11.

[36 FR 11563, June 16, 1971, as amended at 44 FR 61960, Oct. 29, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 952.11  Default.

    (a) If the Respondent fails to file an answer within the time 
specified in the notice of answer and hearing, he shall be deemed in 
default, and to have waived hearing and further procedural steps. The 
Judicial Officer shall thereafter issue orders without further notice to 
the Respondent.
    (b) If the Respondent files an answer but fails to appear at the 
hearing, the Respondent may, unless timely indications to the contrary 
are received, be deemed to have abandoned the intention to present a 
defense to the charges of the complaint, and the Judicial Officer, 
without further notice to Respondent, may issue the orders sought in the 
complaint.

[48 FR 55126, Dec. 9, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 952.12   Amendment of pleadings.

    (a) Amendments proposed prior to the hearing shall be filed with the 
Recorder. Amendments proposed thereafter shall be filed with the 
presiding officer.
    (b) By consent of the parties a pleading may be amended at any time. 
Also, a party may move to amend a pleading at any time prior to the 
close of the hearing and, provided that the amendment is reasonably 
within the scope of the proceeding initiated by the complaint, the 
presiding officer shall make such ruling on the motion as he deems to be 
fair and equitable to the parties.
    (c) When issues not raised by the pleadings but reasonably within 
the scope of the proceedings initiated by the complaint are tried by 
express or implied consent of the parties, they

[[Page 241]]

shall be treated in all respects as if they had been raised in the 
pleadings. Such amendments as may be necessary to make the pleadings 
conform to the evidence and to raise such issues shall be allowed at any 
time upon the motion of any party.
    (d) If a party objects to the introduction of evidence at the 
hearing on the ground that it is not within the issues made by the 
pleadings, but fails to satisfy the presiding officer that an amendment 
of the pleadings would prejudice him on the merits, the presiding 
officer may allow the pleadings to be amended and may grant a 
continuance to enable the objecting party to rebut the evidence 
presented.
    (e) The presiding officer may, upon reasonable notice and upon such 
terms as are just, permit service of a supplemental pleading setting 
forth transactions, occurrences, or events which have happened since the 
date of the pleading sought to be supplemented and which are relevant to 
any of the issues involved.

[36 FR 11563, June 16, 1971, as amended at 44 FR 61960, Oct. 29, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 952.13   Continuances and extensions.

    Continuances and extensions will not be granted by the presiding 
officer except for good cause shown.


<R05>
Sec. 952.14   Hearings.

    Hearings are held at the headquarters of the Postal Service, 
Washington, DC 20260, or other locations designated by the presiding 
officer.


<R05>
Sec. 952.15   Change of place of hearings.

    Not later than the date fixed for the filing of the answer, a party 
may file a request that a hearing be held to receive evidence in his 
behalf at a place other than that designated for hearing in the notice. 
He shall support his request with a statement outlining:
    (a) The evidence to be offered in such place;
    (b) The names and addresses of the witnesses who will testify;
    (c) The reasons why such evidence cannot be produced at Washington, 
DC. The presiding officer shall give consideration to the convenience 
and necessity of the parties and the relevancy of the evidence to be 
offered.


<R05>
Sec. 952.16   Appearances.

    (a) A respondent may appear and be heard in person or by attorney.
    (b) An attorney may practice before the Postal Service in accordance 
with applicable rules issued by the Judicial Officer. See part 951 of 
this chapter.
    (c) When a respondent is represented by an attorney, all pleadings 
and other papers subsequent to the complaint shall be mailed to the 
attorney.
    (d) A respondent must promptly file a notice of change of attorney.


<R05>
Sec. 952.17   Presiding officers.

    (a) The presiding officer at any hearing shall be an Administrative 
Law Judge qualified in accordance with law or the Judicial Officer (39 
U.S.C. 204). The Chief Administrative Law Judge shall assign cases to 
Administrative Law Judges upon rotation so far as practicable. The 
Judicial Officer may, for good cause shown, preside at the reception of 
evidence in proceedings where expedited hearings are requested by either 
party.
    (b) The presiding officer shall have authority to:
    (1) Administer oaths and affirmations;
    (2) Examine witnesses;
    (3) Rule upon offers of proof, admissibility of evidence and matters 
of procedure;
    (4) Order any pleading amended upon motion of a party at any time 
prior to the close of the hearing;
    (5) Maintain discipline and decorum and exclude from the hearing any 
person acting in an indecorous manner;
    (6) Require the filing of briefs or memoranda of law on any matter 
upon which he is required to rule;
    (7) Order prehearing conferences for the purpose of the settlement 
or simplification of issues by the parties;
    (8) Order the proceeding reopened at any time prior to his decision 
for the receipt of additional evidence;
    (9) Render an initial decision, which becomes the final Agency 
decision unless a timely appeal is taken: The Judicial Officer may issue 
a tentative or a final decision;

[[Page 242]]

    (10) Rule upon applications and requests filed under Sec. 952.21.

[36 FR 11563, June 16, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 17216, June 29, 1973; 
38 FR 20263, July 30, 1973; 44 FR 61960, Oct. 29, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 952.18   Evidence.

    (a) Except as otherwise provided in these rules, the Federal Rules 
of Evidence shall govern. However, such rules may be relaxed to the 
extent that the presiding officer deems proper to insure a fair hearing. 
The presiding officer shall exclude irrelevant, immaterial or 
repetitious evidence.
    (b) Testimony shall be under oath or affirmation and witnesses shall 
be subject to cross-examination.
    (c) Agreed statements of fact may be received in evidence.
    (d) Official notice or knowledge may be taken of the types of 
matters of which judicial notice or knowledge may be taken.
    (e) Authoritative writings of the medical or other sciences, may be 
admitted in evidence but only through the testimony of expert witnesses 
or by stipulation.
    (f) Lay testimonials will not be received in evidence as proof of 
the efficacy or quality of any product or thing sold through the mails.
    (g) The written statement of a competent witness may be received in 
evidence provided that such statement is relevant to the issues, that 
the witness shall testify under oath at the hearing that the statement 
is in all respects true, and, in the case of expert witnesses, that the 
statement correctly states his opinion or knowledge concerning the 
matters in question.
    (h) A party who objects to the admission of evidence shall make a 
brief statement of the grounds for the objection. Formal exceptions to 
the rulings of the presiding officer are unnecessary.

[36 FR 11563, June 16, 1971, as amended at 44 FR 61960, Oct. 29, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 952.19   Subpoenas.

    The Postal Service is not authorized by law to issue subpoenas 
requiring the attendance or testimony of witnesses.


<R05>
Sec. 952.20   Witness fees.

    The Postal Service does not pay fees and expenses for respondent's 
witnesses or for depositions requested by respondent.


<R05>
Sec. 952.21   Depositions, interrogatories, requests for admission of fact and production of documents.

    (a) Not later than 5 days after the filing of Respondent's answer, 
any party may file application with the Recorder for the taking of 
testimony by deposition. In support of such application the applicant 
shall submit under oath or affirmation a statement setting out the 
reasons why such testimony should be taken by deposition, the time and 
the place, and the name and address of the witness whose deposition is 
desired, the subject matter of the testimony of each witness and its 
relevancy.
    (b) If the application is granted, the order for the taking of the 
deposition will specify the time and place thereof, the name of the 
witness, and require that the deposition be taken before a person 
authorized to administer oaths as required by paragraph (f) of this 
section.
    (c) Each witness testifying upon deposition shall be duly sworn, and 
the adverse party shall have the right to cross-examine. The questions 
and answers together with all objections, shall be reduced to writing 
and, unless waived by stipulation of the parties, shall be read to and 
subscribed by the witness in the presence of the deposition officer who 
shall certify it in the usual form. The deposition officer shall file 
the testimony taken by deposition as directed in the order. The 
deposition officer shall put the witness on oath. All objections made at 
the time of examination shall be noted by the deposition officer and the 
evidence objected to shall be taken subject to the objections. In lieu 
of participating in the oral examination, a party may transmit written 
interrogatories to the officer, who shall propound them to the witness 
and record the answers verbatim. Objections to relevancy or materiality 
of testimony, or to errors and irregularities occurring at the oral 
examination in the manner of taking the deposition, in the form of the 
questions or answers, in the oath or affirmation,

[[Page 243]]

or in the conduct of the parties and errors of any kind which might be 
obviated, cured or removed if promptly presented, are waived unless 
timely objection is made at the taking of the deposition.
    (d) At the hearing any part or all of the deposition may be offered 
in evidence by any party who was present or represented at the taking of 
the deposition or who had notice thereof. If the deposition is not 
offered and received in evidence, it shall not be considered as a part 
of the record in the proceeding. The admissibility of depositions or 
parts thereof shall be governed by the rules of evidence.
    (e) The party requesting the deposition shall pay all fees required 
to be paid to witnesses and the deposition officer, and shall provide an 
original and one copy of the deposition for the official record, and 
shall serve one copy upon the opposing party.
    (f) Within the United States or within a territory or insular 
possession, subject to the dominion of the United States, depositions or 
interrogatories may be taken or certified before an officer authorized 
to administer oaths by the laws of the United States or of the place 
where the examination is held; within a foreign country, depositions or 
interrogatories may be taken or certified before a secretary of an 
embassy or legation, consul general, vice consul or consular agent of 
the United States, or any other person designated in the order for the 
taking of a deposition.
    (g) Depositions may also be taken and submitted on written 
interrogatories in substantially the same manner as depositions taken by 
oral examination. When a deposition is taken upon written 
interrogatories and cross-interrogatories, none of the parties except a 
witness who is a party shall be present or represented, and no person, 
other than the witness, a stenographic reporter, and the officer shall 
be present at the examination of the witness, which fact shall be 
certified by the officer, who shall propound the interrogatories and 
cross-interrogatories to the witness in their order and reduce the 
testimony to writing in the witness' own words. For good cause shown or 
by stipulation of the parties, written interrogatories and cross-
interrogatories propounding questions of fact may be answered by the 
witness in writing, without the presence of an officer and without being 
recorded by a stenographic reporter, provided the answers are sworn to 
by the witness before a person authorized to administer an oath 
prescribed by paragraph (f).
    (h) Not later than 5 days after the filing of Respondent's answer, 
any party may serve on the other party a request for the admission of 
specified facts. In the event the party served refuses timely to respond 
to the request for admissions, the presiding officer for good cause 
shown may require the party served to admit or deny each requested fact. 
The factual propositions set out in the request shall be deemed admitted 
upon the failure of a party to respond to the presiding officer's order 
for admission or denial.
    (i) Not later than 5 days after the filing of Respondent's answer, 
either party may file an application for the production of documents or 
objects. The application shall state the cause therefor and specifically 
identify the documents or objects and their relevance and materiality to 
the cause or causes in issue. The presiding officer may order the other 
party to produce and permit the inspection and photographing of any 
designated documents or objects not privileged which are reasonably 
calculated to lead to the discovery of admissible evidence. If the 
parties cannot themselves agree thereon, the presiding officer shall 
specify such terms and conditions in making the inspection and taking 
the copies and photographs.
    (j) Failure of a party to comply with an order pursuant to this rule 
may result in the presiding officer's ruling that the disobedient party 
may not support or oppose designated charges or defenses or may not 
introduce designated matters in evidence. The presiding officer may also 
infer from the disobedient party's failure to comply with the order that 
the facts to which the order related would, if produced or

[[Page 244]]

admitted, be adverse to such party's interests. The admissibility of 
matter adduced by operation of Sec. 952.21 shall be governed by 
Sec. 952.18.

[36 FR 11563, June 16, 1971, as amended at 44 FR 61960, Oct. 29, 1979; 
44 FR 65399, Nov. 13, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 952.22   Transcript.

    (a) Hearings shall be stenographically reported by a contract 
reporter of the Postal Service under the supervision of the assigned 
presiding officer. Argument upon any matter may be excluded from the 
transcript by order of the presiding officer. A copy of the transcript 
shall be a part of the record and the sole official transcript of the 
proceeding. Copies of the transcript shall be supplied to the parties to 
the proceeding by the reporter at rates not to exceed the maximum rates 
fixed by contract between the Postal Service and the reporter. Copies of 
parts of the official record including exhibits admitted into evidence, 
other than the transcript, may be obtained by the Respondent from the 
Recorder upon the payment of reasonable copying charges. Items that 
cannot reasonably be photocopied may be photographed and furnished in 
that form to Respondent.
    (b) Changes in the official transcript may be made only when they 
involve errors affecting substance and then only in the manner herein 
provided. No physical changes shall be made in or upon the official 
transcript, or copies thereof, which have been filed with the record. 
Within 10 days after the receipt by any party of a copy of the official 
transcript, or any part thereof, he may file a motion requesting 
correction of the transcript. Opposing counsel shall, within such time 
as may be specified by the presiding officer, notify the presiding 
officer in writing of his concurrence or disagreement with the requested 
corrections. Failure to interpose timely objection to a proposed 
correction shall be considered to be concurrence. Thereafter, the 
presiding officer shall by order specify the corrections to be made in 
the transcript. The presiding officer on his own initiative may order 
corrections to be made in the transcript with prompt notice to the 
parties of the proceeding. Any changes ordered by the presiding officer 
other than by agreement of the parties shall be subject to objection and 
exception.

[36 FR 11563, June 16, 1971, as amended at 44 FR 61961, Oct. 29, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 952.23  Proposed findings and conclusions.

    (a) Each party to a proceeding, except one who fails to answer the 
complaint or, having answered, either fails to appear at the hearing or 
indicates in the answer that he does not desire to appear, may, unless 
at the discretion of the presiding officer such is not appropriate, 
submit proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, orders and 
supporting reasons either in oral or written form in the discretion of 
the presiding officer. The presiding officer may also require parties to 
any proceeding to submit proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, 
orders, and supporting reasons. Unless given orally, the date set for 
filing of proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, orders and 
supporting reasons shall be within 15 days after the delivery of the 
official transcript to the Recorder who shall notify both parties of the 
date of its receipt. The filing date for proposed findings of fact, 
conclusions of law, orders and supporting reasons shall be the same for 
both parties. If not submitted by such date, or unless extension of time 
for the filing thereof is granted, they will not be included in the 
record or given consideration.
    (b) Except when presented orally before the close of the hearing, 
proposed findings of fact shall be set forth in serially numbered 
paragraphs and shall state with particularity all evidentiary facts in 
the record with appropriate citations to the transcript or exhibits 
supporting the proposed findings. Each proposed conclusion shall be 
separately stated.
    (c) Except when presented orally before the close of the hearing, 
proposed orders shall state the statutory basis of the order and, with 
respect to orders proposed to be issued pursuant to 39 U.S.C. 
3005(a)(3), shall be set forth in serially numbered paragraphs stating 
with particularity the representations Respondent and its 
representatives shall cease and desist from using for

[[Page 245]]

the purpose of obtaining money or property through the mail.

[48 FR 55126, Dec. 9, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 952.24  Decisions.

    (a) Initial decision by Administrative Law Judge. A written initial 
decision shall be rendered by an Administrative Law Judge with all due 
speed. The initial decision shall include findings and conclusions with 
the reasons therefor upon all the material issues of fact or law 
presented on the record, and the appropriate orders or denial thereof. 
The initial decision shall become the final Agency decision unless an 
appeal is taken in accordance with Sec. 952.25.
    (b) Tentative or final decision by the Judicial Officer. When the 
Judicial Officer presides at the hearing he shall issue a final or a 
tentative decision. Such decision shall include findings and conclusions 
with the reasons therefor upon all the material issues of fact or law 
presented on the record, and the appropriate orders or denial thereof. 
The tentative decision shall become the final Agency decision unless 
exceptions are filed in accordance with Sec. 952.25.
    (c) Oral decisions. The presiding Officer may render an oral 
decision (an initial decision by an Administrative Law Judge, or a 
tentative or final decision by the Judicial Officer) at the close of the 
hearing when the nature of the case and the public interest warrant. A 
party who desires an oral decision shall notify the presiding officer 
and the opposing party at least 5 days prior to the date set for the 
hearing. Either party may submit proposed findings, conclusions, and 
proposed orders either orally or in writing at the conclusion of the 
hearing.

[48 FR 55126, Dec. 9, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 952.25   Exceptions to initial decision or tentative decision.

    (a) A party in a proceeding presided over by an Administrative Law 
Judge, except a party who failed to file an answer, may appeal to the 
Judicial Officer by filing exceptions in a brief on appeal within 15 
days from the receipt of the Administrative Law Judge's initial 
decision.
    (b) A party in a proceeding presided over by the Judicial Officer, 
except one who has failed to file an answer, may file exceptions within 
15 days from the receipt of the Judicial Officer's tentative decision.
    (c) If an initial or tentative decision is rendered orally by the 
presiding officer at the close of the hearing, he may then orally give 
notice to the parties participating in the hearing of the time limit 
within which an appeal must be filed.
    (d) The date for filing the reply to an appeal brief or to a brief 
in support of exceptions to a tentative decision by the Judicial Officer 
is 10 days after the receipt thereof. No additional briefs shall be 
received unless requested by the Judicial Officer.
    (e) Briefs upon appeal or in support of exceptions to a tentative 
decision by the Judicial Officer and replies thereto shall be filed in 
triplicate with the Recorder and contain the following matter in the 
order indicated:
    (1) A subject index of the matters presented, with page references; 
a table of cases alphabetically arranged; a list of statutes and texts 
cited with page references.
    (2) A concise abstract or statement of the case in briefs on appeal 
or in support of exceptions.
    (3) Numbered exceptions to specific findings and conclusions of 
fact, conclusions of law, or recommended orders of the presiding officer 
in briefs on appeal or in support of exceptions.
    (4) A concise argument clearly setting forth points of fact and of 
law relied upon in support of or in opposition to each exception taken, 
together with specific references to the parts of the record and the 
legal or other authorities relied upon.
    (f) Unless permission is granted by the Judicial Officer no brief 
shall exceed 50 printed or 100 typewritten pages double spaced.
    (g) The Judicial Officer will extend the time to file briefs only 
upon written application for good cause shown. The Recorder shall 
promptly notify the applicant of the decision of the Judicial Officer on 
the application. If the appeal brief or brief in support of exceptions 
is not filed within the time prescribed, the defaulting party will be

[[Page 246]]

deemed to have abandoned the appeal or waived the exceptions, and the 
initial or tentative decision shall become the final Agency decision.

[36 FR 11563, June 16, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 17216, June 29, 1973; 
44 FR 61961, Oct. 29, 1979; 48 FR 55127, Dec. 9, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 952.26  Judicial Officer.

    The Judicial Officer is authorized: (a) To act as presiding officer 
at hearings, (b) to render tentative decisions, (c) to render final 
Agency decisions, (d) to issue Postal Service orders for the Postmaster 
General, (e) to refer the record in any proceeding to the Postmaster 
General or the Deputy Postmaster General for final Agency decision, (f) 
to remand a case to the presiding officer for consideration, (g) to 
revise or amend these rules of practice. In determining appeals from 
initial decisions or exceptions to tentative decisions (see Sec. 952.24 
(a) and (b) supra), the entire official record will be considered before 
a final Agency decision is rendered. Before rendering a final Agency 
decision, the Judicial Officer may order the hearing reopened for the 
presentation of additional evidence by the parties.

[44 FR 61961, Oct. 29, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 952.27   Motion for reconsideration.

    A party may file a motion for reconsideration of a final agency 
decision within 10 days after receiving it or within such longer period 
as the Judicial Officer may fix. Each motion for reconsideration shall 
be accompanied by a brief clearly setting forth the points of fact and 
of law relied upon in support of said motion.

[36 FR 11563, June 16, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 17216, June 29, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 952.28   Orders.

    (a) If an order is issued which prohibits delivery of mail to a 
respondent it shall be incorporated in the record of the proceeding. The 
Recorder shall cause notice of the order to be published in the Postal 
Bulletin and cause the order to be transmitted to such postmasters and 
other officers and employees of the Postal Service as may be required to 
place the order into effect.
    (b) If an order is issued which requires the Respondent to cease and 
desist from using certain representations for the purpose of obtaining 
money or property through the mail, it shall be incorporated in the 
record of the proceeding and a copy thereof shall be served upon the 
Respondent or his agent by certified mail or by personal service, or if 
no person can be found to accept service, service shall be accomplished 
by ordinary mail to the last known address of Respondent or his agent. 
If service is not accomplished by certified mail, a statement, showing 
the time and place of delivery, signed by the postal employee who 
delivered the order, shall be forwarded to the Recorder.

[36 FR 11563, June 16, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 17216, June 29, 1973; 
44 FR 61961, Oct. 29, 1979; 48 FR 55127, Dec. 9, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 952.29  Modification or revocation of orders.

    A party against whom an order or orders have been issued may file an 
application for modification or revocation thereof. The Recorder shall 
transmit a copy of the application to the General Counsel, who shall 
file a written reply within 10 days after filing or such other period as 
the Judicial Officer may fix. A copy of the reply shall be sent to the 
applicant by the Recorder. Thereafter an order granting or denying such 
application will be issued by the Judicial Officer.

[48 FR 55127, Dec. 9, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 952.30  Supplemental orders.

    When the General Counsel or his designated representative shall have 
reason to believe that a person is evading or attempting to evade the 
provisions of any such orders by conducting the same or a similar 
enterprise under a different name or at a different address he may file 
a petition with accompanying evidence setting forth the alleged evasion 
or attempted evasion and requesting the issuance of a supplemental order 
or orders against the name or names allegedly used. Notice shall then be 
given by the Recorder to the person that the order has been requested 
and that an answer may be filed within 10 days of the notice. The

[[Page 247]]

Judicial Officer, for good cause shown, may hold a hearing to consider 
the issues in controversy, and shall, in any event, render a final 
decision granting or denying the supplemental order or orders.

[48 FR 55127, Dec. 9, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 952.31   Computation of time.

    A designated period of time under these rules excludes the day the 
period begins, and includes the last day of the period unless the last 
day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in which event the period 
runs until the close of business on the next business day.


<R05>
Sec. 952.32   Official record.

    The transcript of testimony together with all pleadings, orders, 
exhibits, briefs and other documents filed in the proceeding shall 
constitute the official record of the proceeding.


<R05>
Sec. 952.33  Public Information.

    The Law Librarian of the Postal Service maintains for public 
inspection in the Law Library copies of all initial, tentative and final 
Agency decisions and orders. The Recorder maintains the complete 
official record of every proceeding.

[48 FR 55127, Dec. 9, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 952.34   Ex parte communications.

    The provisions of 5 U.S.C. 551(14), 556(d) and 557(d) prohibiting ex 
parte communications are made applicable to proceedings under these 
rules of practice.

[42 FR 5357, Jan. 28, 1977]


<R03>
PART 953--RULES OF PRACTICE IN PROCEEDINGS RELATIVE TO MAILABILITY--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
953.1  Authority of rules.
953.2  Initiation.
953.3  Appeal.
953.4  Service of notice; Reply; Motion for summary judgment.
953.5  Hearings.
953.6  Compromise and informal dispositions.
953.7  Default; Appearances.
953.8  Location of hearing.
953.9  Change of place of hearing.
953.10  Presiding officers.
953.11  Proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law.
953.12  Initial decision.
953.13  Appeal from initial decision.
953.14  Final Agency decision.
953.15  Expedition.
953.16  Disposition.
953.17  Exparte communications.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 204, 401.

    Source: 59 FR 31538, June 20, 1994, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 953.1  Authority for rules.

    These rules of practice are issued by the Judicial Officer of the 
U.S. Postal Service pursuant to authority delegated by the Postmaster 
General.


<R05>
Sec. 953.2  Initiation.

    Mailability proceedings are initiated upon the filing of a written 
appeal with the Recorder, Judicial Officer Department, U.S. Postal 
Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza, SW., Washington, DC 20260-6100.


<R05>
Sec. 953.3  Appeal.

    The appeal shall:
    (a) Identify the appellant;
    (b) Describe or be accompanied by a copy of the determination or 
ruling being appealed;
    (c) Describe the character or content of the matter the appellant 
wishes to have carried and delivered by the U.S. Postal Service;
    (d) Request review of the determination or ruling, specifying each 
and every reason why the appellant believes the determination or ruling 
should be reversed;
    (e) Indicate whether the appellant desires to have an oral hearing 
or, instead, to have the case decided solely on the basis of the written 
record (i.e., the appeal, the General Counsel's reply, and any documents 
submitted by the parties pursuant to an order of the presiding officer); 
and
    (f) Bear the signature, typed or printed name, title, business 
address, and telephone number of any attorney at law representing the 
appellant in bringing the appeal, and of each individual appellant or, 
if the appellant is a partnership, corporation, limited liability 
company, or unincorporated association, of the managing partner, chief 
executive officer, chief operating

[[Page 248]]

officer, or other officer authorized to bind the organization.


<R05>
Sec. 953.4  Service of notice; Reply; Motion for summary judgment.

    (a) Service of notice. (1) Upon receiving the appeal, the Recorder 
shall issue a notice specifying that the Postal Service General 
Counsel's reply shall be filed within 15 days of receipt of the notice; 
and the time and place of the hearing (if one was requested).
    (2) The Recorder shall promptly serve this notice on the parties as 
follows:
    (i) The notice, with a copy of the appeal, shall be sent to the 
General Counsel at Postal Service headquarters.
    (ii) When the appellant's address is within the United States, the 
notice, with a copy of the appeal, shall be sent to the postmaster at 
the office that delivers mail to the appellant's address. The postmaster 
shall be instructed that, acting personally or through a supervisory 
employee or a postal inspector, he or she is to serve these documents on 
the appellant. If the appellant cannot be found within 3 days, the 
postmaster shall send these documents to the appellant by ordinary mail 
and forward a statement to the Recorder that is signed by the delivering 
employee and that specifies the time and place of delivery.
    (iii) When the appellant's address is outside the United States, the 
notice, with a copy of the appeal, shall be sent to the appellant by 
registered airmail, return receipt requested. A written statement by the 
Recorder, noting the time and place of mailing, shall be accepted as 
proof of service in the event a signed and dated return receipt is not 
received.
    (b) Reply. The General Counsel shall file a written reply, in 
triplicate, with the Recorder, within the aforementioned 15-day period 
or any extension granted by the presiding officer for good cause shown. 
If the General Counsel's reply fails to address any allegation in the 
appeal, that allegation shall be deemed admitted.
    (c) Motion for summary judgment. Upon motion of either the General 
Counsel or the appellant, or on the presiding officer's own initiative, 
the presiding officer may find that the appeal and answer present no 
genuine and material issues of fact requiring an evidentiary hearing, 
and thereupon may render an initial decision upholding or reversing the 
determination or ruling. The initial decision shall become the final 
Agency decision if a timely appeal is not taken.


<R05>
Sec. 953.5  Hearings.

    (a) In general, admissibility of evidence at hearings conducted 
under this part hinges on relevancy and materiality. However, relevant 
evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially 
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, or by considerations of 
undue delay, or by needless presentation of cumulative evidence. 
Testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation, and witnesses are 
subject to cross-examination. Stipulations of fact are encouraged and 
may be received in evidence.
    (b) Objections to the admission or exclusion of evidence shall be in 
short form, stating the grounds of objections relied upon. The 
transcript shall not include argument or debate thereon except as 
ordered by the presiding officer. Rulings on such objections shall be a 
part of the transcript.
    (c) Formal exceptions to the rulings of the presiding officer made 
during the course of the hearing are unnecessary. For all purposes for 
which an exception otherwise would be taken, it is sufficient that a 
party, when the ruling of the presiding officer is made or sought, makes 
known the action he desires the presiding officer to take or his 
objection to an action taken, and his grounds therefor.


<R05>
Sec. 953.6  Compromise and informal dispositions.

    Either party may request the other to consider informal disposition 
of any question of mailability, and the scheduled hearing date may be 
postponed by the presiding officer for such period of time as may be 
necessary to accommodate settlement discussions between the parties.


<R05>
Sec. 953.7  Default; Appearances.

    If a timely reply to the appeal is not filed, the presiding officer 
shall refer the appeal to the Judicial Officer, who may find that the 
General Counsel is in

[[Page 249]]

default. Whenever the General Counsel has been deemed to be in default, 
the Judicial Officer shall take whatever action on the appeal he deems 
appropriate. If an oral evidentiary hearing is to be held, the appellant 
may appear at the hearing in person or by counsel. If either party fails 
to appear at the hearing, the presiding officer shall receive the 
evidence of the party appearing and render a decision.


<R05>
Sec. 953.8  Location of hearing.

    Unless otherwise ordered by the presiding officer, the hearing shall 
be held at Postal Service headquarters, 475 L'Enfant Plaza, SW., 
Washington, DC, on the date set in the notice.


<R05>
Sec. 953.9  Change of place of hearing.

    (a) Not later than the date fixed for the filing of the reply, a 
party may file a motion that the scheduled hearing be held at a place 
other than that designated in the notice. The motion shall include a 
supporting statement outlining:
    (1) The evidence to be offered in such place;
    (2) The names and addresses of the witnesses who will testify; and
    (3) The reasons why such evidence cannot be presented in Washington, 
DC.
    (b) In ruling on the motion, the presiding officer shall consider 
the convenience and necessity of the parties and the relevancy of the 
evidence to be offered.


<R05>
Sec. 953.10  Presiding officers.

    The presiding officer at any hearing shall be an Administrative Law 
Judge qualified in accordance with law (5 U.S.C. 3105) and assigned by 
the Judicial Officer (39 U.S.C. 204), or the Judicial Officer, may at 
his discretion, elect to preside at the reception of evidence. The 
Judicial Officer shall assign cases to Administrative Law Judges upon 
rotation if practicable.


<R05>
Sec. 953.11  Proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law.

    Proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be submitted 
orally or in writing at the conclusion of the hearing, or otherwise, as 
ordered by the presiding officer.


<R05>
Sec. 953.12  Initial decision.

    Unless given orally at the conclusion of the hearing, the 
Administrative Law Judge shall render an initial decision as 
expeditiously as practicable after the conclusion of the hearing and the 
receipt of the proposed findings and conclusions, if any. The initial 
decision shall become the decision of the Postal Service if an appeal is 
not perfected. When the Judicial Officer presides at the hearing, his 
powers shall include those of an Administrative Law Judge, but the 
Judicial Officer may render either an initial or final decision. 
Exceptions may be filed to an initial decision rendered by the Judicial 
Officer in accordance with Sec. 953.13.


<R05>
Sec. 953.13  Appeal from initial decision.

    Either party may file exceptions in a brief on appeal to the 
Judicial Officer within 5 days after receipt of the initial decision 
unless additional time is granted. A reply brief may be filed within 5 
days after the receipt of the appeal brief by the opposing party.


<R05>
Sec. 953.14  Final Agency decision.

    The Judicial Officer shall render a final Agency decision. The 
decision shall be served upon the parties and the postal official having 
custody of any mail detained pursuant to the determination or ruling.


<R05>
Sec. 953.15  Expedition.

    For the purpose of further expedition, either party may move to have 
the hearing held at an earlier date than that specified in the notice. 
Either party may also move to have the initial decision (if an 
Administrative Law Judge or the Judicial Officer is presiding) or the 
final Agency decision (if the Judicial Officer is presiding) rendered 
orally at the conclusion of the hearing. The presiding officer may grant 
or deny any such motion. The parties may, with the concurrence of the 
Judicial Officer, agree to waive any of the procedures established in 
these rules.


<R05>
Sec. 953.16  Disposition.

    Mail matter found to be nonmailable shall be held at the post office 
where detained for a period of 15 days from the date of the Postal 
Service decision,

[[Page 250]]

unless that period is extended by the Judicial Officer. During this 
holding period, the appellant may apply for the withdrawal of the 
matter. If any such application is made, the General Counsel shall be 
given notice and the opportunity to oppose the application. Upon the 
expiration of the holding period with no application having been made, 
the Judicial Officer shall order that the matter be disposed of in 
accordance with 39 U.S.C. 3001(b). If a timely application is made, the 
Judicial Officer shall consider the application and any reasons advanced 
by the General Counsel for denying the application. The Judicial Officer 
shall thereafter order either that the matter be returned to the 
applicant or that it be disposed of in accordance with 39 U.S.C. 
3001(b).


<R05>
Sec. 953.17  Ex parte communications.

    The provisions of 5 U.S.C. 551(14), 556(d), and 557(d) prohibiting 
ex parte communications are made applicable to proceedings under these 
rules of practice.


<R03>
PART 954--RULES OF PRACTICE IN PROCEEDINGS RELATIVE TO THE DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF SECOND-CLASS MAIL PRIVILEGES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
954.1  Authority for rules.
954.2  Scope of rules.
954.3  Informal dispositions.
954.4  Office business hours.
954.5  Application.
954.6  Revocation or suspension.
954.7  Failure to appeal proposed action.
954.8  Pleading.
954.9  Default.
954.10  Intervention or other participation.
954.11  Hearings.
954.12  Change of place of hearing.
954.13  Appearances.
954.14  Presiding officers.
954.15  Judicial Officer.
954.16  Procedure.
954.17  Transcript.
954.18  Proposed findings and conclusions.
954.19  Initial decision.
954.20  Appeals.
954.21  Motion for reconsideration.
954.22  Continuances.
954.23  Computation of time.
954.24  Official record.
954.25  Public information.
954.26  Ex parte communications.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 204, 401.

    Source: 36 FR 11567, June 16, 1971, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 954.1   Authority for rules.

    These rules of practice are issued by the Judicial Officer of the 
U.S. Postal Service pursuant to authority delegated by the Postmaster 
General.


<R05>
Sec. 954.2   Scope of rules.

    The rules of practice shall apply to all Postal Service proceedings 
concerning applications, denials, suspensions and revocations of second-
class mailing privileges arising under former title 39 U.S.C. 4351, 
4352, 4353, 4354, 4355, 4356, and 4369 as continued by sec. 3 of the 
Postal Reorganization Act (Pub. L. 91-375).


<R05>
Sec. 954.3   Informal dispositions.

    These rules do not preclude the informal dispositions of second-
class mailing privilege matters before or after institution of 
proceedings.


<R05>
Sec. 954.4   Office business hours.

    The offices of the officials mentioned in these rules are located at 
the U.S. Postal Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza West, SW., Washington, DC 
20260, and are open Monday through Friday from 8:15 a.m. to 4:45 p.m.

[38 FR 17217, June 29, 1973, as amended at 42 FR 7955, Feb. 8, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 954.5   Application.

    A publisher may file an application for second-class mailing 
privileges. (See Part 132 of this chapter.) An authorized administrative 
official of the Postal Service (hereinafter called ``the authorized 
official'') rules upon all applications. If he denies the application he 
shall notify the publisher specifying the reasons for his denial and 
attaching a copy of these rules. Before taking action on an application, 
the authorized official may call upon the publisher for additional 
information or evidence to support or clarify the application. Failure 
of the publisher to furnish such information or evidence

[[Page 251]]

may be cause for the authorized official to deny the application as 
incomplete or, on its face, not fulfilling the requirements for entry.

[36 FR 11567, June 16, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 17217, June 29, 1973; 
42 FR 30504, June 15, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 954.6   Revocation or suspension.

    When the authorized official determines that a publication is no 
longer entitled to second-class mailing privileges, he shall issue a 
ruling of suspension or revocation to the publisher at the last known 
address of the office of publication stating the reasons and attaching a 
copy of these rules.

[36 FR 11567, June 16, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 17217, June 29, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 954.7   Failure to appeal proposed action.

    A ruling of the authorized official shall become final upon failure 
of the publisher to file a petition in accordance with the requirements 
of Sec. 954.8(b).

[36 FR 11567, June 16, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 17217, June 29, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 954.8   Pleading.

    (a) Place of filing. Parties shall file an original and three copies 
of all documents of record, unless otherwise ordered by the presiding 
officer with the Docket Clerk of the Postal Service, who shall cause 
copies to be delivered to the other parties and to the presiding 
officer. Service is ordinarily made on the private parties by certified 
mail and delivery is deemed complete when a document or notice of its 
arrival is left at the designated address. The Docket Clerk shall 
maintain a docket and the files in all proceedings.
    (b) Petition. A publisher may appeal from a ruling of the authorized 
official by filing a petition within 15 days of the receipt of the 
ruling unless the time is extended by the authorized official. The 
petition shall state the reasons why the publisher (designated 
``Petitioner'' in the proceeding) believes the ruling of the authorized 
official is erroneous and shall provide the address at which documents 
may be served on the Petitioner. The petition shall also allege facts 
showing compliance with each provision of law or regulation on which the 
publisher's claim to second-class mail privileges is based. The 
publisher shall attach to his petition a copy of the letter of the 
authorized official denying, suspending or revoking second class mail 
privileges.
    (c) Notice of hearing. Upon receipt of the petition the Docket Clerk 
shall set a date for the hearing and issue a notice of hearing to the 
parties stating the time and place of the hearing, the date for filing 
an answer, and the name of the presiding officer.
    (d) Answer. The authorized official (designated the ``Respondent'' 
in the proceeding) shall answer the petition within 15 days after filing 
and admit or deny each allegation of the petition.
    (e) Amendment. An amendment of a pleading may be offered by any 
party at any time prior to the close of the hearing. If the presiding 
officer deems it appropriate to permit the amendment of a pleading, he 
may impose such conditions, by way of continuance of the hearing date or 
otherwise, as he considers necessary to assure a fair hearing.

[36 FR 11567, June 16, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 17217, June 29, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 954.9   Default.

    If a publisher fails to appear at the hearing, the presiding officer 
may: (a) Dismiss the petition; (b) order the petitioner to show cause 
within 30 days from the date of the order why an order of dismissal 
should not be entered, and thereafter enter such order as the presiding 
officer deems to be appropriate. If the petition is dismissed by order 
of an Administrative Law Judge, the dismissal may be appealed to the 
Judicial Officer within 15 days from the date of the order.


<R05>
Sec. 954.10   Intervention or other participation.

    To intervene or otherwise participate in a proceeding, any person 
may file a timely application in accordance with Sec. 954.8(a). A timely 
application is one which will not unduly delay the proceeding. The 
application shall state whom the potential intervenor represents, his 
interest, the extent to which he desires to participate, and the 
evidence he seeks to introduce. The presiding officer shall fix the time

[[Page 252]]

within which the parties shall answer the application. The presiding 
officer shall grant or deny the application on such terms and conditions 
as he deems appropriate. In so doing the presiding officer will 
consider, among other things, whether intervention or other 
participation is consistent with the timely and proper adjudication of 
the rights of the original parties.

[31 FR 5198, Mar. 31, 1966. Redesignated at 31 FR 16270, Dec. 20, 1966]


<R05>
Sec. 954.11   Hearings.

    Hearings are held at the headquarters of the Postal Service, 
Washington, DC 20260, or other locations designated by the presiding 
officer.


<R05>
Sec. 954.12   Change of place of hearing.

    Not later than the date fixed for the filing of the answer, a party 
may file a request that a hearing be held to receive evidence in his 
behalf at a place other than that designated for hearing in the notice. 
He shall support his request with a statement setting forth:
    (a) The evidence to be offered in such place;
    (b) The names and addresses of the witnesses who will testify;
    (c) The reasons why such evidence cannot be produced at Washington, 
DC.

The presiding officer shall give consideration to the convenience and 
necessity of the parties and the relevancy of the evidence to be 
offered.


<R05>
Sec. 954.13   Appearances.

    (a) The General Counsel of the Postal Service or a member of his 
staff designated by him shall represent the Director.
    (b) A publisher or intervenor may appear and be heard in person or 
by attorney. Attorneys may practice before the Postal Service in 
accordance with applicable rules issued by the Judicial Officer. See 
part 951 of this chapter.
    (c) An attorney representing a publisher or intervenor shall file a 
written authorization from the publisher or intervenor before he may 
participate in the proceeding. The publisher or intervenor must promptly 
file a notice of change of attorneys.
    (d) When a publisher or intervenor is represented by an authorized 
attorney all subsequent pleadings shall be served upon the attorney.


<R05>
Sec. 954.14   Presiding officers.

    (a) The Chief Administrative Law Judge shall assign each case to an 
Administrative Law Judge qualified in accordance with law to preside 
over the hearing. Such assignments shall be made, so far as practical, 
in rotation.
    (b) The presiding officer shall have authority to:
    (1) Administer oaths and affirmations;
    (2) Examine witnesses;
    (3) Rule upon matters of evidence and procedure;
    (4) Order any pleading amended upon motion of a party at any time 
prior to the close of the hearing;
    (5) Maintain discipline and decorum and exclude from the hearing any 
person acting in an indecorous manner;
    (6) Require the filing of briefs on any matter upon which he is 
required to rule;
    (7) Order prehearing conferences for the settlement or 
simplification of issues by consent of the parties;
    (8) Order the proceeding reopened at any time prior to his decision 
for the receipt of additional evidence;
    (9) Render an initial decision.

[36 FR 11567, June 16, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 17217, June 29, 1973; 
38 FR 20263, July 30, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 954.15   Judicial Officer.

    The Judicial Officer is authorized (a) to act as presiding officer 
at hearings and (b) to render a final Postal Service Decision for the 
Postmaster General. On appeal from an Initial Decision of an 
Administrative Law Judge, the Judicial Officer will consider the entire 
record including the initial decision and the exceptions to that 
decision. Before any final agency decision has been rendered, the 
Judicial Officer may order the hearing reopened for the presiding 
officer to take additional evidence.


<R05>
Sec. 954.16   Procedure.

    (a) Evidence. The general rules of evidence governing civil 
proceedings in matters not involving trial by jury in the courts of the 
United States apply. The rules may be relaxed to the extent

[[Page 253]]

that the presiding officer may deem proper to insure an adequate and 
fair hearing. The presiding officer may exclude irrelevant or 
repetitious evidence.
    (b) Subpoenas. The Postal Service is not authorized to issue 
subpoenas.
    (c) Fees. The Postal Service does not pay fees and expenses for 
witnesses of, or depositions requested by, the publisher or intervenor.
    (d) Depositions. Depositions may be taken as follows:
    (1) Not later than 5 days after the filing of Director's answer, any 
party may file application with the presiding officer for the taking of 
testimony by deposition. In support of such application the applicant 
shall submit under oath or affirmation a statement setting out the 
reasons why such testimony should be taken by deposition, the time and 
the place, and the name and address of the witness whose deposition is 
desired, the subject matter of the testimony of each witness, its 
relevancy, and the name and address of the person before whom the 
deposition is to be taken.
    (2) If the application is granted, the order for the taking of the 
deposition will specify the time and place thereof, the name of the 
witness, the person before whom the deposition is to be taken and any 
other necessary information.
    (3) Each witness testifying upon deposition shall be duly sworn by 
the deposition officer and the adverse party shall have the right to 
cross-examine. The questions and answers together with all objections, 
shall be reduced to writing and, unless waived by stipulation of the 
parties, shall be read to and subscribed by the witness in the presence 
of the deposition officer who shall certify it in the usual form. The 
deposition officer shall file the testimony taken by deposition as 
directed in the order. All objections made at the time of examination 
shall be noted by the deposition officer and the evidence objected to 
shall be taken subject to the objections. In lieu of participating in 
the oral examination, a party may transmit written interrogatories to 
the deposition officer, who shall propound them to the witness and 
record the answers verbatim. Objections to relevancy or materiality of 
testimony, or to errors and irregularities occurring at the oral 
examination in the manner of taking the deposition, in the form of the 
questions or answers, in the oath or affirmation, or in the conduct of 
the parties and errors of any kind which might be obviated, cured or 
removed if promptly presented, are waived unless timely objection is 
made at the taking of the deposition.
    (4) At the hearing any part or all of the deposition may be offered 
in evidence by any party who was present or represented at the taking of 
the deposition or who had notice thereof. If the deposition is not 
offered and received in evidence, it shall not be considered as a part 
of the record in the proceeding. The admissibility of depositions or 
parts thereof shall be governed by the rules of evidence.
    (5) The party requesting the deposition shall pay all fees required 
to be paid to witnesses and the deposition officer, and shall provide an 
original and one copy of the deposition for the official record, and 
shall serve one copy upon the opposing party.
    (6) Within the United States or within a territory or insular 
possession subject to the dominion of the United States, depositions may 
be taken before an officer authorized to administer oaths by the laws of 
the United States or of the place where the examination is held; within 
a foreign country, depositions may be taken before a secretary of an 
embassy or legation, consul general, vice consul or consular agent of 
the United States, or any other person designated in the order for the 
taking of a deposition.
    (7) Depositions may also be taken and submitted on written 
interrogatories in substantially the same manner as depositions taken by 
oral examination. When a deposition is taken upon written 
interrogatories and cross-interrogatories, none of the parties shall be 
present or represented, and no person, other than the witness, a 
stenographic reporter, and the deposition officer shall be present at 
the examination of the witness, which fact shall be certified by the 
officer, who shall propound the interrogatories and cross-
interrogatories to the witness in their order and reduce the testimony 
to writing in the witness' own words.

[[Page 254]]


<R05>
Sec. 954.17   Transcript.

    (a) A contract reporter of the Postal Service under the supervision 
of the presiding officer shall report hearings. The reporter shall 
supply the parties with copies of the transcript at rates not to exceed 
those fixed by contract between the Postal Service and the reporter.
    (b) Changes in the official transcript may be made only when they 
involve substantial errors. A party may file a motion for correction of 
the official transcript within 10 days after his receipt of the 
transcript or any part thereof. Other parties shall, within such time as 
may be specified by the presiding officer, notify the presiding officer 
in writing if they object to the requested corrections. Failure of a 
party to interpose timely objection to a proposed correction may be 
considered by the presiding officer to be concurrence. The presiding 
officer shall then specify the corrections to be made in the transcript. 
He may on his own initiative order corrections in the transcript after 
notice to the parties subject to their objection.


<R05>
Sec. 954.18   Proposed findings and conclusions.

    (a) A party to a proceeding may submit proposed findings of fact and 
conclusions of law to the presiding officer. The presiding officer shall 
determine whether they shall be oral or written. The presiding officer 
may require parties to a proceeding to submit proposed findings of fact 
and conclusions of law with supporting reasons. When the proposed 
findings and conclusions are not submitted orally they shall be filed 
within 15 days after delivery of the official transcript to the Docket 
Clerk. The Docket Clerk shall notify the parties of the filing date 
which shall be the same for both parties. If not submitted by that date, 
the findings and conclusions will not be considered or included in the 
record.
    (b) Except when presented orally, proposed findings of fact and 
conclusions of law shall be set forth in numbered paragraphs and shall 
state with particularity all evidentiary facts in the record with 
appropriate citations to the transcript or exhibits relied upon to 
support the conclusions proposed. Each proposed conclusion shall be 
separately stated.


<R05>
Sec. 954.19   Initial decision.

    (a) Upon request of either party the presiding officer may render an 
oral initial decision at the close of the hearing when the nature of the 
case and the public interest warrant. If a party desires an oral initial 
decision he shall notify the presiding officer and the opposing party at 
least 5 days prior to the date set for hearing. Parties may then submit 
proposed findings and conclusions orally or in writing at the conclusion 
of the hearing.
    (b) If an oral initial decision is not rendered, the presiding 
officer shall render a written initial decision with all due speed after 
the parties have submitted all posthearing material. The initial 
decision shall become the final agency decision unless it is appealed.
    (c) The initial decision shall include findings upon all material 
issues of fact and law presented on the record and the reasons for those 
findings.


<R05>
Sec. 954.20   Appeals.

    (a) A party may appeal to the Judicial Officer from an initial 
decision by filing exceptions in a brief on appeal within 15 days from 
the receipt of a written or oral initial decision.
    (b) The time for the filing of the reply brief is 10 days after 
receipt of the appeal brief. No additional briefs shall be received 
unless requested by the Judicial Officer.
    (c) Appeal briefs shall contain the following matter in the order 
indicated:
    (1) A subject index of the matters presented with page references;
    (2) A table of cases alphabetically arranged;
    (3) A list of statutes and texts cited with page references;
    (4) A concise abstract or statement of the case;
    (5) Numbered exceptions to the findings and conclusions of the 
presiding officer and the reasons for the exceptions.
    (d) Reply briefs shall contain paragraphs (c) (1), (2), and (3) of 
this section

[[Page 255]]

and the reasons for opposing the exceptions.

[36 FR 11567, June 16, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 17217, June 29, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 954.21   Motion for reconsideration.

    Within 10 days from the date thereof, or such longer period as may 
be fixed by the Judicial Officer, either party may file a motion for 
reconsideration of a final Agency decision.


<R05>
Sec. 954.22   Continuances.

    For good cause shown, continuances or extensions may be granted by 
the presiding officer. Similar action may be taken by the Judicial 
Officer when the proceeding is on appeal.


<R05>
Sec. 954.23   Computation of time.

    A designated period of time under these rules excludes the day the 
period begins, and includes the last day of the period unless the last 
day is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, in which event the period runs 
until the close of business on the next working day.


<R05>
Sec. 954.24   Official record.

    The pleadings, orders, exhibits, transcript of testimony, briefs, 
decisions and other documents filed in the proceeding constitute the 
official record of the proceeding.


<R05>
Sec. 954.25   Public information.

    The Law Librarian of the Postal Service maintains for public 
inspection in the Law Library copies of all initial and final Agency 
decisions. The Docket Clerk of the Postal Service maintains a complete 
official record of every proceeding. A person may examine a record upon 
authorization by the Judicial Officer.


<R05>
Sec. 954.26   Ex parte communications.

    The provisions of 5 U.S.C. 551(14), 556(d) and 557(d) prohibiting ex 
parte communications are made applicable to proceedings under these 
rules of practice.

[42 FR 5358, Jan. 28, 1977]


<R03>
PART 955--RULES OF PRACTICE BEFORE THE BOARD OF CONTRACT APPEALS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
955.1  Jurisdiction, procedure, representation of parties.

                         Preliminary Procedures

955.2  Appeals, how taken.
955.3  Notice of appeal, contents of.
955.4  Forwarding of appeals.
955.5  Preparation, contents, organization, forwarding, and status of 
          appeal file.
955.6  Dismissal for lack of jurisdiction.
955.7  Pleadings.
955.8  Amendments of pleadings or record.
955.9  Hearing election.
955.10  Prehearing briefs.
955.11  Prehearing or presubmission conference.
955.12  Submission without a hearing.
955.13  Optional small claims (excedited) and accelerated procedures.
955.14  Settling the record.
955.15  Discovery--depositions.
955.16  Interrogatories to parties, admission of facts, and production 
          and inspection of documents.
955.17  Service of papers.

                                Hearings

955.18  Where and when held.
955.19  Notice of hearings.
955.20  Unexcused absence of a party.
955.21  Nature of hearings.
955.22  Examination of witnesses.
955.23  Copies of papers.
955.24  Posthearing briefs.
955.25  Transcript of proceedings.
955.26  Withdrawal of exhibits.

                             Representation

955.27  The appellant.
955.28  The respondent.

                                Decisions

955.29  Decisions.

                       Motion for Reconsideration

955.30  Motion for reconsideration.

                               Dismissals

955.31  Dismissal without prejudice.
955.32  Dismissal for failure to prosecute.

                         Ex Parte Communications

955.33  Ex parte communications.

                                Sanctions

955.34  Sanctions.

[[Page 256]]

                    Effective Date and Applicability

955.35  Subpoenas.
955.36  Effective dates and applicability.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 204, 401; 41 U.S.C. 607, 608.

    Source: 41 FR 7408, Feb. 18, 1976, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 955.1   Jurisdiction, procedure, representation of parties.

    (a) Jurisdiction for considering appeals. The U.S. Postal Service 
Board of Contract Appeals (Board) shall consider and determine appeals 
from decisions of contracting officers arising under contracts which 
contain provisions requiring the determination of appeals by the 
Postmaster General or his duly authorized representative or board. In 
addition the Board shall have jurisdiction over other matters assigned 
to it by the Postmaster General. The Board has authority to determine 
appeals falling within the scope of its jurisdiction as fully and 
finally as might the Postmaster General himself.
    (b) Organization and location of the Board. (1) The Board is located 
in Washington, DC, and its mailing address is 475 L'Enfant Plaza, SW., 
Washington, DC 20260-6100.
    (2) The Board consists of the Judicial Officer as Chairman, the 
Associate Judicial Officer as Vice Chairman, and the Administrative 
Judges of the Postal Service. All members of the Board shall be 
attorneys at law duly licensed by any state, commonwealth, territory, or 
the District of Columbia. In general, the appeals are assigned to a 
panel of at least three members of the Board. The decision of a majority 
of the panel constitutes the decision of the Board.
    (c) Decisions on questions of law. When an appeal is taken pursuant 
to a Disputes Clause in a contract which limits appeals to disputes 
concerning questions of fact, the Board may, in its discretion, hear, 
consider, and decide all questions of law necessary for the complete 
adjudication of the issue. In the consideration of an appeal, should it 
appear that a claim is involved which is not cognizable under the terms 
of the contract, the Board may make findings of fact with respect to 
such a claim without expressing an opinion on the question of liability.
    (d) Board of contract appeals procedure--(1) Rules. Appeals referred 
to the Board are handled in accordance with the rules of the Board.
    (2) Administration and interpretation of rules. Emphasis is placed 
upon the sound administration of these rules in specific cases, because 
it is impracticable to articulate a rule to fit every possible 
circumstance which may be encountered. These rules will be interpreted 
so as to secure a just and inexpensive determination of appeals without 
unnecessary delay.
    (3) Preliminary procedures. Preliminary procedures are available to 
encourage full disclosure of relevant and material facts, and to 
discourage unwarranted surprise.
    (4) Time, computation, and extensions. (i) All time limitations 
specified for various procedural actions are computed as maximums, and 
are not to be fully exhausted if the action described can be 
accomplished in a lesser period. These time limitations are similarly 
eligible for extension in appropriate circumstances, on good cause 
shown.
    (ii) Except as otherwise provided by law, in computing any period of 
time prescribed by these rules or by any order of the Board, the day of 
the event from which the designated period of time begins to run shall 
not be included, but the last day of the period shall be included unless 
it is a Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday in which event the period 
shall run to the end of the next business day.
    (iii) Requests for extensions of time from either party shall be 
made in writing stating good cause therefor.
    (5) Place of filings. Unless the Board otherwise directs, all 
notices of appeal, pleadings and other communications shall be filed 
with the Recorder of the Board at its offices in the United States 
Postal Service Headquarters Building, 475 L'Enfant Plaza, SW., 
Washington, DC 20260-6100.
    (e) Representation of parties. Whenever reference is made to 
contractor, appellant, contracting officer, respondent and parties, this 
shall include respective counsel for the parties, as soon as

[[Page 257]]

appropriate notices of appearance have been filed with the Board.

[41 FR 7408, Feb. 18, 1976, as amended at 43 FR 60275, Dec. 27, 1978; 60 
FR 57938, Nov. 24, 1995]

                         Preliminary Procedures


<R05>
Sec. 955.2   Appeals, how taken.

     Notice of an appeal must be in writing, and the original, together 
with two copies, may be filed with the contracting officer from whose 
decision the appeal is taken. The notice of appeal must be mailed or 
otherwise filed within the time specified therefor in the contract or 
allowed by applicable provision of directive or law.


<R05>
Sec. 955.3   Notice of appeal, contents of.

    A notice of appeal should indicate that an appeal is thereby 
intended, and should identify the contract (by number), the department 
and agency or bureau cognizant of the dispute, and the decision from 
which the appeal is taken. The notice of appeal should be signed 
personally by the appellant (the contractor making the appeal), or by an 
officer of the appellant corporation or member of the appellant firm, or 
by the contractor's duly authorized representative or attorney. The 
complaint referred to in Sec. 955.7 may be filed with the notice of 
appeal, or the appellant may designate the notice of appeal as a 
complaint, if it otherwise fulfills the requirements of a complaint.


<R05>
Sec. 955.4   Forwarding of appeals.

    When a notice of appeal in any form has been received by the 
contracting officer, he shall endorse thereon the date of mailing (or 
date of receipt, if otherwise conveyed) and within 10 days shall forward 
said notice of appeal to the Board. Following receipt by the Board of 
the original notice of an appeal (whether through the contracting 
officer or otherwise), the contractor and contracting officer will be 
promptly advised of its receipt and the contractor will be furnished a 
copy of these rules.


<R05>
Sec. 955.5   Preparation, contents, organization, forwarding, and status of appeal file.

    (a) Duties of contracting officer. Within 30 days of receipt of an 
appeal, or advice that an appeal has been filed, the contracting officer 
shall assemble and transmit to the Board through Postal Service counsel 
an appeal file consisting of all documents pertinent to the appeal, 
including:
    (1) The decision and findings of fact from which appeal is taken;
    (2) The contract including specifications and pertinent amendments, 
plans and drawings;
    (3) All correspondence between the parties pertinent to the appeal, 
including the letter or letters of claim in response to which decision 
was issued;
    (4) Transcripts of any testimony taken during the course of 
proceedings, and affidavits or statements of any witnesses on the matter 
in dispute made prior to the filing of the notice of appeal with the 
Board; and
    (5) Any additional information considered pertinent.

Within the same time above specified Postal Service counsel shall 
furnish the appellant a copy of each document he transmits to the Board, 
except those stated in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, as to which a 
list furnished appellant indicating specific contractual documents 
transmitted will suffice, and those stated in paragraph (d) of this 
section.
    (b) Duties of the appellant. Within 30 days after receipt of a copy 
of the appeal file assembled by the contracting officer, the appellant 
shall supplement the same by transmitting to the Board any documents not 
contained therein which he considers pertinent to the appeal, furnishing 
two copies of such documents to the Government trial attorney.
    (c) Organization of appeal file. Documents in the appeal file may be 
originals or legible facsimile or authenticated copies thereof, and 
shall be arranged in chronological order where practicable, numbered 
sequentially, tabbed, and indexed to identify the contents of the file.

[[Page 258]]

    (d) Lengthy documents. The Board may waive the requirement of 
furnishing to the other party copies of bulky, lengthy, or out-of-size 
documents in the appeal file when a party has shown that doing so would 
impose an undue burden. At the time a party files with the Board a 
document as to which such a waiver has been granted, he shall notify the 
other party that the same or a copy is available for inspection at the 
offices of the Board or of the party filing same.
    (e) Status of documents in appeal file. Documents contained in the 
appeal file are considered, without further action by the parties, as 
part of the record upon which the Board will render its decision, unless 
a party objects to the consideration of a particular document in advance 
of hearing or of settling the record in the event there is no hearing on 
the appeal. If objection to a document is made, the Board will rule upon 
its admissibility into the record as evidence in accordance with 
Secs. 955.14 and 955.21.


<R05>
Sec. 955.6   Dismissal for lack of jurisdiction.

    Any motion addressed to the jurisdiction of the Board shall be 
promptly filed. Hearing on the motion shall be afforded on application 
of either party, unless the Board determines that its decision on the 
motion will be deferred pending hearing on both the merits and the 
motion. The Board shall have the right at any time and on its own motion 
to raise the issue of its jurisdiction to proceed with a particular 
case, and shall do so by an appropriate order, affording the parties an 
opportunity to be heard thereon.


<R05>
Sec. 955.7   Pleadings.

    (a) Appellant. Within 30 days after receipt of notice of docketing 
of the appeal, the appellant shall file with the Board an original and 
one copy of a complaint setting forth simple, concise and direct 
statements of each of his claims, alleging the basis, with appropriate 
reference to contract provisions, for each claim, and the dollar amount 
claimed. This pleading shall fulfill the generally recognized 
requirements of a complaint although no particular form or formality is 
required. Upon receipt thereof, the Board shall serve a copy upon the 
respondent. Should the complaint not be received within 30 days, 
appellant's claim and appeal may, if in the opinion of the Board the 
issues before the Board are sufficiently defined, be deemed to set forth 
his complaint and the respondent shall be so notified.
    (b) Respondent. Within 30 days from receipt of said complaint, or 
the aforesaid notice from the Board, respondent shall prepare and file 
with the Board an original and one copy of an answer thereto, setting 
forth simple, concise, and direct statements of respondent's defenses to 
each claim asserted by appellant. This pleading shall fulfill the 
generally recognized requirements of an answer, and shall set forth any 
affirmative defenses or counter-claims as appropriate. Upon receipt 
thereof, the Board shall serve a copy upon appellant. Should the answer 
not be received within 30 days, the Board may, in its discretion, enter 
a general denial on behalf of the Government, and the appellant shall be 
so notified.


<R05>
Sec. 955.8   Amendments of pleadings or record.

    (a) The Board upon its own initiative or upon application by a party 
may, in its discretion, order a party to make a more definite statement 
of the complaint or answer, or to reply to an answer.
    (b) The Board may, in its discretion, and within the proper scope of 
the appeal, permit either party to amend his pleading upon conditions 
just to both parties. When issues within the proper scope of the appeal, 
but not raised by the pleadings or the documentation described in 
Sec. 955.5, are tried by express or implied consent of the parties, or 
by permission of the Board, they shall be treated in all respects as if 
they had been raised therein. In such instances, motions to amend the 
pleadings to conform to the proof may be entered, but are not required. 
If evidence is objected to at a hearing on the ground that it is not 
within the issues raised by the pleadings or the documentation required 
pursuant to Sec. 955.5 (which shall be deemed part of the pleadings for 
this purpose), it may be admitted within the proper scope of the appeal, 
provided, however, that the objecting

[[Page 259]]

party may be granted a continuance if necessary to enable him to meet 
such evidence.


<R05>
Sec. 955.9   Hearing election.

    Upon receipt of respondent's answer or the notice referred to in the 
last sentence of Sec. 955.7(b), appellant shall advise whether he 
desires a hearing as prescribed in Secs. 955.18 through 955.26, or 
whether, in the alternative, he elects to submit his case on the record 
without a hearing, as prescribed in Sec. 955.12. In appropriate cases, 
the appellant shall also elect whether he desires the optional small 
claims (expedited) procedure or accelerated procedure prescribed in 
Sec. 955.13.

[41 FR 7408, Feb. 18, 1976, as amended at 60 FR 57938, Nov. 24, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 955.10   Prehearing briefs.

    Based on an examination of the documentation described in 
Sec. 955.5, the pleadings, and a determination of whether the arguments 
and authorities addressed to the issues are adequately set forth 
therein, the Board may, in its discretion, require the parties to submit 
prehearing briefs in any case in which a hearing has been elected 
pursuant to Sec. 955.9. In the absence of a Board requirement therefor, 
either party may, in its discretion and upon appropriate and sufficient 
notice to the other party, furnish a prehearing brief to the Board. In 
any case where a prehearing brief is submitted, it shall be furnished so 
as to be received by the Board at least 15 days prior to the date set 
for hearing, and a copy shall simultaneously be furnished to the other 
party as previously arranged.


<R05>
Sec. 955.11   Prehearing or presubmission conference.

    Whether the case is to be submitted pursuant to Sec. 955.12, or 
heard pursuant to Secs. 955.18 through 955.26, the Board may upon its 
own initiative or upon the application of either party, call upon the 
parties to appear before a Board Member for a conference to consider:
    (a) The simplification or clarification of the issues;
    (b) The possibility of obtaining stipulations, admissions, 
agreements on documents, understandings on matters already of record, or 
similar agreements which will avoid unnecessary proof;
    (c) The limitation of the number of expert witnesses, or avoidance 
of similar cumulative evidence, if the case is to be heard;
    (d) The possibility of agreement disposing of all or any of the 
issues in dispute; and
    (e) Such other matters as may aid in the disposition of the appeal.

The results of the conference shall be reduced to writing by the Board 
Member and this writing shall thereafter constitute part of the record.


<R05>
Sec. 955.12   Submission without a hearing.

    Either party may elect to waive a hearing and to submit his case 
upon the record before the Board, as settled pursuant to Sec. 955.14. 
Submission of the case without hearing does not relieve the parties from 
the necessity of proving the facts supporting their allegations or 
defenses. Affidavits, depositions, admissions, answers to 
interrogatories, and stipulations may be employed to supplement other 
documentary evidence in the Board record. The Board may permit such 
submission to be supplemented by oral argument (transcribed if 
requested), and by briefs arranged in accordance with Sec. 955.24.


<R05>
Sec. 955.13  Optional small claims (expedited) and accelerated procedures.

    (a) These procedures are available solely at the election of the 
appellant.
    (b) Elections to Utilize SMALL CLAIMS (EXPEDITED) and ACCELERATED 
Procedure.
    (1) In appeals where the amount in dispute is $50,000 or less, the 
appellant may elect to have the appeal processed under a small claims 
(expedited) procedure requiring decision of the appeal, whenever 
possible, within 120 days after the Board receives written notice of the 
appellant's election to utilize this procedure. The details of this 
procedure appear in paragraph (c) of this section. An appellant may 
elect the ACCELERATED procedure rather than the SMALL CLAIMS (EXPEDITED) 
procedure for any appeal eligible for the SMALL CLAIMS (EXPEDITED) 
procedure.

[[Page 260]]

    (2) In appeals where the amount in dispute is $100,000 or less, the 
appellant may elect to have the appeal processed under an accelerated 
procedure requiring the decision of the appeal, whenever possible, 
within 180 days after the Board receives written notice of the 
appellant's election to utilize this procedure. The details of this 
procedure appear in paragraph (d) of this section.
    (3) The appellant's election of either the SMALL CLAIMS (EXPEDITED) 
procedure or the ACCELERATED procedure may be made either in his notice 
of appeal or by other written notice at any time thereafter.
    (4) In deciding whether the SMALL CLAIMS (EXPEDITED) procedure or 
the ACCELERATED procedure is applicable to a given appeal the Board 
shall determine the amount in dispute by adding the amount claimed by 
the appellant against the respondent to the amount claimed by respondent 
against the appellant. If either party making a claim against the other 
party does not otherwise state in writing the amount of its claim, the 
amount claimed by such party shall be the maximum amount which such 
party represents in writing to the Board that it can reasonably expect 
to recover against the other.
    (c) The SMALL CLAIMS (EXPEDITED) Procedure.
    (1) This procedure shall apply only to appeals where the amount in 
dispute is $50,000 or less as to which the appellant has elected the 
small claims (expedited) procedure.
    (2) In cases proceeding under the SMALL CLAIMS (EXPEDITED) 
procedure, the following time periods shall apply (i) within ten days 
from the respondent's first receipt from either the appellant or the 
Board of a copy of the appellant's notice of election of the SMALL 
CLAIMS (EXPEDITED) procedure, the respondent shall send the Board a copy 
of the contract, the contracting officer's final decision, and the 
appellant's claim letter or letters, if any; (ii) within 5 days after 
the Board has acknowledged receipt of the notice of election, either 
party desiring an oral hearing shall so inform the Board. If either 
party requests an oral hearing, the Board shall promptly schedule such a 
hearing for a mutually convenient time consistent with administrative 
due process and the 120-day limit for a decision, at a place determined 
under Sec. 955.18. If a hearing is not requested by either party within 
the time prescribed by this Rule, the appeal shall be deemed to have 
been submitted under Sec. 955.12 without a hearing.
    (3) In cases proceeding under the SMALL CLAIMS (EXPEDITED) 
procedure, pleadings, discovery, and other prehearing activity will be 
allowed only as consistent with the requirement to conduct the hearing 
on the date scheduled or, if no hearing is scheduled, to close the 
record on a date that will allow decision within the 120-day limit. The 
Board, in its discretion, may shorten time periods prescribed elsewhere 
in these Rules as necessary to enable the Board to decide the appeal 
within 120 days after the Board has received the appellant's notice of 
election of the SMALL CLAIMS (EXPEDITED) procedure. In so doing the 
Board may reserve whatever time up to 30 days it considers necessary for 
preparation of the decision.
    (4) Written decision by the Board in cases processed under the SMALL 
CLAIMS (EXPEDITED) procedure will be short and contain only summary 
findings of fact and conclusions. Decisions will be rendered for the 
Board by a single Administrative Judge. If there has been a hearing, the 
Administrative Judge presiding at the hearing may, in his discretion, at 
the conclusion of the hearing and after entertaining such oral arguments 
as he deems appropriate, render on the record oral summary findings of 
fact, conclusions, and a decision of the Appeal. Whenever such an oral 
decision is rendered, the Board will subsequently furnish the parties a 
typed copy of such oral decision for the record and payment purposes and 
for the establishment of the commencement date of the period for filing 
a motion for reconsideration under Sec. 955.30.
    (5) Decisions of the Board under the SMALL CLAIMS (EXPEDITED) 
procedure will not be published, will have no value as precedents, and 
in the absence of fraud, cannot be appealed.
    (d) The ACCELERATED Procedure

[[Page 261]]

    (1) This procedure shall apply only to appeals where the amount in 
dispute is $100,000 or less as to which the appellant has made the 
requisite election.
    (2) In cases proceeding under the ACCELERATED procedure, the parties 
are encouraged, to the extent possible consistent with adequate 
presentation of their factual and legal positions, to waive pleadings, 
discovery, and briefs. The Board, in its discretion, may shorten time 
periods prescribed elsewhere in these Rules as necessary to enable the 
Board to decide the appeal within 180 days after the Board has received 
the appellant's notice of election of the ACCELERATED procedure, and may 
reserve 30 days for preparation of the decision.
    (3) Written decisions by the Board in cases processed under the 
ACCELERATED procedure will normally be short and contain only summary 
findings of fact and conclusions. Decisions will be rendered for the 
Board by a single Administrative Judge with the concurrence of the 
Chairman or Vice Chairman or other designated Administrative Judge, or 
by a majority among these two and an additional designated member in 
case of disagreement. Alternatively, in cases where the amount in 
dispute is $50,000 or less as to which the accelerated procedure has 
been elected and in which there has been a hearing, the single 
Administrative Judge presiding at the hearing may, with the concurrence 
of both parties, at the conclusion of the hearing and after entertaining 
such oral arguments as he deems appropriate, render on the record oral 
summary findings of fact, conclusions, and a decision of the appeal. 
Whenever such an oral decision is rendered, the Board will subsequently 
furnish the parties a typed copy of such oral decision for record and 
payment purposes and to establish the date of commencement of the period 
for filing a motion for reconsideration under Sec. 955.30.
    (e) Motions for Reconsideration in Cases Arising Under Sec. 955.13. 
Motions for Reconsideration of cases decided under either the small 
claims (expedited) procedure or the accelerated procedure need not be 
decided within the time periods prescribed by this Sec. 955.13 for the 
initial decision of the appeal, but all such motions shall be processed 
and decided rapidly so as to fulfill the intent of this section.
    (f) Except as herein modified, the rules of this part 955 otherwise 
apply in all aspects.

[44 FR 13014, Mar. 9, 1979; 44 FR 23828, Apr. 23, 1979. Redesignated and 
amended at 60 FR 57939, Nov. 24, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 955.14   Settling the record.

    (a) The record upon which the Board's decision will be rendered 
consists of the appeal file described in Sec. 955.5, and to the extent 
the following items have been filed, pleadings, prehearing conference 
memoranda or orders, prehearing briefs, depositions or interrogatories 
received in evidence, admissions, stipulations, transcripts of 
conferences and hearings, hearing exhibits, posthearing briefs, and 
documents which the Board has specifically designated be made a part of 
the record. The record will at all reasonable times be available for 
inspection by the parties at the office of the Board.
    (b) Except as the Board may otherwise order in its discretion, no 
proof shall be received in evidence after completion of an oral hearing 
or, in cases submitted on the record, after notification by the Board 
that the case is ready for decision.
    (c) The weight to be attached to any evidence of record will rest 
within the sound discretion of the Board. The Board may in any case 
require either party, with appropriate notice to the other party, to 
submit additional evidence on any matter relevant to the appeal.


<R05>
Sec. 955.15   Discovery--depositions.

    (a) General policy and protective orders. The parties are encouraged 
to engage in voluntary discovery procedures. In connection with any 
deposition or other discovery procedure, the Board may make any order 
which justice requires to protect a party or person from annoyance, 
embarrassment, oppression, or undue burden or expense, and those orders 
may include limitations on the scope, method, time and place for 
discovery, and provisions for protecting the secrecy of confidential 
information or documents.

[[Page 262]]

    (b) When depositions permitted. After an appeal has been docketed 
and complaint filed, the parties may mutually agree to, or the Board 
may, upon application of either party and for good cause shown, order 
the taking of testimony of any person by deposition upon oral 
examination or written interrogatories before any officer authorized to 
administer oaths at the place of examination, for use as evidence or for 
purpose of discovery. The application for order shall specify whether 
the purpose of the deposition is discovery or for use as evidence.
    (c) Orders on depositions. The time, place, and manner of taking 
depositions shall be as mutually agreed by the parties, or failing such 
agreement, governed by order of the Board.
    (d) Use as evidence. No testimony taken by depositions shall be 
considered as part of the evidence in the hearing of an appeal unless 
and until such testimony is offered and received in evidence at such 
hearing. It will not ordinarily be received in evidence if the deponent 
is present and can testify personally at the hearing. In such instances, 
however, the deposition may be used to contradict or impeach the 
testimony of the witness given at the hearing. In cases submitted on the 
record, the Board may, in its discretion, receive depositions as 
evidence in supplementation of that record.
    (e) Expenses. Each party shall bear its own expenses associated with 
the taking of any deposition.


<R05>
Sec. 955.16   Interrogatories to parties, admission of facts, and production and inspection of documents.

    (a) Interrogatories to parties. After an appeal has been filed with 
the Board, a party may serve on the other party written interrogatories 
to be answered separately in writing, signed under oath and returned 
within 30 days. Upon timely objection by the party, the Board will 
determine the extent to which the interrogatories will be permitted. The 
scope and use of interrogatories will be controlled by Sec. 955.15.
    (b) Admission of facts. After an appeal has been filed with the 
Board, a party may serve upon the other party a request for the 
admission of specified facts. Within 30 days after service, the party 
served shall answer each requested fact or file objections thereto. The 
factual propositions set out in the request shall be deemed admitted 
upon the failure of a party to respond to the request for admission.
    (c) Production and inspection of documents. Upon motion of any party 
showing good cause therefor, and upon notice, the Board may order the 
other party to produce and permit the inspection and copying or 
photographing of any designated documents or objects, not privileged, 
specifically identified, and their relevance and materiality to the 
cause or causes in issue explained, which are reasonably calculated to 
lead to the discovery of admissible evidence. If the parties cannot 
themselves agree thereon, the Board shall specify just terms and 
conditions in making the inspection and taking the copies and 
photographs.


<R05>
Sec. 955.17   Service of papers.

    Papers shall be served personally or by mailing the same, addressed 
to the party upon whom service is to be made. Copies of complaints, 
answers and simultaneous briefs shall be filed directly with the Board. 
The party filing any other paper with the Board shall send a copy 
thereof to the opposing party, noting on the paper filed with the Board, 
or on the letter transmitting the same, that a copy has been so 
furnished.

                                Hearings


<R05>
Sec. 955.18   Where and when held.

    Hearings will ordinarily be held in the Washington, DC, area, except 
that upon request seasonably made and upon good cause shown, the Board 
may set the hearing at another location. Hearings will be scheduled at 
the discretion of the Board with due consideration to the regular order 
of appeals and other pertinent factors. On request or motion by either 
party and upon good cause shown, the Board may, in its discretion, 
advance a hearing.

[41 FR 7408, Feb. 18, 1976, as amended at 60 FR 57938, Nov. 24, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 955.19   Notice of hearings.

    The parties shall be given at least 15 days notice of the time and 
place set

[[Page 263]]

for hearings. In scheduling hearings, the Board will give due regard to 
the desires of the parties and to the requirement for just and 
inexpensive determination of appeals without unnecessary delay. Notices 
of hearing shall be promptly acknowledged by the parties.


<R05>
Sec. 955.20   Unexcused absence of a party.

    The unexcused absence of a party at the time and place set for 
hearing will not be occasion for delay. In the event of such absence, 
the hearing will proceed and the case will be regarded as submitted by 
the absent party as provided in Sec. 955.12.


<R05>
Sec. 955.21   Nature of hearings.

    Hearings shall be as informal as may be reasonable and appropriate 
under the circumstances. Appellant and respondent may offer at a hearing 
on the merits such relevant evidence as they deem appropriate and as 
would be admissible under the generally accepted rules of evidence 
applied in the courts of the United States in nonjury trials, subject, 
however, to the sound discretion of the presiding officer in supervising 
the extent and manner of presentation of such evidence. In general, 
admissibility will hinge on relevancy and materiality. Letters or copies 
thereof, affidavits, or other evidence not ordinarily admissible under 
the generally accepted rules of evidence, may be admitted in the 
discretion of the presiding officer. The weight to be attached to 
evidence presented in any particular form will be within the discretion 
of the Board, taking into consideration all the circumstances of the 
particular case. Stipulations of fact agreed upon by the parties may be 
regarded and used as evidence at the hearing. The parties may stipulate 
the testimony that would be given by a witness if the witness were 
present. The Board may in any case require evidence in addition to that 
offered by the parties.


<R05>
Sec. 955.22   Examination of witnesses.

    Witnesses before the Board will be examined orally under oath or 
affirmation, unless the facts are stipulated, or the presiding officer 
shall otherwise order. If the testimony of a witness is not given under 
oath, the Board may warn the witness that his statements may be subject 
to the provisions of Title 18, U.S.C., sections 287 and 1001, and any 
other provisions of law imposing penalties for knowingly making false 
representations in connection with claims against the United States or 
in any matter within the jurisdiction of any department or agency 
thereof.


<R05>
Sec. 955.23   Copies of papers.

    When books, records, papers, or documents have been received in 
evidence, a true copy thereof or of such part thereof as may be material 
or relevant may be substituted therefor, during the hearing or at the 
conclusion thereof.


<R05>
Sec. 955.24   Posthearing briefs.

    Posthearing briefs may be submitted upon such terms as may be agreed 
upon by the parties and the presiding officer at the conclusion of the 
hearing. Ordinarily, they will be simultaneous briefs, exchanged within 
30 days after receipt of transcript.


<R05>
Sec. 955.25   Transcript of proceedings.

    Testimony and argument at hearings shall be reported verbatim, 
unless the Board otherwise orders. Transcripts or copies of the 
proceedings shall be supplied to the parties at such rates as may be 
fixed by contract between the Reporter and the U.S. Postal Service.


<R05>
Sec. 955.26   Withdrawal of exhibits.

    After a decision has become final the Board may, upon request and 
after notice to the other party, in its discretion, permit the 
withdrawal of original exhibits, or any part thereof, by the party 
entitled thereto. The substitution of true copies of exhibits or any 
part thereof may be required by the Board in its discretion as a 
condition of granting permission for such withdrawal.

                             Representation


<R05>
Sec. 955.27   The appellant.

    An individual appellant may appear before the Board in person, a 
corporation by an officer thereof, a partnership or joint venture by a 
member thereof, or any of these by an attorney

[[Page 264]]

at law duly licensed in any State, commonwealth, territory, or in the 
District of Columbia. An attorney representing an appellant shall file a 
written notice of appearance with the Board.


<R05>
Sec. 955.28   The respondent.

    Postal Service counsel, designated by the General Counsel, will 
represent the interest of the Government before the Board. Counsel shall 
file a notice of appearance with the Board, and notice thereof will be 
given appellant or his attorney in the form specified by the Board from 
time to time. Whenever at any time it appears that appellant and Postal 
Service Counsel are in agreement as to disposition of the controversy, 
the Board may suspend further processing of the appeal: Provided, 
however, That if the Board is advised thereafter by either party that 
the controversy has not been disposed of by agreement, the case shall be 
restored to the Board's calendar without loss of position.

                                Decisions


<R05>
Sec. 955.29   Decisions.

    Decisions of the Board will be made in writing and authenticated 
copies thereof will be forwarded simultaneously to both parties. The 
rules of the Board and all final orders and decisions shall be open for 
public inspection at the offices of the Board in Washington, DC. 
Decisions of the Board will be made solely upon the record, as described 
in Sec. 955.14.

                       Motion for Reconsideration


<R05>
Sec. 955.30   Motion for reconsideration.

    A motion for reconsideration, if filed by either party, shall set 
forth specifically the ground or grounds relied upon to sustain the 
motion, and shall be filed within 30 days from the date of the receipt 
of a copy of the decision of the Board by the party filing the motion.

                               Dismissals


<R05>
Sec. 955.31   Dismissal without prejudice.

    In certain cases, appeals docketed before the Board are required to 
be placed in a suspense status and the Board is unable to proceed with 
disposition thereof for reasons not within the control of the Board. In 
any such case where the suspension has continued, or it appears that it 
will continue, for an inordinate length of time, the Board may, in its 
discretion, dismiss such appeals from its docket without prejudice to 
their restoration when the cause of suspension has been removed. Unless 
either party or the Board acts within three years to reinstate any 
appeal dismissed without prejudice, the dismissal shall be deemed with 
prejudice.


<R05>
Sec. 955.32   Dismissal for failure to prosecute.

    Whenever a record discloses the failure of either party to file 
documents required by these rules, respond to notices or correspondence 
from the Board, comply with orders of the Board, or otherwise indicates 
an intention not to continue the prosecution or defense of an appeal, 
the Board may issue an order requiring the offending party to show cause 
why the appeal should not be either dismissed or granted, as 
appropriate. If the offending party shall fail to show such cause, the 
Board may take such action as it deems reasonable and proper under the 
circumstances.

                         Ex Parte Communications


<R05>
Sec. 955.33  Ex parte communications.

    No member of the Board or of the Board's staff shall entertain, nor 
shall any person directly or indirectly involved in an appeal submit to 
the Board or the Board's staff, off the record, any evidence, 
explanation, analysis, or advice, whether written or oral, regarding any 
matter at issue in an appeal. This provision does not apply to 
consultation among Board members nor to ex parte communications 
concerning the Board's administrative functions or procedures.

                                Sanctions


<R05>
Sec. 955.34   Sanctions.

    If any party fails or refuses to obey an order issued by the Board, 
the Board may make such order in regard to the failure as it considers 
necessary to the

[[Page 265]]

just and expeditious conduct of the appeal.

                    Effective Date and Applicability


<R05>
Sec. 955.35  Subpoenas.

    (a) General. Upon written request of either party filed with the 
Recorder or on his own initiative, the Administrative Judge to whom a 
case is assigned or who is otherwise designated by the Chairman may 
issue a subpoena requiring:
    (1) Testimony at a deposition. The deposing of a witness in the city 
or county where he resides or is employed or transacts his business in 
person, or at another location convenient for him that is specifically 
determined by the Board;
    (2) Testimony at a hearing. The attendance of a witness for the 
purpose of taking testimony at a hearing; and
    (3) Production of books and papers. In addition to (1) and (2), the 
production by the witness at the deposition or hearing of books and 
papers designated in the subpoena.
    (b) Voluntary cooperation. Each party is expected (1) To cooperate 
and make available witnesses and evidence under its control as requested 
by the other party, without issuance of a subpoena, and (2) To secure 
voluntary attendance of desired third-party books, papers, documents, or 
tangible things whenever possible.
    (c) Requests for subpoenas. (1) A request for a subpoena shall 
normally be filed at least:
    (i) 15 days before a scheduled deposition where the attendance of a 
witness at a deposition is sought;
    (ii) 30 days before a scheduled hearing where the attendance of a 
witness at a hearing is sought.

In its discretion the Board may honor requests for subpoenas not made 
within these time limitations.
    (2) A request for a subpoena shall state the reasonable scope and 
general relevance to the case of the testimony and of any books and 
papers sought.
    (d) Requests to quash or modify. Upon written request by the person 
subpoenaed or by a party, made within 10 days after service but in any 
event not later than the time specified in the subpoena for compliance, 
the Board may (1) quash or modify the subpoena if it is unreasonable and 
oppressive or for other good cause shown, or (2) require the person in 
whose behalf the subpoena was issued to advance the reasonable cost of 
producing subpoenaed books and papers. Where circumstances require, the 
Board may act upon such a request at any time after a copy has been 
served upon the opposing party.
    (e) Form; issuance. (1) Every subpoena shall state the name of the 
Board and the title of the appeal and shall command each person to whom 
it is directed to attend and give testimony, and if appropriate, to 
produce specified books and papers at a time and place therein 
specified. In issuing a subpoena to a requesting party, the 
Administrative Judge shall sign the subpoena and may in his discretion, 
enter the name of the witness and otherwise leave it blank. The party to 
whom the subpoena is issued shall complete the subpoena before service.
    (2) Where the witness is located in a foreign country, a letter 
rogatory or subpoena may be issued and served under the circumstances 
and in the manner provided in 28 U.S.C. 1781-1784.
    (f) Service. (1) The party requesting issuance of a subpoena shall 
arrange for service.
    (2) A subpoena requiring the attendance of a witness at a deposition 
or hearing may be served at any place. A subpoena may be served by a 
United States marshal or deputy marshal, or by any other person who is 
not a party and not less than 18 years of age. Service of a subpoena 
upon a person named therein shall be made by personally delivering a 
copy to that person and tendering the fees for one day's attendance and 
the mileage provided by 28 U.S.C. 1821 or other applicable law.
    (3) The party at whose instance a subpoena is issued shall be 
responsible for the payment of fees and mileage of the witness and of 
the officer who serves the subpoena. The failure to make payment of such 
charges on demand may be deemed by the Board as a sufficient ground for 
striking the testimony of the witness and the evidence the witness has 
produced.
    (g) Contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena. In case of contumacy or 
refusal

[[Page 266]]

to obey a subpoena by a person who resides, if found, or transacts 
business within the jurisdiction of a U.S. District Court, the Board 
will apply to the Court through the Attorney General of the United 
States for an order requiring the person to appear before the Board or a 
member thereof to give testimony or produce evidence or both. Any 
failure of any such person to obey the order of the Court may be 
punished by the Court as a contempt thereof.

[44 FR 13015, Mar. 9, 1979. Redesignated and amended at 60 FR 57939, 
Nov. 24, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 955.36  Effective Dates and Applicability.

    The provisions of Secs. 955.9 and 955.13 took effect on October 1, 
1995. Pursuant to the Contract Disputes Acts of 1978 (41 U.S.C. 601-
613), Secs. 955.13 and 955.35 apply to appeals relating to contracts 
entered into on or after March 1, 1979. All other provisions of this 
part 955 took effect February 18, 1976. Except as otherwise directed by 
the Board, these rules shall not apply to appeals docketed prior to 
their effective dates.

[60 FR 57939, Nov. 24, 1995]


<R03>
PART 956--RULES OF PRACTICE IN PROCEEDINGS RELATIVE TO DISCIPLINARY ACTION FOR VIOLATION OF RESTRICTIONS ON POST-EMPLOYMENT ACTIVITY--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
956.1  Authority for rules.
956.2  Scope of rules.
956.3  Definitions.
956.4  Initiation of proceedings.
956.5  Answer.
956.6  Hearing election.
956.7  Notice of hearing.
956.8  Reply.
956.9  Service and filing of documents for the record.
956.10  Respondent's failure to appear at the hearing.
956.11  Amendment of pleadings.
956.12  Continuances and extensions.
956.13  Hearings.
956.14  Appearances.
956.15  Presiding officer.
956.16  Burden of proof and evidence.
956.17  Discovery--depositions.
956.18  Interrogatories to parties, admission of facts, and production 
          of documents.
956.19  Transcript.
956.20  Proposed findings and conclusions.
956.21  Decisions.
956.22  Exceptions to initial decision or tentative decision.
956.23  Judicial Officer.
956.24  Motion for reconsideration.
956.25  Modification or revocation of orders.
956.26  Computation of time.
956.27  Official record.
956.28  Ex parte communications.

    Authority: 18 U.S.C. 207(j), 39 U.S.C. 204, 401.

    Source: 49 FR 40771, Oct. 17, 1984, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 956.1  Authority for rules.

    The rules in this part are issued by the Judicial Officer of the 
Postal Service pursuant to authority delegated by the Postmaster General 
(39 U.S.C. 204, 401).


<R05>
Sec. 956.2  Scope of rules.

    The rules in this part shall be applicable in all formal proceedings 
before the Postal Service pertaining to proposed disciplinary action 
initiated under Sec. 447.34(e) of this title.


<R05>
Sec. 956.3  Definitions.

    (a) The term Ethical Conduct Officer has the same meaning as in 
Sec. 447.31 of this title and includes his authorized representative.
    (b) Respondent means any individual who has been served a written 
notice of proposed disciplinary action pursuant to Sec. 447.34 of this 
title.
    (c) The Recorder means the Recorder of the U.S. Postal Service, 475 
L'Enfant Plaza West, SW., Washington, DC 20260.


<R05>
Sec. 956.4  Initiation of proceedings.

    (a) The Ethical Conduct Officer shall initiate a proceeding by 
serving upon the proposed respondent a written notice of proposed 
disciplinary action in the manner hereinafter (Sec. 956.9(d)) provided 
for the service of all other papers.
    (b) The notice shall:
    (1) State that disciplinary action is being proposed;
    (2) Inform the respondent of the subsection of section 207 (18 
U.S.C. 207) that he is alleged to have violated and of the basis of the 
allegation;
    (3) Inform the respondent of the disciplinary action which is 
proposed;
    (4) Advise the respondent that he may oppose the proposed 
disciplinary

[[Page 267]]

action by filing an answer within 20 days following receipt of the 
notice;
    (5) State that the disciplinary action will not become effective 
until after a final agency decision is issued;
    (6) Inform the respondent of the rules in this part, a copy of which 
shall be enclosed with the notice.
    (c) If no answer is filed within 20 days following the receipt of 
the notice, the proposed disciplinary action set forth in the notice 
shall become the final agency decision without further notice to the 
respondent.


<R05>
Sec. 956.5  Answer.

    Within 20 days from receipt of the notice of proposed disciplinary 
action, the respondent may file an answer setting forth simple, concise, 
and direct statements admitting, denying or explaining each of the 
allegations set forth in the notice.


<R05>
Sec. 956.6  Hearing election.

    Either party may, within, 10 days following the filing of the 
respondent's answer, request a hearing. If a timely request is not made, 
the case shall be submitted on the record without a hearing. Submission 
of the case without a hearing does not relieve the parties of the 
necessity of proving the facts supporting their allegations or defenses. 
Affidavits, depositions, admissions, answers to interrogatories and 
stipulations may be employed to supplement the pleadings which consitute 
the record. The presiding officer may permit such submission to be 
supplemented by oral argument (transcribed if requested) and by proposed 
findings of fact and conclusions of law.


<R05>
Sec. 956.7  Notice of hearing.

    (a) When a request for a hearing is filed, a notice of hearing, 
stating the time and place thereof and advising the respondent of the 
consequences of a failure to appear at the hearing, will be issued (see 
Sec. 956.10). In setting a hearing date, due regard shall be given to 
the respondent's need for:
    (1) Adequate time to prepare a defense properly; and
    (2) An expeditious resolution of allegations that may be damaging to 
his or her reputation. Subject to those considerations, whenever 
practicable, the hearing date shall be within 30 days of the date of the 
notice of hearing.
    (b) The notice of proposed disciplinary action and the answer 
together with the reply, if any, shall become the pleadings in any 
proceeding in which a hearing is held.


<R05>
Sec. 956.8  Reply.

    Not more than 15 days from the service of the answer, the Ethical 
Conduct Officer may submit a reply.


<R05>
Sec. 956.9  Service and filing of documents for the record.

    (a) Each party shall file with the Recorder pleadings, motions, 
orders and other documents for the record. The Recorder shall cause 
copies to be served promptly on other parties to the proceeding and on 
the presiding officer.
    (b) The parties shall submit four copies of all documents unless 
otherwise ordered by the presiding officer. One copy shall be signed as 
the original.
    (c) Documents shall be dated and shall state the docket number and 
title of the proceeding. Any pleading or other document required by 
these rules or by order of the presiding officer to be filed by a 
specified date shall be filed with the Recorder on or before such date. 
The filing date shall be entered thereon by the Recorder.
    (d) Service of all papers shall be effected by mailing the same, 
postage prepaid registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, 
or by causing said notice to be personally served on the proposed 
respondent by an authorized representative of the Postal Service. In the 
case of personal service, the person making service shall, if possible, 
secure from the proposed respondent or his agent, a written 
acknowledgment of receipt of said notice, showing the date and time of 
such receipt. If the person upon whom service is made will not 
acknowledge receipt, the person effecting service shall execute a 
statement, showing the time, place and manner of service, which shall 
constitute evidence of service. The acknowledgment, statement, or return 
receipt, when service is effected by mail, shall be made a part of the 
record by the Ethical Conduct Officer. The date of delivery, as shown by 
the

[[Page 268]]

acknowledgment or statement of personal service or the return receipt, 
shall be the date of service.


<R05>
Sec. 956.10  Respondent's failure to appear at the hearing.

    If the respondent shall fail to appear at the hearing, the presiding 
officer shall receive the Ethical Conduct Officer's evidence and render 
a decision without requirement of further notice to the respondent.


<R05>
Sec. 956.11  Amendment of pleadings.

    (a) By consent of the parties, a pleading may be amended at any 
time. Also, a party may move to amend a pleading at any time prior to 
the close of the hearing, provided that the proposed amendment is 
reasonably within the scope of the proceeding.
    (b) When issues not raised by the pleadings but reasonably within 
the scope of the proceedings initiated by the notice of proposed 
disciplinary action are tried by express or implied consent of the 
parties, they shall be treated in all respects as if they had been 
raised in the pleadings. Such amendments, as may be necessary to make 
the pleadings conform to the evidence and to raise such issues, shall be 
allowed at any time upon the motion of any party.
    (c) If a party objects to the introduction of evidence at the 
hearing on the ground that it is not within the issues framed by the 
pleadings, but fails to satisfy the presiding officer that an amendment 
of the pleadings would prejudice him on the merits, the presiding 
officer may allow the pleadings to be amended and may grant a 
continuance to enable the objecting party to rebut the evidence 
presented.
    (d) The presiding officer may, upon reasonable notice and upon such 
terms as are just, permit service of a supplemental pleading setting 
forth transactions, occurrences, or events which have transpired since 
the date of the pleading sought to be supplemented and which are 
relevant to any of the issues involved.


<R05>
Sec. 956.12  Continuances and extensions.

    Continuances and extensions will not be granted by the presiding 
officer except for good cause shown.


<R05>
Sec. 956.13  Hearings.

    (a) Hearings are held at the headquarters of the Postal Service, 
Washington, DC 20260, or other locations designated by the presiding 
officer.
    (b) A party may, not later than 7 days prior to the scheduled date 
of a hearing, file a request that such hearing be held at a place other 
than that designated in the notice of hearing. He shall support his 
request with a statement outlining:
    (1) The evidence to be offered in such place;
    (2) The names and addresses of the witnesses who will testify;
    (3) The reasons why such evidence cannot be produced at the place 
designated in the notice of hearing.

The presiding officer shall give consideration to the convenience and 
necessity of the parties and the relevance of the evidence to be 
offered.


<R05>
Sec. 956.14  Appearances.

    (a) A respondent may appear and be heard in person or by attorney.
    (b) An attorney may practice before the Postal Service in accordance 
with applicable rules issued by the Judicial Officer (see part 951 of 
this chapter).
    (c) When a respondent is represented by an attorney, all pleadings 
and other papers subsequent to the notice of proposed disciplinary 
action shall be mailed to the attorney.
    (d) All counsel shall promptly file notices of appearance. Changes 
of the respondent's counsel shall be recorded by notices from retiring 
and succeeding counsel and from the respondent.
    (e) After an answer has been filed pursuant to the rules in this 
part, the Law Department shall represent the Ethical Conduct Officer in 
further proceedings relative to the hearing and shall in its notice of 
appearance identify the individual member of such department who has 
been assigned to handle the case on its behalf.


<R05>
Sec. 956.15  Presiding officer.

    (a) The presiding officer shall be an Administrative Law Judge 
qualified in accordance with law. The Chief Administrative Law Judge 
shall assign cases under this part upon rotation so far as practicable. 
The Judicial Officer may,

[[Page 269]]

for good cause found, preside at the reception of evidence upon request 
of either party.
    (b) The presiding officer shall have authority to:
    (1) Administer oaths and affirmations;
    (2) Examine witnesses;
    (3) Rule upon offers of proof, admissibility of evidence, and 
matters of procedure;
    (4) Order any pleading amended upon motion of a party at any time 
prior to the close of the hearing;
    (5) Maintain discipline and decorum and exclude from the hearing any 
person acting in an indecorous manner;
    (6) Require the filing of briefs or memoranda of law on any matter 
upon which he is required to rule;
    (7) Order prehearing conferences for the purposes of the settlement 
or simplification of issues by the parties;
    (8) Permit oral argument by any party;
    (9) Order the proceeding reopened at any time prior to his decision 
for the receipt of additional evidence;
    (10) Render an initial decision, if the presiding officer is not the 
Judicial Officer, which becomes the final agency decision unless a 
timely appeal is taken; the Judicial Officer may issue a tentative or a 
final decision;
    (11) Take such other and further action as may be necessary properly 
to preside over the proceeding and render decision therein.


<R05>
Sec. 956.16  Burden of proof and evidence.

    (a) Each party may introduce and examine witnesses and submit 
physical evidence. The Ethical Conduct Officer has the burden of proof 
in any proceeding under this part and must establish a violation by a 
preponderance of the evidence.
    (b) Except as otherwise provided in these rules, the Federal Rules 
of Evidence shall be applicable to the hearings conducted under this 
part. Such rules may be relaxed, however, to the extent that the 
presiding officer deems proper to insure a fair hearing.
    (c) Testimony shall be under oath or affirmation, and witnesses 
shall be subject to cross-examination.
    (d) Agreed statements of fact may be received in evidence.
    (e) Official notice or knowledge may be taken of the types of 
matters of which judicial notice or knowledge may be taken.
    (f) Each party may present oral argument.


<R05>
Sec. 956.17  Discovery--depositions.

    (a) The parties are encouraged to engage in voluntary discovery 
procedures. In connection with any deposition or other discovery 
procedure, the presiding officer may make any order which justice 
requires to protect a party or person from annoyance, embarrassment, 
oppression, or undue burden or expense; and those orders may include 
limitations on the scope, method, time and place for discovery, and 
provisions for protecting the secrecy of confidential information or 
documents.
    (b) After an answer has been filed, the parties may mutually agree 
to, or the presiding officer may, upon application of either party and 
for good cause shown, order the taking of the testimony of any person by 
deposition upon oral examination or written interrogatories before any 
officer authorized to administer oaths at the place of examination, for 
use as evidence or for purposes of discovery. The application for order 
shall specify whether the purpose of the deposition is discovery or for 
use as evidence.
    (c) The time, place, and manner of taking depositions shall be 
mutually agreed by the parties or, failing such agreement, governed by 
order of the presiding officer.
    (d) No testimony taken by depositions shall be considered as part of 
the evidence in a hearing unless and until such testimony is offered and 
received in evidence at such hearing. It will not ordinarily be received 
in evidence if the deponent is present and can testify personally at the 
hearing. In such instances, however, the deposition may be used to 
contradict or impeach the testimony of the witness given at the hearing. 
In cases submitted on the record, the presiding officer may, in his 
discretion, receive depositions as evidence in supplementation of that 
record.
    (e) Each party shall bear its own expenses associated with the 
taking of any deposition.

[[Page 270]]


<R05>
Sec. 956.18  Interrogatories to parties, admission of facts, and production of documents.

    (a) After an answer has been filed, a party may serve on the other 
party written interrogatories to be answered separately in writing, 
signed under oath and returned within 30 days. Upon timely objection by 
the party, the presiding officer will determine the extent to which the 
interrogatories will be permitted. The scope and use of interrogatories 
will be controlled by Sec. 956.17.
    (b) After an answer has been filed, a party may serve upon the other 
party a request for the admission of specified facts. Within 30 days 
after service, the party served shall answer each requested fact or file 
objections thereto. The factual propositions set out in the request 
shall be deemed admitted upon the failure of a party to respond to the 
request for admission.
    (c) Upon motion of any party showing good cause therefore, and upon 
notice, the presiding officer may order the other party to produce and 
permit the inspection and copying or photocopying of any designated 
documents or objects, not privileged, specifically identified, and their 
relevance and materiality to the cause or causes in issue explained, 
which are reasonably calculated to lead to the discovery of admissible 
evidence. If the parties cannot themselves agree thereon, the presiding 
officer shall specify just terms and conditions in making the inspection 
and making the copies and photographs.


<R05>
Sec. 956.19  Transcript.

    Testimony and argument at hearings shall be reported verbatim, 
unless the presiding officer otherwise orders. Transcripts or copies of 
the proceedings shall be supplied to the parties at such rates as may be 
fixed by contract between the reporter and the Postal Service.


<R05>
Sec. 956.20  Proposed findings and conclusions.

    (a) Each party to a proceeding, except one who fails to appear at 
the hearing may, unless the presiding officer orders otherwise, submit 
proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law and supporting reasons, 
either in oral or written form at the discretion of the presiding 
officer. The presiding officer may also require parties to any 
proceeding to submit proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law 
with supporting reasons. Unless ordered otherwise by the presiding 
officer, the date set for filing of proposed findings of fact and 
conclusions of law shall be within 15 days after the delivery of the 
official transcript to the Recorder who shall notify both parties of the 
date of its receipt. The filing date for proposed findings shall be the 
same for both parties. If not submitted by such date, or unless an 
extension of time for the filing thereof is granted, they will not be 
included in the record or given consideration.
    (b) Proposed findings of fact shall be set forth in serially 
numbered paragraphs and shall state with particularity all evidentiary 
facts in the record with appropriate citations to the transcript or 
exhibits supporting the proposed findings. Each proposed conclusion 
shall be separately stated.


<R05>
Sec. 956.21  Decisions.

    (a) A written initial decision by an Administrative Law Judge shall 
be rendered with all due speed. The initial decision shall include 
findings of fact and conclusions of law, with the reasons therefor, upon 
all the material issues of fact or law presented on the record, and an 
appropriate order. A tentative decision shall become the final decision 
of the Postal Service unless exceptions are filed in accordance with 
Sec. 956.22.
    (b) When the Judicial Officer presides at the hearing, he shall 
issue a final or a tentative decision. Such decision shall include 
findings of fact and conclusions of law, with the reasons therefor, upon 
all the material issues of fact or law presented on the record, and an 
appropriate order. A tentative decision shall become the final decision 
of the Postal Service unless exceptions are filed in accordance with 
Sec. 956.22.


<R05>
Sec. 956.22  Exceptions to initial decision or tentative decision.

    (a) A party in a proceeding presided over by an Administrative Law 
Judge, except a party who failed to file an answer, may appeal to the 
Judicial Officer by filing exceptions in a brief on

[[Page 271]]

appeal within 15 days from the receipt of the Administrative Law Judge's 
written initial decision.
    (b) A party in a proceeding presided over by the Judicial Officer, 
except one who has failed to file an answer, may file exceptions within 
15 days from the receipt of the Judicial Officer's written tentative 
decision.
    (c) Upon receipt of the brief on appeal from an initial decision of 
an Administrative Law Judge, the Recorder shall promptly transmit the 
record to the Judicial Officer. The date for filing the reply to a brief 
on appeal or to a brief in support of exceptions to a tentative decision 
by the Judicial Officer is 10 days after the receipt thereof. No 
additional briefs shall be received unless requested by the Judicial 
Officer.
    (d) Briefs on appeal or in support of exceptions and replies thereto 
shall be filed in quadruplicate with the Recorder and contain the 
following matter in the order indicated:
    (1) A subject index of the matters presented, with page references; 
a table of cases alphabetically arranged; a list of statutes and texts 
cited, with page references.
    (2) A concise abstract or statement of the case.
    (3) Numbered exceptions to specific findings of fact or conclusions 
of law of the presiding officer.
    (4) A concise argument clearly setting forth points of fact and of 
law relied upon in support of, or in opposition to, each exception 
taken, together with specific references to the pertinent part of the 
record and the legal or other authorities relied upon.
    (e) Unless permission is granted by the Judicial Officer, no brief 
on appeal or in support of exceptions shall exceed 50 printed or 100 
typewritten pages double spaced.
    (f) The Judicial Officer will extend the time to file briefs only 
upon motion for good cause found. The movant shall be promptly notified 
of the Judicial Officer's decision on the motion.


<R05>
Sec. 956.23  Judicial Officer.

    The Judicial Office is authorized:
    (a) To act as presiding officer at hearings;
    (b) To render tentative decisions;
    (c) To render final decisions of the Postal Service;
    (d) To refer the record in any proceedings to the Postmaster General 
or the Deputy Postmaster General who will make the final decision of the 
Postal Service; and
    (e) To revise or amend these rules of practice. In determining 
appeals from initial decisions or exceptions to tentative decisions, the 
entire official record will be considered before a final decision of the 
Postal Service is rendered. Before rendering a final decision of the 
Postal Service, the Judicial Officer may order the hearing reopened for 
the presentation of additional evidence by the parties.


<R05>
Sec. 956.24  Motion for reconsideration.

    Within 10 days from the date thereof, or such longer period as may 
be fixed by the Judicial Officer, either party may file a motion for 
reconsideration of the final agency decision. Each motion for 
reconsideration shall be accompanied by a brief clearly setting forth 
the points of fact and of law relied upon in support of said motion. The 
Judicial Officer, in his discretion, may hold a hearing on the issues 
raised by the motion.


<R05>
Sec. 956.25  Modification or revocation of orders.

    A party against whom an order has been issued may file an 
application setting forth reasons which he believes warrant the 
modification or revocation of the order. The Recorder shall transmit a 
copy of the application to the Ethical Conduct Officer who shall file a 
written reply. A copy of the reply shall be sent to the applicant by the 
Recorder. The Judicial Officer, in his discretion, may hold a hearing on 
the issues raised by the application. Thereafter an order granting or 
denying such application will be issued by the Judicial Officer.


<R05>
Sec. 956.26  Computation of time.

    A designated period of time under the rules of this part excludes 
the day the period begins and includes the last day of the period unless 
the last day is a Saturday or Sunday or legal holiday, in which event 
the period runs until

[[Page 272]]

the close of business on the next business day.


<R05>
Sec. 956.27  Official record.

    The transcript of testimony together with all pleadings, orders, 
exhibits, briefs, and other documents filed in the proceeding shall 
constitute the official record of the proceeding.


<R05>
Sec. 956.28  Ex parte communications.

    The provisions of 5 U.S.C. 551(14), 556(d) and 557(d) prohibiting ex 
parte communications are made applicable to proceedings under these 
rules of practice.


<R03>
PART 957--RULES OF PRACTICE IN PROCEEDINGS RELATIVE TO DEBARMENT AND SUSPENSION FROM CONTRACTING--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
957.1  Authority for rules.
957.2  Scope of rules.
957.3  Definitions.
957.4  Initiation of debarment proceedings.
957.5  The request for a hearing.
957.6  Order relative to hearing.
957.7  Reply.
957.8  Service and filing documents for the record.
957.9  Respondent's failure to appear at the hearing.
957.10  Respondent already debarred by another Government agency.
957.11  Amendment of pleadings.
957.12  Continuances and extensions.
957.13  Hearings.
957.14  Appearances.
957.15  Conduct of the hearing.
957.16  Evidence.
957.17  Witness fees.
957.18  Depositions.
957.19  Transcript.
957.20  Proposed findings and conclusions.
957.21  Decision.
957.22  Motion for reconsideration.
957.23  Modification or revocation of orders.
957.24  Computation of time.
957.25  Official record.
957.26  Public information.
957.27  Suspension.
957.28  Ex parte communications.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 204, 401.

    Source: 36 FR 11574, June 16, 1971, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 957.1   Authority for rules.

    The rules in this part are issued by the Judicial Officer of the 
Postal Service pursuant to authority delegated by the Postmaster General 
(39 U.S.C. secs. 204, 401; sec. 1, part 6 of the Postal Contracting 
Manual).

[36 FR 11574, June 16, 1971, as amended at 41 FR 19309, May 12, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 957.2   Scope of rules.

    The rules in this part shall be applicable in all formal proceedings 
before the Postal Service pertaining to hearings initiated under sec. 1, 
part 6 of the Postal Contracting Manual.

[36 FR 11574, June 16, 1971, as amended at 41 FR 19309, May 12, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 957.3   Definitions.

    (a) The term Department Head means the head of any Department of the 
Postal Service or his representative for the purpose of carrying out the 
provisions of sec. 1, part 6 of the Postal Contracting Manual.
    (b) The term General Counsel includes his authorized representative.
    (c) The term Judicial Officer includes the Acting Judicial Officer.
    (d) Debarment means, in general, an exclusion from Government 
contracting and subcontracting for a reasonable, specified period of 
time commensurate with the seriousness of the offense or failure, or the 
inadequacy of performance.
    (e) Suspension means a disqualification from Government contracting 
and subcontracting for a temporary period of time because a concern or 
individual is suspected upon adequate evidence of engaging in criminal, 
fraudulent, or seriously improper conduct.
    (f) Respondent means any individual, firm or other entity which has 
been served a written notice of proposed debarment pursuant to Section 
1, part 6 of the Postal Contracting Manual.
    (g) The Docket Clerk means the Docket Clerk of the U.S. Postal 
Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza West, SW., Washington, DC 20260.

[36 FR 11574, June 16, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 17217, June 29, 1973; 
41 FR 19309, May 12, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 957.4   Initiation of debarment proceedings.

    (a) A Department Head shall initiate a debarment proceeding by 
serving

[[Page 273]]

upon the proposed Respondent a written notice of proposed debarment in 
the manner hereinafter (Sec. 957.8(d)) provided for the service of all 
other papers.
    (b) The notice shall state:
    (1) That debarment is being considered;
    (2) The reasons for the proposed debarment;
    (3) The period of debarment and the proposed effective date thereof;
    (4) That the debarment will not become effective until after a 
hearing if such hearing is requested within 20 days following the 
receipt of the notice; and
    (5) That the request for a hearing is to be submitted in the manner 
prescribed by the rules in this part, a copy of which shall be enclosed 
with the notice.
    (c) If no hearing is requested within 20 days following the receipt 
of the notice, the action of the Department Head set forth in the notice 
shall become the final agency determination without further notice to 
the Respondent.
    (d) The party against which a final agency determination has been 
entered pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section shall, however, at any 
time have the privilege of reopening a case for the limited purpose of 
contesting the issue of service. Such party's contentions on that issue 
shall be addressed to the Judicial Officer in the same manner as a 
request for a hearing (see Sec. 957.5). The Judicial Officer may require 
such additional showings or proof as he may deem necessary on the issue 
of service and shall reopen any debarment proceeding previously closed 
pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section if he shall find that service 
was incomplete or otherwise failed to adequately advise of the pendency 
of the proposed debarment.


<R05>
Sec. 957.5   The request for a hearing.

    A respondent may, within 20 days following the receipt of a written 
notice of proposed debarment, file a request for a hearing before the 
Judicial Officer. The request shall be addressed to the presiding 
officer through the Department Head who initiated the debarment 
proceeding and shall be accompanied by a concise statement admitting, 
denying or explaining each of the allegations set forth in the notice of 
proposed debarment and stating the relief desired.


<R05>
Sec. 957.6   Order relative to hearing.

    (a) The Judicial Officer shall issue an order granting the 
Respondent's request for a hearing, establishing the time and place 
thereof and advising the Respondent of the consequences of a failure to 
appear at the hearing (see Sec. 957.9). Whenever practicable, the 
hearing date shall be within 30 days of the date of the Judicial 
Officer's order relative to hearing.
    (b) The notice of proposed debarment and the request for a hearing 
together with the reply, if any, shall become the pleadings in any 
proceeding in which the Judicial Officer orders a hearing to be held.


<R05>
Sec. 957.7   Reply.

    Not more than 15 days from the service of the request for a hearing, 
the General Counsel may submit a reply on behalf of the Department Head 
who initiated the debarment proceeding.


<R05>
Sec. 957.8   Service and filing documents for the record.

    (a) Each party shall file with the Docket Clerk pleadings, motions, 
orders and other documents for the record. The Docket Clerk shall cause 
copies to be served promptly on other parties to the proceeding and on 
the Judicial Officer.
    (b) The parties shall submit four copies of all documents unless 
otherwise ordered by the Judicial Officer. One copy shall be signed as 
the original.
    (c) Documents shall be dated and shall state the docket number and 
title of the proceeding. Any pleading or other document required by 
order of the Judicial Officer to be filed by a specified date shall be 
served upon the Docket Clerk on or before such date. The date of such 
service shall be the filing date and shall be entered thereon by the 
Docket Clerk.
    (d) Service of all papers shall be effected by mailing the same, 
postage prepaid registered, or certified mail, return receipt requested, 
or by causing said notice to be personally served on

[[Page 274]]

the proposed Respondent by an authorized representative of the 
Department. In the case of personal service the person making service 
shall secure from the proposed Respondent or his agent, a written 
acknowledgment of receipt of said notice, showing the date and time of 
such receipt. Said acknowledgment (or the return receipt where service 
is effectuated by mail) shall be made a part of the record by the 
Department Head initiating the debarment proceeding. The date of 
delivery, as shown by the acknowledgment of personal service or the 
return receipt, shall be the date of service.


<R05>
Sec. 957.9   Respondent's failure to appear at the hearing.

    If the Respondent shall fail to appear at the hearing, the Judicial 
Officer shall receive the Department Head's evidence and render a Postal 
Service Decision without requirement of further notice to the 
Respondent.

[36 FR 11574, June 16, 1971, as amended at 37 FR 23422, Nov. 3, 1972]


<R05>
Sec. 957.10   Respondent already debarred by another Government agency.

    (a) When a Department Head proposes to debar a firm or individual 
already debarred by another Government agency for a term concurrent with 
such debarment, the debarment proceedings before the Postal Service may 
be based entirely upon the record of facts obtained from such other 
agency or upon such facts and additional other facts. In such cases the 
facts obtained from the other agency shall be considered as established, 
but the party to be debarred shall have opportunity to present 
information to the Judicial Officer and to explain why the debarment by 
the Postal Service should not be imposed.
    (b) Where the Department Head initiating the debarment proceeding 
relies:
    (1) Upon the provisions of paragraph (a) of this section, or
    (2) Upon all or part of the record of the proposed Respondent's 
previous debarment by another Government agency, in initiating such 
proceeding, the notice of proposed debarment shall contain a statement 
so stating in sufficient detail to apprise the Respondent of the extent 
of such reliance.
    (c) The Department Head's reliance upon provisions of paragraph (a) 
of this section, stated in conformity with the directions set forth in 
paragraph (b) of this section does not deprive the Respondent of the 
right to request the Judicial Officer to grant a hearing pursuant to 
these rules, nor the Judicial Officer the full discretion to grant or 
deny such request.


<R05>
Sec. 957.11   Amendment of pleadings.

    (a) By consent of the parties a pleading may be amended at any time. 
Also, a party may move to amend a pleading at any time prior to the 
close of the hearing: Provided, That the proposed amendment is 
reasonably within the scope of the proceeding.
    (b) When issues not raised by the pleadings but reasonably within 
the scope of the proceedings initiated by the notice of proposed 
debarment are tried by express or implied consent of the parties, they 
shall be treated in all respects as if they had been raised in the 
pleadings. Such amendments as may be necessary to make the pleadings 
conform to the evidence and to raise such issues shall be allowed at any 
time upon the motion of any party.
    (c) If a party objects to the introduction of evidence at the 
hearing on the ground that it is not within the issues framed by the 
pleadings, but fails to satisfy the Judicial Officer that an amendment 
of the pleadings would prejudice him on the merits, the Judicial Officer 
may allow the pleadings to be amended and may grant a continuance to 
enable the objecting party to rebut the evidence presented.
    (d) The Judicial Officer may, upon reasonable notice and upon such 
terms as are just, permit service of a supplemental pleading setting 
forth transactions, occurrences, or events which have transpired since 
the date of the pleading sought to be supplemented and which are 
relevant to any of the issues involved.


<R05>
Sec. 957.12   Continuances and extensions.

    Continuances and extensions will not be granted by the Judicial 
Officer except for good cause shown.

[[Page 275]]


<R05>
Sec. 957.13   Hearings.

    (a) Hearings are held at the headquarters of the Postal Service, 
Washington, DC 20260, or other locations designated by the Judicial 
Officer.
    (b) A party may, not later than 7 days prior to the scheduled date 
of a hearing, file a request that such hearing be held at a place other 
than that designated in the Judicial Officer's order relative to 
hearing. He shall support his request with a statement outlining:
    (1) The evidence to be offered in such place;
    (2) The names and addresses of the witnesses who will testify;
    (3) The reasons why such evidence cannot be produced at Washington, 
DC. The Judicial Officer shall give consideration to the convenience and 
necessity of the parties and the relevancy of the evidence to be 
offered.


<R05>
Sec. 957.14   Appearances.

    (a) A Respondent may appear and be heard in person or by attorney.
    (b) An attorney may practice before the Postal Service in accordance 
with applicable rules issued by the Judicial Officer (see part 951 of 
this chapter).
    (c) When a Respondent is represented by an attorney, all pleadings 
and other papers subsequent to the notice of proposed debarment shall be 
mailed to the attorney.
    (d) All counsel shall promptly file notices of appearance. Changes 
of Respondent's counsel shall be recorded by notices from retiring and 
succeeding counsel and from the Respondent.
    (e) After a request for a hearing has been filed pursuant to the 
rules in this part, the Law Department shall represent the Department 
Head in further proceedings relative to the hearing and shall in its 
notice of appearance identify the individual member of such office who 
has been assigned to handle the case on its behalf.


<R05>
Sec. 957.15   Conduct of the hearing.

    The Judicial Officer shall have authority to:
    (a) Administer oaths and affirmations;
    (b) Examine witnesses;
    (c) Rule upon offers of proof, admissibility of evidence, and 
matters of procedure;
    (d) Order any pleading amended upon motion of a party at any time 
prior to the close of the hearing;
    (e) Maintain discipline and decorum and exclude from the hearing any 
person acting in an indecorous manner;
    (f) Require the filing of briefs or memoranda of law on any matter 
upon which he is required to rule;
    (g) Order prehearing conferences for the purpose of the settlement 
or simplification of issues by the parties;
    (h) Order the proceeding reopened at any time prior to his decision 
for the receipt of additional evidence;
    (i) Render a final agency decision;
    (j) Take such other further action as may be necessary to properly 
preside over the debarment proceeding and render decision therein.


<R05>
Sec. 957.16   Evidence.

    (a) Except as otherwise provided in the rules in this part, the 
rules of evidence governing civil proceedings in matters not involving 
trial by jury in the courts of the United States shall govern. However, 
such rules may be relaxed to the extent that the Judicial Officer deems 
proper to insure a fair hearing.
    (b) Testimony shall be under oath or affirmation and witnesses shall 
be subject to cross-examination.
    (c) Agreed statements of fact may be received in evidence.
    (d) Official notice or knowledge may be taken of the types of 
matters of which judicial notice or knowledge may be taken.
    (e) The written statement of a competent witness may be received in 
evidence: Provided, That such statement is relevant to the issues, that 
the witness shall testify under oath at the hearing that the statement 
is in all respects true, and, in the case of expert witnesses, that the 
statement correctly states his opinion or knowledge concerning the 
matters in question.


<R05>
Sec. 957.17   Witness fees.

    The Postal Service does not pay fees and expenses for Respondent's 
witnesses or for depositions requested by Respondent.

[[Page 276]]


<R05>
Sec. 957.18   Depositions.

    (a) Not later than 7 days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing 
any party may file application with the Docket Clerk for the taking of 
testimony by deposition. In support of such application the applicant 
shall submit under oath or affirmation a statement setting out the 
reasons why such testimony should be taken by deposition, the time and 
the place, and the name and address of the witness whose deposition is 
desired, the subject matter of the testimony of each witness, its 
relevancy, and the name and address of the person before whom the 
deposition is to be taken.
    (b) If the application be granted, the order for the taking of the 
deposition will specify the time and place thereof, the name of the 
witness, the person before whom the deposition is to be taken and any 
other necessary information.
    (c) Each witness testifying upon deposition shall be duly sworn, and 
the adverse party shall have the right to cross-examine. The questions 
and answers together with all objections, shall be reduced to writing 
and, unless waived by stipulation of the parties, shall be read to and 
subscribed by the witness in the presence of the deposition officer who 
shall certify it in the usual form. The deposition officer shall file 
the testimony taken by deposition as directed in the order. The 
deposition officer shall put the witness on oath. All objections made at 
the time of examination shall be noted by the deposition officer and the 
evidence objected to shall be taken subject to the objections. In lieu 
of participating in the oral examination, a party may transmit written 
interrogatories to the officer, who shall propound them to the witness 
and record the answers verbatim. Objections to relevancy or materiality 
of testimony, or to errors and irregularities occurring at the oral 
examination in the manner of taking the deposition, in the form of the 
questions or answers, in the oath or affirmation, or in the conduct of 
the parties and errors of any kind which might be obviated, cured or 
removed if promptly presented, are waived unless timely objection is 
made at the taking of the deposition.
    (d) At the hearing any part or all of the deposition may be offered 
in evidence by any party who was present or represented at the taking of 
the deposition or who had notice thereof. If the deposition is not 
offered and received in evidence, it shall not be considered as a part 
of the record in the proceeding. The admissibility of depositions or 
parts thereof shall be governed by the rules of evidence.
    (e) The party requesting the deposition shall pay all fees required 
to be paid to witnesses and the deposition officer, and shall provide an 
original and one copy of the deposition for the official record, and 
shall serve one copy upon the opposing party.
    (f) Within the United States or within a territory or insular 
possession, subject to the dominion of the United States, depositions 
may be taken before an officer authorized to administer oaths by the 
laws of the United States or of the place where the examination is held; 
within a foreign country, depositions may be taken before a secretary of 
an embassy or legation, consul general, vice consul or consular agent of 
the United States, or any other person designated in the order for the 
taking of a deposition.
    (g) Depositions may also be taken and submitted on written 
interrogatories in substantially the same manner as depositions taken by 
oral examination. When a deposition is taken upon written 
interrogatories and cross-interrogatories, none of the parties shall be 
present or represented, and no person, other than the witness, a 
stenographic reporter, and the officer shall be present at the 
examination of the witness, which fact shall be certified by the 
officer, who shall propound the interrogatories and cross-
interrogatories to the witness in their order and reduce the testimony 
to writing in the witness' own words.


<R05>
Sec. 957.19   Transcript.

    (a) Hearings shall be stenographically reported by a contract 
reporter of the Postal Service under the supervision of the Judicial 
Officer. Argument upon any matter may be excluded from the transcript by 
order of the Judicial Officer. A copy of the transcript shall be a part 
of the record and the

[[Page 277]]

sole official transcript of the proceeding. Copies of the transcript may 
be obtained by the Respondent from the reporter upon the payment to him 
of a reasonable price therefor. Copies of parts of the official record 
other than the transcript may be obtained from the librarian of the 
Postal Service or the Docket Clerk.
    (b) Changes in the official transcript may be made only when they 
involve errors affecting substance and then only in the manner herein 
provided. No physical changes shall be made in or upon the official 
transcript, or copies thereof, which have been filed with the record. 
Within 10 days after the receipt by any party of a copy of the official 
transcript, or any part thereof, he may file a motion requesting 
correction of the transcript. Opposing counsel shall, within such time 
as may be specified by the Judicial Officer, notify the Judicial Officer 
in writing of his concurrence or disagreement with the requested 
corrections. Failure to interpose timely objection to a proposed 
correction shall be considered to be concurrence. Thereafter, the 
Judicial Officer shall by order specify the corrections to be made in 
the transcript. The Judicial Officer on his own initiative may order 
corrections to be made in the transcript with prompt notice to the 
parties of the proceeding. Any changes ordered by the Judicial Officer 
other than the agreement of the parties shall be subject to objection 
and exception.


<R05>
Sec. 957.20   Proposed findings and conclusions.

    (a) Each party to a proceeding, except one who fails to appear at 
the hearing may, unless at the discretion of the Judicial Officer such 
is not appropriate, submit proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law 
and supporting reasons either in oral or written form in the discretion 
of the Judicial Officer. The Judicial Officer may also require parties 
to any proceeding to submit proposed findings of fact and conclusions of 
law with supporting reasons. Unless given orally the date set for filing 
of proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be within 15 
days after the delivery of the official transcript to the Docket Clerk 
who shall notify both parties of the date of its receipt. The filing 
date for proposed findings shall be the same for both parties. If not 
submitted by such date, or unless extension of time for the filing 
thereof is granted, they will not be included in the record or given 
consideration.
    (b) Except when presented orally before the close of the hearing, 
proposed findings of fact shall be set forth in serially numbered 
paragraphs and shall state with particularity all evidentiary facts in 
the record with appropriate citations to the transcript or exhibits 
supporting the proposed findings. Each proposed conclusion shall be 
separately stated.


<R05>
Sec. 957.21   Decision.

    The Judicial Officer shall issue a final agency decision. Such 
decision shall include findings and conclusions, with the reasons 
therefor, upon all the material issues of fact or law presented on the 
record, and the appropriate order.


<R05>
Sec. 957.22   Motion for reconsideration.

    Within 10 days from the date thereof, or such longer period as may 
be fixed by the Judicial Officer, either party may file a motion for 
reconsideration of the final agency decision. Each motion for 
reconsideration shall be accompanied by a brief clearly setting forth 
the points of fact and of law relied upon in support of said motion.


<R05>
Sec. 957.23   Modification or revocation of orders.

    A party against whom an order of debarment has been issued may file 
an application for modification or revocation thereof. The Docket Clerk 
shall transmit a copy of the application to the General Counsel, who 
shall file a written reply. A copy of the reply shall be sent to the 
applicant by the Docket Clerk. Thereafter an order granting or denying 
such application will be issued by the Judicial Officer.


<R05>
Sec. 957.24   Computation of time.

    A designated period of time under the rules in this part excludes 
the day the period begins, and includes the last day of the period 
unless the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in

[[Page 278]]

which event the period runs until the close of business on the next 
business day.


<R05>
Sec. 957.25   Official record.

    The transcript of testimony together with all pleadings, orders, 
exhibits, briefs, and other documents filed in the proceeding shall 
constitute the official record of the proceeding.


<R05>
Sec. 957.26   Public information.

    The Law Librarian of the Postal Service shall maintain for public 
inspection in the Law Library copies of all final decisions. The Docket 
Clerk maintains the complete official record of every proceeding.


<R05>
Sec. 957.27   Suspension.

    (a) Any firm or individual suspended under section 1, part 6 of the 
Postal Contracting Manual who believes that his suspension has not been 
in accordance with the provisions thereof, or with applicable laws or 
regulations, may appeal to the Judicial Officer for a review of the 
suspension.
    (b) Any such appeal shall be addressed to the Judicial Officer 
through the Department Head who ordered the suspension within 20 days of 
the date upon which the respondent has been notified of his suspension. 
Such appeal shall concisely and in the manner of a pleading set forth 
the grounds upon which the suspension is contested and may be supported 
by a brief and such evidence as the respondent may desire to submit.
    (c) Should the respondent desire oral argument or a hearing before 
the Judicial Officer in connection with his appeal, application therefor 
shall be included in the appeal. In the event that the Judicial Officer 
grants the respondent's application for a hearing the notice of 
suspension and the appeal shall constitute the pleadings defining the 
issues therein and the hearing shall be regulated in accordance with the 
rules in this part concerning debarment proceedings.
    (d) The decision of the Judicial Officer in any appeal shall 
constitute the final agency determination of the issues presented 
thereby. Either party thereto may, however, file a motion for 
reconsideration thereof, in accordance with the provisions of 
Sec. 957.22.

[36 FR 11574, June 16, 1971, as amended at 41 FR 19309, May 12, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 957.28   Ex parte communications.

    The provisions of 5 U.S.C. 551(14), 556(d) and 557(d) prohibiting ex 
parte communications are made applicable to proceedings under these 
rules of practice.

[42 FR 5358, Jan. 28, 1977]


<R03>
PART 958--RULES OF PRACTICE IN PROCEEDINGS RELATIVE TO THE REFUSAL TO PROVIDE POST OFFICE BOX OR CALLER SERVICE AND THE TERMINATION OF POST OFFICE BOX OR CALLER SERVICE--Table of Contents

<R05>



Sec.
958.1  Authority for rules.
958.2  Scope of rules.
958.3  Petition; notice of hearing; answer; summary judgment.
958.4  Hearings.
958.5  Election as to hearing.
958.6  Default.
958.7  Presiding officers.
958.8  Proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law.
958.9  Initial decision.
958.10  Appeal.
958.11  Final agency decision.
958.12  Compromise and informal disposition.
958.13  Petition to revoke, amend, or modify.
958.14  Ex parte communications.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 204, 401.

    Source: 36 FR 11578, June 16, 1971, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 958.1   Authority for rules.

    The Judicial Officer promulgates the rules in this part pursuant to 
authority delegated by the Postmaster General.


<R05>
Sec. 958.2   Scope of rules.

    The rules in this part shall be applicable to cases in which a 
postmaster has issued a Determination denying an application for post 
office box or caller service, or terminating the box or caller service 
being provided to a customer, and in which a Petition in opposition to 
that Determination has been filed.

[46 FR 62847, Dec. 29, 1981]

[[Page 279]]


<R05>
Sec. 958.3  Petition; notice of hearing; answer; summary judgment.

    (a) Petition. Any applicant or customer who receives a postmaster's 
Determination may oppose it by filing, in triplicate, a written Petition 
stating his reasons for opposing the Determination. The Petition, signed 
by the Petitioner or his attorney, shall be filed by sending the 
Petition via certified mail to the postmaster who issued the 
Determination, or by otherwise delivering it to the postmaster's office. 
The Petition must be filed within twenty days (Sundays and holidays 
included) after the date on which the Petitioner received the 
Determination. The postmaster shall immediately forward two copies of 
the Petition to the Recorder, Judicial Officer Department, U.S. Postal 
Service, Washington, DC 20260-6100.
    (b) Notice of hearing. On receipt of the Petition, the Recorder 
shall schedule a hearing on a date not later than 30 days after the date 
of receipt. A Notice of Hearing shall be sent to the Petitioner. A copy 
of the Notice of Hearing and the Petition shall be sent to the General 
Counsel of the U.S. Postal Service.
    (c) Answer. The General Counsel of the Postal Service shall file an 
Answer to the Petition within fifteen days after the date the General 
Counsel received a copy of the Petition from the Recorder.
    (d) Summary judgment. Upon motion of either the General Counsel or 
the Petitioner, or on his or her own initiative, the presiding officer 
may find that the Petition and Answer present no genuine or material 
issues of fact requiring an evidentiary hearing and may thereupon render 
an initial decision granting or dismissing the Petition. The initial 
decision shall become the final asgency decision if a timely appeal is 
not taken.

[46 FR 62847, Dec. 29, 1981]


<R05>
Sec. 958.4   Hearings.

    Hearings are held at the Headquarters Office of the U.S. Postal 
Service, Washington, DC, or such other location as may be designated by 
the presiding officer. Not later than 5 days prior to the date fixed for 
the hearing, a party may file a request that a hearing be held to 
receive evidence in his behalf at a place other than that designated for 
hearing in the notice. He shall support his request with a statement 
outlining: (a) The evidence to be offered in such place; (b) the names 
and addresses of the witnesses who will testify; (c) the reasons why 
such evidence cannot be produced at Washington, D.C. The presiding 
officer shall give consideration to the convenience and necessity of the 
parties and the relevancy of the evidence to be offered.

[36 FR 11578, June 16, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 17217, June 29, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 958.5   Election as to hearing.

    If both parties so elect, they may waive an oral hearing and submit 
the matter for decision on the basis of the appeal and answer, with the 
approval of the presiding officer and subject to the right of the 
presiding officer to require the parties to furnish such further 
evidence or such briefs as the presiding officer may deem necessary. The 
request to waive oral hearing shall be mailed to the presiding officer 
not later than 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 958.6   Default.

    If a person who has not waived oral hearing fails, without notice or 
without adequate cause, satisfactory to the presiding officer, to appear 
at the hearing, the presiding officer shall issue an order dismissing 
the appeal. If no protest to such order of dismissal is received within 
10 days from the date of issuance of the order, such order shall become 
final. Any protest to the order of dismissal received within 10 days 
from the date of its issuance shall be given such consideration as the 
presiding officer deems to be warranted by the facts and circumstances 
alleged in the protest. An order of dismissal issued under this section 
by an Administrative Law Judge may be appealed to the Judicial Officer 
within 10 days from the date of the order.

[36 FR 11578, June 16, 1971, as amended by 42 FR 30504, June 15, 1977]

[[Page 280]]


<R05>
Sec. 958.7   Presiding officers.

    The presiding officer at any hearing shall be an Administrative Law 
Judge qualified in accordance with law, or the Judicial Officer (39 
U.S.C. 204). The Chief Administrative Law Judge shall assign cases to 
Administrative Law Judges by rotation so far as practicable. The 
Judicial Officer may, for good cause shown, preside at the reception of 
evidence in proceedings where expedited hearings are requested by either 
party. When the Judicial Officer presides at the hearing, he shall, in 
his sole discretion, render a tentative or final decision after the 
conclusion of the hearing. Exceptions may be filed to a tentative 
decision in accordance with Sec. 958.10.

[36 FR 11578, June 16, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 20263, July 30, 1973; 
42 FR 30504, June 15, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 958.8   Proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law.

    Unless otherwise ordered by the presiding officer, proposed findings 
of fact and conclusions of law and supporting arguments shall be 
submitted orally or in writing at the conclusion of the hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 958.9   Initial decision.

    Unless given orally at the conclusion of the hearing, the 
Administrative Law Judge shall render an initial decision as 
expeditiously as practicable following the conclusion of the hearing, 
and the receipt of the proposed findings, if any. The initial decision 
shall become the final agency decision if a timely appeal is not taken.


<R05>
Sec. 958.10   Appeal.

    Either party may file exceptions in a brief on appeal to the 
Judicial Officer within 5 days after receipt of the initial or tentative 
decision unless additional time is granted. A reply brief may be filed 
within 5 days after the receipt of the appeal brief by the opposing 
party.


<R05>
Sec. 958.11   Final agency decision.

    The Judicial Officer shall render a final agency decision or he 
shall refer the matter to the Postmaster General or the Deputy 
Postmaster General for such final decision. The decision shall be served 
upon the parties and upon the postmaster at the office where the box is 
located.


<R05>
Sec. 958.12   Compromise and informal disposition.

    Nothing in these rules precludes the compromise, settlement, and 
informal disposition of proceedings initiated under these rules at any 
time prior to the issuance of the final agency decision.


<R05>
Sec. 958.13   Petition to revoke, amend, or modify.

    A party against whom an order has been issued may file a petition 
for the revocation, amendment or modification thereof. The Docket Clerk 
shall transmit a copy of the petition to the General Counsel, who may 
file a written reply. A copy of the reply shall be sent to the 
petitioner by the Docket Clerk. Thereafter an order granting or denying 
such application will be issued by the Judicial Officer.


<R05>
Sec. 958.14   Ex parte communications.

    The provisions of 5 U.S.C. 551(14), 556(d) and 557(d) prohibiting ex 
parte communications are made applicable to proceedings under these 
rules of practice.

[42 FR 5358, Jan. 28, 1977]


<R03>
PART 959--RULES OF PRACTICE IN PROCEEDINGS RELATIVE TO THE PRIVATE EXPRESS STATUTES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
959.1  Authority for rules.
959.2  Scope of rules.
959.3  Office, business hours.
959.4  Demands for payment of postage.
959.5  Appeals from demands.
959.6  Revocations of suspension.
959.7  Notice of hearing.
959.8  Service of petition filed under Sec. 959.6.
959.9  Filing documents for the record.
959.10  Default.
959.11  Amendment of pleadings.
959.12  Continuances and extensions.
959.13  Hearings.
959.14  Change of place of hearings.
959.15  Appearances.
959.16  Presiding officers.
959.17  Evidence.
959.18  Subpoenas.
959.19  Witness fees.
959.20  Depositions.

[[Page 281]]

959.21  Transcript.
959.22  Proposed findings and conclusions.
959.23  Decisions.
959.24  Exceptions to initial decision or tentative decision.
959.25  Judicial Officer.
959.26  Motion for reconsideration.
959.27  Modification or revocation of orders.
959.28  Computation of time.
959.29  Official record.
959.30  Public information.
959.31  Ex parte communications.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 204, 401; 39 CFR 224.1(c)(6)(ii)(D).

    Source: 39 FR 33213, Sept. 16, 1974, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 959.1   Authority for rules.

    These rules are issued by the Judicial Officer of the U.S. Postal 
Service pursuant to authority delegated by the Postmaster General.


<R05>
Sec. 959.2   Scope of rules.

    These rules apply to all Postal Service proceedings in which part 
310 of this title authorizes appeals to the Judicial Officer from 
demands for postage for matter carried in violation of the Private 
Express Statutes, and in proceedings to revoke, as to any person, the 
suspension of provisions of the Private Express Statutes in accordance 
with part 320 of this title.


<R05>
Sec. 959.3   Office, business hours.

    The offices of the officials mentioned in these rules are located at 
the U.S. Postal Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza West SW., Washington, DC 
20260, and are open, Monday through Friday except holidays, during the 
normal business hours of the Postal Service.


<R05>
Sec. 959.4   Demands for payment of postage.

    Final demands for payment of postage will be accompanied by a copy 
of these rules and will:
    (a) State that the demand is final unless appealed under these rules 
within 15 days after receipt of the demand;
    (b) Describe the transaction on which the demand is based and the 
provisions of law or regulation alleged to have been violated; and
    (c) State the manner in which the amount of the demand is computed.


<R05>
Sec. 959.5   Appeals from demands.

    (a) A party upon whom a demand for postage has been made may appeal 
from the demand by filing a petition, in triplicate, with the Docket 
Clerk, Judicial Officer Department, within 15 days after receipt of the 
demand.
    (b) The petition shall:
    (1) Be signed personally by an individual petitioner, by one of the 
partners of a partnership, or by an officer of a corporation or 
association;
    (2) State the reasons why the person filing the petition (designated 
the ``Petitioner'' in these rules) believes the demand is not justified;
    (3) Admit or deny each fact alleged in the demand and allege any 
facts upon which the Petitioner relies to show compliance with 
applicable laws and regulations; and,
    (4) Be accompanied by a copy of the demand.
    (c) Factual allegations that are not denied by the petition may be 
deemed to have been admitted. The demand and the petition (together with 
other documents authorized in this part) shall become the pleadings in 
appeals from demands.


<R05>
Sec. 959.6   Revocations of suspension.

    (a) The General Counsel, or a member of his staff as he may 
designate, may initiate a revocation of the suspension of the Private 
Express Statutes as provided in part 320 of this title as to any person, 
by filing, in triplicate, a petition with the Docket Clerk which
    (1) Names the person involved;
    (2) States the legal authority under which the proceeding is 
initiated;
    (3) States the facts in a manner sufficient to enable the person 
named to make answer thereto; and,
    (4) Recommends the issuance of an appropriate order.
    (b) Answer. (1) The person named in the petition (designated the 
``Respondent'' in these rules) shall file an answer with the Docket 
Clerk within 15 days after he is served with a copy of the petition in 
accordance with Sec. 959.8.
    (2) The answer shall contain a concise statement admitting, denying, 
or explaining each of the allegations set forth in the petition.

[[Page 282]]

    (3) Any facts alleged in the petition which are not denied, or which 
are expressly admitted in the answer, may be considered as proved, and 
no further evidence regarding these facts need be adduced at the 
hearing.
    (4) The answer shall be signed personally by an individual 
respondent, or in the case of a partnership, by one of the partners, or, 
in the case of a corporation or association, by an officer thereof.
    (5) The answer shall set forth the respondent's address and the name 
and address of his attorney, if respondent is represented by counsel.
    (6) The answer shall affirmatively state whether the respondent will 
appear in person or by counsel at the hearing.
    (7) If the respondent does not desire to appear at the hearing in 
person or by counsel, the matter shall be deemed submitted for 
determination pursuant to paragraph (b) of Sec. 959.10.


<R05>
Sec. 959.7   Notice of hearing.

    When a petition is filed, the Docket Clerk shall issue a notice of 
hearing, stating the time and place of the hearing and the date for 
filing an answer which shall not exceed 15 days from the date of service 
of the petition, and a reference to the effect of failure to file an 
answer or appear at the hearing. (See Secs. 959.5(c), 959.6(b), and 
959.10.) Whenever practicable, the hearing date shall be within 30 days 
of the date of the notice.


<R05>
Sec. 959.8   Service of petition filed under Sec. 959.6.

    (a) The Docket Clerk shall cause a notice of hearing and a copy of 
the petition to be transmitted to the postmaster at any office of 
address of the respondent in which the respondent is doing business, 
which shall be delivered to the respondent or his agent by said 
postmaster or his designee. A receipt acknowledging delivery of the 
notice shall be secured from the respondent or his agent and forwarded 
to the Docket Clerk, to become a part of the official record.
    (b) If, after 5 days, the postmaster or his designee, can find no 
person to accept service of the notice of hearing and petition pursuant 
to paragraph (a) of this section, the notice and copy of the petition 
may be delivered in the usual manner as other mail addressed to the 
respondent. A statement, showing the time and place of delivery, signed 
by the postal employee who delivered the notice of hearing and petition 
shall be forwarded to the Docket Clerk and such statement shall 
constitute evidence of service.


<R05>
Sec. 959.9   Filing documents for the record.

    (a) Each party shall file with the Docket Clerk pleadings, motions, 
orders and other documents for the record. The Docket Clerk shall cause 
copies to be delivered promptly to other party(ies) to the proceeding 
and to the presiding officer.
    (b) The parties shall submit three copies of all documents unless 
otherwise ordered by the presiding officer. One copy shall be signed as 
the original.
    (c) Documents shall be dated and state the title of the proceeding 
and, except initial petitions, the docket number. Any pleading or other 
document required by order of the presiding officer to be filed by a 
specified date, shall be delivered to the Docket Clerk on or before such 
date. The date of filing shall be entered thereon by the Docket Clerk.


<R05>
Sec. 959.10   Default.

    (a) If the respondent fails to file an answer within the time 
specified in the notice of hearing, he shall be deemed in default and to 
have waived hearing and further procedural steps. The Judicial Officer 
shall thereafter issue an order without further notice to the 
respondent.
    (b) If the respondent files an answer but fails to appear at the 
hearing, the presiding officer shall receive petitioner's evidence and 
render an initial decision.


<R05>
Sec. 959.11   Amendment of pleadings.

    (a) Amendments proposed prior to the hearing shall be filed with the 
Docket Clerk. Amendments proposed thereafter shall be filed with the 
presiding officer.
    (b) By consent of the parties, a pleading may be amended at any 
time. Also,

[[Page 283]]

a party may move to amend a pleading at any time prior to the close of 
the hearing and, provided that the amendment is reasonably within the 
scope of the proceeding initiated by the petition, the presiding officer 
shall make such ruling on the motion as he deems fair and equitable to 
the parties.
    (c) When issues not raised by the pleadings, but reasonably within 
the scope of the proceedings initiated by the petition, are tried by 
express or implied consent of the parties, they shall be treated in all 
respects as if they had been raised in the pleadings. Such amendments as 
may be necessary to make the pleadings conform to the evidence, and to 
raise such issues, shall be allowed at any time upon the motion of any 
party.
    (d) If a party objects to the introduction of evidence at the 
hearing on the ground that it is not within the issues made by the 
pleadings, but fails to satisfy the presiding officer that an amendment 
of the pleadings would prejudice him on the merits, the presiding 
officer may allow the amendment and may grant a continuance to enable 
the objecting party to rebut the evidence presented.
    (e) The presiding officer may, upon reasonable notice and upon such 
terms as are just, permit service of supplemental pleadings setting 
forth transactions, occurrences, or events which have happened since the 
date of the pleading sought to be supplemented and which are relevant to 
any of the issues involved.


<R05>
Sec. 959.12   Continuances and extensions.

    Continuances and extensions will not be granted by the presiding 
officer except for good cause found.


<R05>
Sec. 959.13   Hearings.

    Hearings are held at the headquarters of the Postal Service, 
Washington, DC 20260, or other locations designated by the presiding 
officer.


<R05>
Sec. 959.14   Change of place of hearings.

    Not later than the date fixed for the filing of the answer, a party 
may file a written request that a hearing be held at a place other than 
that designated in the notice. He shall support his request with a 
statement outlining:
    (a) The evidence to be offered in such place;
    (b) The names and addresses of the witnesses who will testify; and,
    (c) The reasons why such evidence cannot be produced at Washington, 
D.C. The presiding officer shall give consideration to the convenience 
and necessity of the parties and the relevancy of the evidence to be 
offered.


<R05>
Sec. 959.15   Appearances.

    (a) A respondent may appear and be heard in person or by attorney.
    (b) An attorney may practice before the Postal Service in accordance 
with the rules in part 951 of this title.
    (c) When a respondent is represented by an attorney, all pleadings 
and other papers subsequent to the initial petition shall be mailed to 
the attorney.
    (d) A respondent must promptly file a notice of change of attorney.


<R05>
Sec. 959.16   Presiding officers.

    (a) The presiding officer shall be either an Administrative Law 
Judge qualified in accordance with law, or the Judicial Officer. The 
Chief Administrative Law Judge shall assign cases to Administrative Law 
Judges upon rotation so far as practicable. The Judicial Officer may, 
for good cause found, preside at the reception of evidence in 
proceedings upon request of either party.
    (b) The presiding officer shall have authority to:
    (1) Administer oaths and affirmations;
    (2) Examine witnesses;
    (3) Rule upon offers of proof, admissibility of evidence and matters 
of procedure;
    (4) Order any pleading amended upon motion of a party at any time 
prior to the close of the hearing;
    (5) Maintain discipline and decorum and exclude from the hearing any 
person acting in an indecorous manner;
    (6) Require the filing of briefs or memoranda of law on any matter 
upon which he is required to rule;
    (7) Order prehearing conferences for the purpose of settlement or 
simplification of issues by the parties;
    (8) Order the proceeding reopened at any time prior to his decision 
for the receipt of additional evidence; and,

[[Page 284]]

    (9) Render an initial decision if the presiding officer is an 
Administrative Law Judge, which becomes the final decision of the Postal 
Service unless a timely appeal is taken; the Judicial Officer may issue 
a tentative or a final decision.


<R05>
Sec. 959.17   Evidence.

    (a) Except as otherwise provided in these rules, the rules of 
evidence governing civil proceedings in matters not involving trial by 
jury in the District courts of the United States shall govern. However, 
such rules may be relaxed to the extent that the presiding officer deems 
proper to insure a fair hearing. The presiding officer shall exclude 
irrelevant, immaterial or repetitious evidence.
    (b) Testimony shall be under oath or affirmation and witnesses shall 
be subject to cross-examination.
    (c) Agreed statements of fact may be received into evidence.
    (d) Official notice or knowledge may be taken of the types of 
matters of which judicial notice or knowledge may be taken.
    (e) The written statement of a competent witness may be received 
into evidence provided that such statement is relevant to the issues, 
that the witness shall testify under oath at the hearing that the 
statement is in all respects true, and, in the case of expert witnesses, 
that the statement correctly states his opinion or knowledge concerning 
the matters in question.
    (f) A party who objects to the admission of evidence shall make a 
brief statement of the grounds for the objection. Formal exceptions to 
the rulings of the presiding officer are unnecessary.


<R05>
Sec. 959.18   Subpoenas.

    The Postal Service is not authorized by law to issue subpoenas 
requiring the attendance or testimony of witnesses or the production of 
documents. This does not affect the authority of the Chief Postal 
Inspector to issue subpoenas for the production of documents or 
information pursuant to Sec. 233.1(c) of this chapter.

[39 FR 33213, Sept. 16, 1974, as amended at 56 FR 55825, Oct. 30, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 959.19   Witness fees.

    The Postal Service does not pay fees and expenses for a respondent's 
witnesses or for depositions requested by a respondent.


<R05>
Sec. 959.20   Depositions.

    (a) Not later than 5 days after the filing of respondent's answer, 
any party may file an application with the Docket Clerk for the taking 
of testimony by deposition. In support of such application, the 
applicant shall submit under oath or affirmation, a statement containing 
the reasons why such testimony should be taken by deposition, the time 
and place, and the name and address of the witness whose deposition is 
desired, the subject matter of the testimony of each witness, its 
relevancy, and the name and address of the person before whom the 
deposition is to be taken.
    (b) If the application be granted, the order shall specify the time 
and place thereof, the name of the witness, the person before whom the 
deposition is to be taken, and any other necessary information.
    (c) Each deponent shall first be duly sworn, and the adverse party 
shall have the right to cross-examine. The questions and answers, 
together with all objections, shall be reduced to writing and, unless 
waived by stipulation of the parties, shall be read to and subscribed by 
the witness in the presence of the deposition officer who shall certify 
it in the usual form. The deposition officer shall file the testimony 
taken by deposition as directed in the order. All objections made at the 
time of examination shall be noted by the deposition officer and the 
evidence objected to shall be taken subject to the objections. In lieu 
of participating in the oral examination, a party may transmit written 
interrogatories to the deposition officer, who shall propound them to 
the witness and record the answers verbatim. Objections to relevancy or 
materiality of testimony, or to errors and irregularities occurring at 
the oral examination in the manner of taking the deposition, in the form 
or relevancy or materiality of the questions or answers, in the oath or 
affirmation, or in the conduct of the parties, and errors of any kind 
which

[[Page 285]]

might be obviated, cured or removed if promptly presented, are waived 
unless timely objection is made at the taking of the deposition.
    (d) At the hearing, any part or all of the deposition may be offered 
into evidence by any party who was present or represented at the taking 
of the deposition or who had notice thereof. If the deposition is not 
offered and received into evidence, it shall not be considered as a part 
of the record. The admissibility of depositions or parts thereof shall 
be governed by the rules of evidence.
    (e) The party requesting the deposition shall pay all fees required 
to be paid to witnesses and the deposition officer, and shall provide an 
original and one copy thereof for the official record, and shall serve 
one copy upon the opposing party.
    (f) Within the United States, or within a territory or possession 
subject to the dominion of the United States, depositions may be taken 
before an officer authorized to administer oaths by the laws of the 
United States or of the place where the examination is held; within a 
foreign country, depositions may be taken before a secretary of an 
embassy or legation, consul general, vice consul or consular agent of 
the United States, or any other person designated in the order for the 
taking of the deposition.
    (g) Depositions may also be taken and submitted on written 
interrogatories in substantially the same manner as depositions taken by 
oral examination. When a deposition is taken upon written 
interrogatories and cross-interrogatories, none of the parties shall be 
present or represented, and no person, other than the witness, a 
stenographic reporter, and the deposition officer, shall be present at 
the examination of the witness, which fact shall be certified by the 
deposition officer, who shall propound the interrogatories and cross-
interrogatories to the witness in their order and cause the testimony to 
be reduced to writing in the witness' own words.


<R05>
Sec. 959.21   Transcript.

    (a) Hearings shall be stenographically reported by a contract 
reporter of the Postal Service under the supervision of the assigned 
presiding officer. Argument upon any matter may be excluded from the 
transcript by order of the presiding officer. A copy of the transcript 
shall be a part of the record and the sole official transcript of the 
proceeding. Copies of the transcript shall be supplied to the parties by 
the reporter at rates not to exceed the maximum rates fixed by the 
contract between the Postal Service and the reporter. Copies of parts of 
the official record, other than the transcript, may be obtained by the 
respondent from the reporter upon the payment to him of a reasonable 
price therefor.
    (b) Changes in the official transcript may be made only when they 
involve errors affecting substance, and then only in the manner herein 
provided. No physical changes shall be made in or upon the official 
transcript, or copies thereof, which have been filed with the record. 
Within 10 days after the receipt by any party of a copy of the official 
transcript, or any part thereof, a party may file a motion requesting 
correction of the transcript. The opposing party shall, within such time 
as may be specified by the presiding officer, notify the presiding 
officer in writing of his concurrence or disagreement with the requested 
corrections. Failure to interpose timely objection to a proposed 
correction shall be considered to be concurrence. Thereafter, the 
presiding officer shall by order specify the corrections to be made in 
the transcript. The presiding officer on his own initiative may order 
corrections to be made in the transcript with prompt notice to the 
parties of the proceeding. Any changes ordered by the presiding officer 
other than by agreement of the parties shall be subject to objection and 
exception.


<R05>
Sec. 959.22   Proposed findings and conclusions.

    (a) Each party, except one who fails to answer the complaint or, 
having answered, either fails to appear at the hearing or indicates in 
the answer that he does not desire to appear, may submit proposed 
findings of fact, conclusions of law and supporting reasons either in 
oral or written form. The presiding officer may also require the parties 
to submit proposed findings of fact

[[Page 286]]

and conclusions of law with supporting reasons.
    (b) Proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law and supporting 
reasons not presented orally before the close of the hearing, shall, 
unless otherwise directed by the presiding officer, be filed within 15 
days after the delivery of the official transcript to the Docket Clerk, 
who shall notify the parties of the date of its receipt. The proposed 
findings of fact, conclusions of law and supporting reasons shall be set 
forth in serially numbered paragraphs, and shall state with 
particularity, all pertinent evidentiary facts in the record with 
appropriate citations to the transcript or exhibits supporting the 
proposed findings. Each proposed conclusion of law shall be separately 
stated.


<R05>
Sec. 959.23   Decisions.

    (a) Oral decisions. The presiding officer may, in his discretion, 
render an oral decision (an initial decision by an Administrative Law 
Judge, or a tentative or final decision by the Judicial Officer) at the 
close of the hearing. A party who desires an oral decision shall notify 
the presiding officer and the opposing party at least 5 days prior to 
the date set for the hearing. Either party may submit proposed findings 
of fact and conclusions of law either orally or in writing at the 
conclusion of the hearing.
    (b) Written initial decision by Administrative Law Judge. A written 
initial decision shall be rendered with all due speed. The initial 
decision shall include findings of fact and conclusions of law, with the 
reasons therefor, upon all the material issues of fact or law presented 
on the record, and an appropriate order. The initial decision shall 
become the final decision of the Postal Service unless an appeal is 
taken in accordance with Sec. 959.24.
    (c) Written tentative or final decision by the Judicial Officer. 
When the Judicial Officer presides at the hearing, he shall issue a 
final or a tentative decision. Such decision shall include findings of 
fact and conclusions of law, with the reasons therefor, upon all the 
material issues of fact or law presented on the record, and appropriate 
order. The tentative decision shall become the final decision of the 
Postal Service unless exceptions are filed in accordance with 
Sec. 959.24.


<R05>
Sec. 959.24   Exceptions to initial decision or tentative decision.

    (a) A part in a proceeding presided over by an Administrative Law 
Judge, except a party who failed to file an answer, may appeal to the 
Judicial Officer by filing exceptions in a brief on appeal within 15 
days from the receipt of the Administrative Law Judge's written initial 
decision.
    (b) A party in a proceeding presided over by the Judicial Officer, 
except one who has failed to file an answer, may file exceptions within 
15 days from the receipt of the Judicial Officer's written tentative 
decision.
    (c) When an initial or tentative decision is rendered orally at the 
close of the hearing, the presiding officer may then establish and 
orally give notice to the parties participating in the hearing of the 
time limit within which exceptions must be filed.
    (d) Upon receipt of the brief on appeal from an initial decision of 
an Administrative Law Judge, the Docket Clerk shall promptly transmit 
the record to the Judicial Officer. The date for filing the reply to a 
brief on appeal or to a brief in support of exceptions to a tentative 
decision by the Judicial Officer is 10 days after the receipt thereof. 
No additional briefs shall be received unless requested by the Judicial 
Officer.
    (e) Briefs on appeal or in support of exceptions and replies thereto 
shall be filed in triplicate with the Docket Clerk, and contain the 
following matter in the order indicated:
    (1) A subject index of the matters presented, with page references; 
a table of cases alphabetically arranged; a list of statutes and texts 
cited, with page references.
    (2) A concise abstract or statement of the case.
    (3) Numbered exceptions to specific findings of fact or conclusions 
of law of the presiding officer.
    (4) A concise argument clearly setting forth points of fact and of 
law relied upon in support of, or in opposition to, each exception 
taken, together with specific references to the pertinent

[[Page 287]]

parts of the record and the legal or other authorities relied upon.
    (f) Unless permission is granted by the Judicial Officer, no brief 
on appeal or in support of exceptions shall exceed 50 printed or 100 
typewritten pages double spaced.
    (g) The Judicial Officer will extend the time to file briefs only 
upon written motion for good cause found. The Docket Clerk shall 
promptly notify the movant of the Judicial Officer's decision on the 
motion. If a brief is not filed within the time prescribed, the 
defaulting party will be deemed to have abandoned the appeal or waived 
the exceptions, and the initial or tentative decision shall become the 
final decision of the Postal Service.


<R05>
Sec. 959.25   Judicial Officer.

    The Judicial Officer is authorized (a) to act as presiding officer 
at hearings, (b) to render tentative decisions, (c) to render final 
decisions of the Postal Service, (d) to refer the record in any 
proceedings to the Postmaster General or the Deputy Postmaster General 
who will make the final decision of the Postal Service, and (e) to 
revise or amend these rules of practice. The entire official record will 
be considered before a final decision of the Postal Service is rendered. 
Before rendering a final decision of the Postal Service, the Judicial 
Officer may order the hearing reopened for the presentation of 
additional evidence by the parties.


<R05>
Sec. 959.26   Motion for reconsideration.

    A party may file a motion for reconsideration of a final decision of 
the Postal Service within 10 days after receiving it, or within such 
longer period as the Judicial Officer may fix. Each motion for 
reconsideration shall be accompanied by a brief clearly setting forth 
the points of fact and of law relied upon in support of said motion.


<R05>
Sec. 959.27   Modification or revocation of orders.

    A party against whom an order has been issued may file with the 
Docket Clerk an application for modification or revocation, addressed to 
the Judicial Officer. The Docket Clerk shall transmit a copy of the 
application to the General Counsel, who shall file a written reply 
within 10 days after filing, or such other period as the Judicial 
Officer may fix. A copy of the reply shall be sent to the applicant by 
the Docket Clerk. Thereafter an order granting or denying such 
application in whole or in part will be issued by the Judicial Officer.


<R05>
Sec. 959.28   Computation of time.

    A designated period of time excludes the day the period begins, and 
includes the last day of the period unless the last day is a Saturday, 
Sunday, or legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the close 
of business on the next business day.


<R05>
Sec. 959.29   Official record.

    The transcript of testimony together with all pleadings, orders, 
exhibits, briefs and other documents filed in the proceedings shall 
constitute the official record of the proceeding.


<R05>
Sec. 959.30   Public information.

    The Law Librarian of the Postal Service maintains for public 
inspection in the Law Library copies of all initial, tentative and final 
decisions of the Postal Service. The Docket Clerk maintains the complete 
official record of every proceeding.


<R05>
Sec. 959.31   Ex parte communications.

    The provisions of 5 U.S.C. 551(14), 556(d) and 557(d) prohibiting ex 
parte communications are made applicable to proceedings under these 
rules of practice.

[42 FR 5358, Jan. 28, 1977]


<R03>
PART 960--RULES RELATIVE TO IMPLEMENTATION OF THE EQUAL ACCESS TO JUSTICE ACT IN POSTAL SERVICE PROCEEDINGS--Table of Contents

<R05>


                      Subpart A--General Provisions

Sec.
960.1  Purpose of these rules.
960.2  When the Act applies.
960.3  Proceedings covered.
960.4  Eligibility of applicants.
960.5  Standards for awards.
960.6  Allowable fees and expenses.
960.7  Rulemaking on maximum rates for attorney fees.

[[Page 288]]

960.8  Official authorized to take final action under the Act.

             Subpart B--Information Required from Applicants

960.9  Contents of application.
960.10  Net worth exhibit.
960.11  Documentation of fees and expenses.
960.12  When an application may be filed.

           Subpart C--Procedures for Considering Applications

960.13  Filing and service of documents.
960.14  Answer to application.
960.15  Reply.
960.16  Comments by other parties.
960.17  Settlement.
960.18  Further proceedings.
960.19  Decision.
960.20  Further Postal Service review.
960.21  Judicial review.
960.22  Payment of award.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 504 (c)(1); 39 U.S.C. 204, 401 (2).

    Source: 46 FR 45945, Sept. 16, 1981, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                      Subpart A--General Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 960.1  Purpose of these rules.

    The Equal Access to Justice Act, 5 U.S.C. 504 (called ``the Act'' in 
this part), provides for the award of attorney fees and other expenses 
to eligible individuals and entities who are parties to certain 
administrative proceedings (called ``adversary adjudications'') before 
the Postal Service. An eligible party may receive an award when it 
prevails over the Postal Service, unless the Postal Service's position 
was substantially justified or special circumstances make an award 
unjust. The rules in this part describe the parties eligible for awards 
and the proceedings that are covered. They also explain how to apply for 
awards, and the procedures and standards that the Postal Service will 
use to make them.

[46 FR 45945, Sept. 16, 1981, as amended at 52 FR 6797, Mar. 5, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 960.2  When the Act applies.

    The Act applies to any adversary adjudication pending or commenced 
before the Postal Service on or after August 5, 1985. It also applies to 
any adversary adjudication commenced on or after October 1, 1984, and 
finally disposed of before August 5, 1985, provided that an application 
for fees and expenses, as described in subpart B of these rules, has 
been filed with the Postal Service within 30 days after August 5, 1985, 
and to any adversary adjudication pending on or commenced on or after 
October 1, 1981, in which an application for fees and other expenses was 
timely filed and was dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.

[52 FR 6797, Mar. 5, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 960.3  Proceedings covered.

    (a) The Act applies to adversary adjudications conducted by the 
Postal Service. These are:
    (1) Adjudications under 5 U.S.C. 554 in which the position of the 
Postal Service is presented by an attorney or other representative who 
enters an appearance and participates in the proceeding (for the Postal 
Service, the types of proceedings generally covered are proceedings 
relative to false representation and cease and desist orders and 
mailability under chapter 30 of title 39, U.S.C., with the exception of 
proceedings under 39 U.S.C. 3008); and
    (2) Appeals of decisions of contracting officers made pursuant to 
section 6 of the Contract Disputes Act of 1978 (41 U.S.C. 605) before 
the Postal Service Board of Contract Appeals as provided in section 8 of 
that Act. (41 U.S.C. 607).
    (b) The Postal Service may also designate a proceeding not listed in 
paragraph (a) of this section as an adversary adjudication for purposes 
of the Act by so stating in an order initiating the proceeding or 
designating the matter for hearing. The failure to designate a 
proceeding as an adversary adjudication shall not preclued the filing of 
an application by a party who believes the proceeding is covered by the 
Act; whether the proceeding is covered will then be an issue for 
resolution in proceedings on the application.
    (c) If a proceeding includes both matters covered by the Act and 
matters specifically excluded from coverage, any award made will include 
only fees and expenses related to covered issues.

[46 FR 45945, Sept. 16, 1981, as amended at 52 FR 6798, Mar. 5, 1987]

[[Page 289]]


<R05>
Sec. 960.4  Eligibility of applicants.

    (a) To be eligible for an award of attorney fees and other expenses 
under the Act, the applicant must be a party to the adversary 
adjudication for which it seeks an award. The term ``party'' is defined 
in 5 U.S.C. 551(3). The applicant must show by clear and convincing 
evidence that it meets all conditions of eligibility set out in this 
subpart and in subpart B and must submit additional information to 
verify its eligibility upon order by the adjudicative officer.
    (b) The types of eligible applicants are as follows:
    (1) An individual with a net worth of not more than $2 million;
    (2) The sole owner of an unincorporated business who has a net worth 
of not more than $7 million, including both personal and business 
interests, and not more than 500 employees;
    (3) A charitable or other tax-exempt organization described in 
section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3)) 
with not more than 500 employees;
    (4) A cooperative association as defined in section 15(a) of the 
Agricultural Marketing Act (12 U.S.C. 1141j(a)) with not more than 500 
employees; and
    (5) Any other partnerships, corporation, association, unit of local 
government, or organization with a net worth of not more than $7 million 
and not more than 500 employees.
    (c) For the purposes of eligibility, the net worth and number of 
employees of an applicant shall be determined as of the date the 
proceeding was initiated, which in proceedings before the Board of 
Contract Appeals is the date the applicant files its appeal to the 
Board.
    (d) An applicant who owns an unincorporated business will be 
considered as an ``individual'' rather than a ``sole owner of an 
unincorporated business'' if the issues on which the applicant prevails 
are related primarily to personal interests rather than to business 
interests.
    (e) The employees of an applicant include all persons who regularly 
perform services for remuneration for the applicant, under the 
applicant's direction and control. Part-time employees shall be included 
on a proportional basis.
    (f) The net worth and number of employees of the applicant and all 
of its affiliates shall be aggregated to determine eligibility. Any 
individual, corporation or other entity that directly or indirectly 
controls or owns a majority of the voting shares or other interest of 
the applicant, or any corporation or other entity of which the applicant 
directly or indirectly owns or controls a majority of the voting shares 
or other interest, will be considered an affiliate for purposes of this 
part, unless the adjudicative officer determines that such treatment 
would be unjust and contrary to the purposes of the Act in light of the 
actual relationship between the affiliated entities. In addition, the 
adjudicative officer may determine that financial relationships of the 
applicant other than those described in this paragraph constitute 
special circumstances that would make an award unjust.
    (g) An applicant that participates in a proceeding primarily on 
behalf of one or more other persons or entities that would be ineligible 
is not itself eligible for an award.

[46 FR 45945, Sept. 16, 1981, as amended at 52 FR 6798, Mar. 5, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 960.5  Standards for awards.

    (a) A prevailing applicant may receive an award for fees and 
expenses incurred in connection with a proceeding, including expenses 
and fees incurred in filing for an award under the Act, or in a 
significant and discrete substantive portion of the proceeding, unless 
the position of the agency over which the applicant has prevailed was 
substantially justified. The position of the agency includes in addition 
to the position taken by the agency in the adversary adjudication, the 
action or failure to act by the agency upon which the adversary 
adjudication is based. The burden of proof that an award should not be 
made to an eligible prevailing applicant is on Postal Service counsel.
    (b) An award will be reduced or denied if the applicant has unduly 
or unreasonably protracted the proceeding or if special circumstances 
make the award sought unjust.

[46 FR 45945, Sept. 16, 1981, as amended at 52 FR 6798, Mar. 5, 1987]

[[Page 290]]


<R05>
Sec. 960.6  Allowable fees and expenses.

    (a) Awards will be based on rates customarily charged by persons 
engaged in the business of acting as attorneys, agents and expert 
witnesses, even if the services were made available without charge or at 
a reduced rate to the applicant. Attorney fees may not be recovered by 
parties appearing pro se in postal proceedings.
    (b) No award for the fee of an attorney or agent under these rules 
may exceed $75.00 per hour. No award to compensate an expert witness may 
exceed the highest rate at which the Postal Service pays expert 
witnesses, which is generally $50.00 per hour. However, an award may 
also include the reasonable expenses of the attorney, agent, or witness 
as a separate item, if the attorney, agent or witness ordinarily charges 
clients separately for such expenses.
    (c) In determining the reasonableness of the fee sought for an 
attorney, agent or expert witness, the adjudicative officer shall 
consider the following:
    (1) If the attorney, agent or witness is in private practice, his or 
her customary fee for similar services, or, if an employee of the 
applicant, the fully allocated cost of the services;
    (2) The prevailing rate for similar services in the community in 
which the attorney, agent or witness ordinarily performs services;
    (3) The time actually spent in the representation of the applicant;
    (4) The time reasonably spent in light of the difficulty or 
complexity of the issues in the proceeding; and
    (5) Such other factors as may bear on the value of the services 
provided.
    (d) The reasonable cost of any study, analysis, engineering report, 
test, project or similar matter prepared on behalf of a party may be 
awarded, to the extent that the charge for the service does not exceed 
the prevailing rate for similar services, and the study or other matter 
was necessary for preparation of the applicant's case.

[46 FR 45945, Sept. 16, 1981, as amended at 52 FR 6798, Mar. 5, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 960.7  Rulemaking on maximum rates for attorney fees.

    (a) If warranted by an increase in the cost of living or by special 
circumstances (such as limited availability of attorneys qualified to 
handle certain types of proceedings), the Postal Service may adopt 
regulations providing that attorney fees may be awarded at a rate higher 
than $75 per hour in some or all of the types of proceedings covered by 
this part. The Postal Service will conduct any rulemaking proceedings 
for this purpose under the informal rulemaking procedures of the 
Administrative Procedure Act.
    (b) Any person may request the Postal Service to initiate a 
rulemaking proceeding to increase the maximum rate for attorney fees. 
The request should identify the rate the person believes the Postal 
Service should establish and the types of proceedings in which the rate 
should be used. It should also explain fully the reasons why the higher 
rate is warranted. The Postal Service will respond to the request within 
60 days after it is filed, by determining to initiate a rulemaking 
proceeding, denying the request, or taking other appropriate action.


<R05>
Sec. 960.8  Official authorized to take final action under the Act.

    The Postal Service official who renders the final agency decision in 
a proceeding under Sec. 952.26 or Sec. 953.15, or the panel that renders 
the decision in an appeal before the Board of Contract Appeals under 
part 955 procedures, as the case may be, is authorized to take final 
action on matters pertaining to the Equal Access to Justice Act as 
applied to the proceeding.

[52 FR 6798, Mar. 5, 1987]


<R04>
             Subpart B--Information Required From Applicants


<R05>
Sec. 960.9  Contents of application.

    (a) An application for an award of fees and expenses under the Act 
shall identify the applicant and the proceeding for which an award is 
sought. The

[[Page 291]]

application shall show that the applicant has prevailed and identify the 
position of the Postal Service in the proceeding that the applicant 
alleges was not substantially justified. Unless the applicant is an 
individual, the application shall also state the number of employees of 
the applicant and describe briefly the type and purpose of its 
organization or business.
    (b) The application shall also include a statement that the 
applicant's net worth does not exceed $2 million (if an individual) or 
$7 million (for all other applicants, including their affiliates.) 
However, an applicant may omit this statement if:
    (1) It attaches a copy of a ruling by the Internal Revenue Service 
that it qualifies as an organization described in section 501(c)(3) of 
the Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3)) or, in the case of a 
tax-exempt organization not required to obtain a ruling from the 
Internal Revenue Service on its exempt status, a statement that 
describes the basis for the applicant's belief that it qualifies under 
such section; or
    (2) It states on the application that it is a cooperative 
association as defined in section 15(a) of the Agricultural Marketing 
Act (12 U.S.C. 1141j(a)).
    (c) The application shall state the amount of fees and expenses for 
which an award is sought.
    (d) The application may also include any other matters that the 
applicant wishes the Postal Service to consider in determining whether 
and in what amount an award should be made.
    (e) The application shall be signed by the applicant or an 
authorized officer or attorney of the applicant. It shall also contain 
or be accompanied by a written verification under oath or under penalty 
of perjury that the information provided in the application is true and 
correct.

[46 FR 45945, Sept. 16, 1981, as amended at 52 FR 6798, Mar. 5, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 960.10  Net worth exhibit.

    (a) Each applicant except a qualified tax-exempt organization or 
cooperative association must provide with its application a detailed 
exhibit showing the net worth of the applicant and any affiliates (as 
defined in Sec. 960.4(f)) when the proceeding was initiated. The exhibit 
may be in any form convenient to the applicant that provides full 
disclosure of the applicant's and its affiliates' assets and liabilities 
and is sufficient to determine whether the applicant qualifies under the 
standards in this part. The adjudicative officer may require an 
applicant to file additional information to determine its eligibility 
for an award.
    (b) Ordinarily, the net worth exhibit will be included in the public 
record of the proceeding. However, an applicant that objects to public 
disclosure of information in any portion of the exhibit and believes 
there are legal grounds for withholding it from disclosure may submit 
that portion of the exhibit directly to the adjudicative officer in a 
sealed envelope labeled ``Confidential Financial Information'', 
accompanied by a motion to withhold the information from public 
disclosure. The motion shall describe the information sought to be 
withheld and explain, in detail, why it falls within one or more of the 
specific exemptions from mandatory disclosure under the Freedom of 
Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552(b) (1) through (9), why public disclosure 
of the information would adversely affect the applicant, and why 
disclosure is not required in the public interest. The material in 
question shall be served on counsel representing the agency against 
which the applicant seeks an award, but need not be served on any other 
party to the proceeding. If the adjudicative officer finds that the 
information should not be withheld from disclosure, it shall be placed 
in the public record of the proceeding. Otherwise, any request to 
inspect or copy the exhibit shall be disposed of in accordance with the 
Postal Service's established procedures under the Freedom of Information 
Act, part 265 of this title.


<R05>
Sec. 960.11  Documentation of fees and expenses.

    (a) The application shall be accompanied by full documentation of 
the fees and expenses, including the cost of any study, analysis, 
engineering report, test, project or similar matter,

[[Page 292]]

for which an award is sought. A separate itemized statement shall be 
submitted for each professional firm or individual whose services are 
covered by the application, showing the hours spent in connection with 
the proceeding by each individual, a description of the specific 
services performed, the rate at which each fee has been computed, any 
expenses for which reimbursement is sought, the total amount claimed, 
and the total amount paid or payable by the applicant or by any other 
person or entity for the services provided. The adjudicative officer may 
require the applicant to provide vouchers, receipts, or other 
substantiation for any expenses claimed. In addition, the Board of 
Contract Appeals may require an applicant to submit to an audit by the 
Postal Service of its claimed fees and expenses.
    (b) Where the case has been sustained in part and denied in part or 
where the applicant has prevailed in only a significant and discrete 
substantive portion of the case, the application must be limited to fees 
and expenses allocable to the portion of the case as to which the 
applicant was the prevailing party.

[46 FR 45945, Sept. 16, 1981, as amended at 52 FR 6798, Mar. 5, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 960.12  When an application may be filed.

    (a) An application may be filed whenever the applicant has prevailed 
in the proceeding or in a significant and discrete substantive portion 
of the proceeding, but in no case later than 30 days after the Postal 
Service's final disposition of the proceeding.
    (b) If review or reconsideration is sought or taken of a decision as 
to which an applicant believes it has prevailed, proceedings for the 
award of fees shall be stayed pending final disposition of the 
underlying controversy.
    (c) For purposes of this rule, final disposition means the later of 
(1) the date on which an initial decision or other recommended 
disposition of the merits of the proceeding by an adjudicative officer 
or intermediate review board becomes administratively final;
    (2) Issuance of an order disposing of any petitions for 
reconsideration of the Postal Service's final order in the proceeding;
    (3) If no petition for reconsideration is filed, the last date on 
which such a petition could have been filed;
    (4) Issuance of a final order or any other final resolution of a 
proceeding, such as a settlement or voluntary dismissal, which is not 
subject to a petition for reconsideration;
    (5) In proceedings under 39 U.S.C. 3005, on the date that an 
Administrative Law Judge enters an order indefinitely suspending further 
proceedings on the basis of a compromise agreement entered into between 
the parties; or
    (6) In proceedings before the Board of Contract Appeals, the Board 
of Contract Appeals decision on quantum. When the Board decides only 
entitlement and remands the issue of quantum to the parties, the final 
disposition occurs when the parties execute an agreement on quantum, or 
if the parties cannot agree on quantum and resubmit the quantum dispute 
to the Board, when the Board issues a decision on quantum.

[46 FR 45945, Sept. 16, 1981, as amended at 52 FR 6798, Mar. 5, 1987]


<R04>
           Subpart C--Procedures for Considering Applications


<R05>
Sec. 960.13  Filing and service of documents.

    Any application for an award or other pleading or document related 
to an application shall be filed and served on all parties to the 
proceeding in the same manner as other pleadings in the proceeding, 
except as provided in Sec. 960.11(b) for confidential financial 
information.


<R05>
Sec. 960.14  Answer to application.

    (a) Within 30 days after service of an application, counsel 
representing the Postal Service may file an answer to the application. 
Unless the Postal Service counsel requests an extension of time for 
filing or files a statement of intent to negotiate under paragraph (b) 
of this section, failure to file an answer within the 30-day period may 
be treated as a consent to the award requested.

[[Page 293]]

    (b) If the Postal Service counsel and the applicant believe that the 
issues in the fee application can be settled, they may jointly file a 
statement of their intent to negotiate a settlement. The filing of this 
statement shall extend the time for filing an answer for an additional 
30 days, and further extensions may be granted by the adjudicative 
officer upon request by Postal Service counsel and the applicant.
    (c) The answer shall explain in detail any objections to the award 
requested and identify the facts relied on in support of the Postal 
Service's position. If the answer is based on any alleged facts not 
already in the record of the proceeding, the Postal Service shall 
include with the answer either supporting affidavits or a request for 
further proceedings under Sec. 960.19.


<R05>
Sec. 960.15  Reply.

    Within 15 days after service of an answer, the applicant may file a 
reply. If the reply is based on any alleged facts not already in the 
record of the proceeding, the applicant shall include with the reply 
either supporting affidavits or a request for further proceedings under 
Sec. 960.19.


<R05>
Sec. 960.16  Comments by other parties.

    Any party to a proceeding other than the applicant and Postal 
Service may file comments on an application within 30 days after it is 
served or on an answer within 15 days after it is served. A commenting 
party may not participate further in proceedings on the application 
unless the adjudicative officer determines that the public interest 
requires such participation in order to permit full exploration of 
matters raised in the comments.


<R05>
Sec. 960.17  Settlement.

    The applicant and the Postal Service may agree on a proposed 
settlement of the award before final action on the application, either 
in connection with a settlement of the underlying proceeding, or after 
the underlying proceeding has been concluded. If a prevailing party and 
Postal Service counsel agree on a proposed settlement of an award before 
an application has been filed, the application shall be filed with the 
proposed settlement.


<R05>
Sec. 960.18  Further proceedings.

    (a) Ordinarily, the determination of an award will be made on the 
basis of the written record. However, on request of either the applicant 
or Postal Service counsel, or on his or her own initiative, the 
adjudicative officer may order further proceedings, such as an informal 
conference, oral argument, additional written submissions, or an 
evidentiary hearing. Such further proceedings shall be held only when 
necessary for full and fair resolution of the issues arising from the 
application, and shall be conducted as promptly as possible. Whether or 
not the position of the agency was substantially justified shall be 
determined on the basis of the entire administrative record that is made 
in the adversary adjudication for which fees and other expenses are 
sought.
    (b) A request that the adjudicative officer order further 
proceedings under this section shall specifically identify the 
information sought or the disputed issues and shall explain why the 
additional proceedings are necessary to resolve the issues.

[46 FR 45945, Sept. 16, 1981, as amended at 52 FR 6798, Mar. 5, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 960.19  Decision.

    (a) The adjudicative officer shall issue an initial decision on the 
application as promptly as possible after completion of proceedings on 
the application. The decision shall include written findings and 
conclusions on the applicant's eligibility and status as a prevailing 
party, and an explanation of the reasons for any difference between the 
amount requested and the amount awarded. The decision shall also 
include, if at issue, findings on whether the Postal Service's position 
was substantially justified, whether the applicant unduly protracted the 
proceedings, or whether special circumstances make an award unjust. If 
the applicant has sought an award against the Postal Service and another 
agency, the decision shall allocate responsibility for payment of any 
award made between the Postal Service and the other agency, and shall 
explain the reasons for the allocation made.

[[Page 294]]

    (b) The Board of Contract Appeals shall issue its decision on the 
application as promptly as possible after completion of proceedings on 
the application. Whenever possible, the decision shall be made by the 
same Administrative Judge or panel that decided the contract appeal for 
which fees are sought. The decision shall be in the format described in 
paragraph (a) of this section.

[46 FR 45945, Sept. 16, 1981, as amended at 52 FR 6798, Mar. 5, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 960.20  Further Postal Service review.

    (a) Either the applicant or Postal Service counsel may seek review 
of the initial decision on the fee application, in accordance with 
Sec. 952.25 or Sec. 953.14. If neither the applicant nor the Postal 
Service counsel seeks review, the initial decision on the application 
shall become a final decison of the Postal Service 30 days after it is 
issued. If review is taken, the Judicial Officer will issue a final 
decision on the application or remand the application to the 
adjudicative officer for further proceedings.
    (b) In Board of Contract Appeals proceedings, either party may seek 
reconsideration of the decision on the fee application in accordance 
with 39 CFR 955.30.

[46 FR 45945, Sept. 16, 1981, as amended at 52 FR 6798, Mar. 5, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 960.21  Judicial review.

    A party other than the Postal Service may, within 30 days after a 
determination on the award is made, appeal the determination to the 
court of the United States having jurisdiction to review the merits of 
the underlying decision of the agency adversary adjudication in 
accordance with 5 U.S.C. 504(c)(2).

[52 FR 6799, Mar. 5, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 960.22  Payment of award.

    An applicant seeking payment of an award shall submit to the 
Judicial Officer a copy of the Postal Service's final decision granting 
the award, accompanied by a statement that the applicant will not seek 
review of the decision in the United States courts. Requests for payment 
should be sent to: Judicial Officer, Room 10803, U.S. Postal Service, 
475 L'Enfant Plaza, SW., Washington, DC 20260. The Judicial Officer 
shall submit certification for payment to the Postal Data Center. The 
Postal Service will pay the amount awarded to the applicant within 60 
days, unless judicial review of the award or of the underlying decision 
of the adversary adjudication has been sought by the applicant or any 
other party to the proceeding.


<R03>
PART 961--RULES OF PRACTICE IN PROCEEDINGS RELATIVE TO EMPLOYEE HEARING PETITIONS UNDER SECTION 5 OF THE DEBT COLLECTION ACT--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
961.1  Authority for rules.
961.2  Scope of rules.
961.3  Definitions.
961.4  Employee petition for a hearing and supplement to petition.
961.5  Effect of Petition filing.
961.6  Filing, docketing and serving documents; computation of time; 
          representation of parties.
961.7  Answer to Petition and Supplement to Petition.
961.8  Hearing Official authority and responsibilities.
961.9  Effect of Hearing Official's decision; motion for 
          reconsideration.
961.10  Waiver of employee rights.
961.11  Ex parte communications.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 204, 401; 5 U.S.C. 5514(a).

    Source: 51 FR 1251, Jan. 10, 1986, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 961.1  Authority for rules.

    These rules are issued by the Judicial Officer pursuant to authority 
delegated by the Postmaster General.


<R05>
Sec. 961.2  Scope of rules.

    The rules in this part apply to the hearing provided by section 5 of 
the Debt Collection Act of 1982, as amended, 5 U.S.C. 5514(a), on the 
Postal Service's determination of the existence or amount of an employee 
debt to the Postal Service, or of the terms of the employee's debt 
repayment schedule. In addition, these rules, as appropriate, apply to a 
hearing under section 5 of

[[Page 295]]

the Debt Collection Act when an Administrative Law Judge or an 
Administrative Judge in the Judicial Officer Department is designated as 
the Hearing Official for a creditor Federal agency other than the Postal 
Service pursuant to an agreement between the Postal Service and that 
agency.


<R05>
Sec. 961.3  Definitions.

    (a) Employee refers to a current employee of the Postal Service or 
another Federal agency who is alleged to be indebted to the Postal 
Service or another creditor Federal agency and whose hearing under 
section 5 of the Debt Collection Act is being conducted under these 
rules.
    (b) General Counsel refers to the General Counsel of the Postal 
Service, and includes a designated representative.
    (c) Hearing Official refers to an Administrative Law Judge qualified 
to hear cases under the Administrative Procedure Act, an Administrative 
Judge appointed under the Contract Disputes Act of 1978, or any other 
qualified person not under the control or supervision of the Postmaster 
General, who is designated by the Judicial Officer to conduct the 
hearing under section 5 of the Debt Collection Act of 1982, as amended, 
5 U.S.C. 5514(a).
    (d) Judicial Officer refers to the Judicial Officer or Acting 
Judicial Officer of the United States Postal Service.
    (e) Notice of Involuntary Administrative Salary Offsets Under the 
Debt Collection Act refers to the formal written notice required by 
section 5 of the Debt Collection Act before involuntary collection 
deductions can be taken from an employee's salary.
    (f) Postmaster/Installation Head refers to the Postal Service 
official who is authorized under the Postal Service Employee and Labor 
Relations Manual to make the initial determination of employee 
indebtedness and to issue the ``Notice of Involuntary Administrative 
Salary Offsets Under the Debt Collection Act.''
    (g) Recorder refers to the Recorder, Judicial Officer Department, 
U.S. Postal Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza, SW., Washington, DC 20260-6100.


<R05>
Sec. 961.4  Employee petition for a hearing and supplement to petition.

    (a) If an employee desires a hearing, prescribed by section 5 of the 
Debt Collection Act, on the Postal Service's determination of the 
existence or amount of a debt, or on the involuntary repayment terms 
proposed by the Postal Service, the employee must file a written, signed 
petition with the Recorder, Judicial Officer Department, U.S. Postal 
Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza, SW., Washington, DC 20260-6100, on or 
before the fifteenth (15th) calendar day following the employee's 
receipt of the Postal Service's ``Notice of Involuntary Administrative 
Salary Offsets Under the Debt Collection Act.''
    (b) The hearing petition is to include the following:
    (1) The words, ``Petition for Hearing Under the Debt Collection 
Act,'' prominently captioned at the top of the first page:
    (2) The name of the employee petitioner and the employee's work and 
home addresses, and work and home telephone numbers; or other address 
and telephone number where the employee may be contacted about the 
hearing proceedings;
    (3) A statement of the date the employee received the ``Notice of 
Involuntary Administrative Salary Offsets Under the Debt Collection 
Act,'' and a copy of the Notice;
    (4) A statement indicating whether the employee requests an oral 
hearing or a hearing based solely on written submissions;
    (5) If the employee requests an oral hearing, a statement of the 
evidence he or she will produce which makes an oral hearing necessary, 
including a list of witnesses, with their addresses, whom the employee 
expects to call; the proposed city for the hearing site, with 
justification for holding the hearing in that city; and recommended 
alternative dates for the hearing; which should be within 40 days from 
filing the Petition;
    (6) A statement of the grounds upon which the employee objects to 
the Postal Service's determination of the existence or amount of the 
debt, or to the proposed offset schedule. This statement should identify 
and explain with reasonable specificity and brevity

[[Page 296]]

the facts, evidence, and legal arguments, if any, which the employee 
believes support his or her position;
    (7) Copies of all records in the employee's possession which relate 
to the debt; and
    (8) If an employee contends that the Postal Service's proposed 
offset schedule would result in a severe financial hardship on the 
employee and his or her spouse and dependents, an alternative offset 
schedule, and a statement and supporting documents indicating for the 
employee and his or her spouse and dependents for the one year preceding 
the Postal Service's notice and for the repayment period proposed by the 
employee in his or her altenative offset schedule, their total income 
from all sources; assets; liabilities; number of dependents; and 
expenses for food, housing, clothing, transportation, medical care, and 
exceptional expenses, if any.
    (c) The employee may, if necessary, file with the Recorder, 
additional information as a Supplement to the Petition on or before the 
thirtieth (30th) calendar day following the employee's receipt of the 
Postal Service's ``Notice of Involuntary Administrative Salary Offsets 
Under the Debt Collection Act.''


<R05>
Sec. 961.5  Effect of Petition filing.

    Upon receipt and docketing of the employee's Petition for a hearing, 
the Recorder will notify the Postmaster/Installation Head and the 
General Counsel that the Petition has been filed and that pursuant to 
section 5 of the Debt Collection Act, a timely-filed Petition for a 
hearing stays further collection action.


<R05>
Sec. 961.6  Filing, docketing and serving documents; computation of time; representation of parties.

    (a) Filing. All documents relating to the Debt Collection Act 
hearing proceedings must be filed by the employee or the General Counsel 
with the Recorder. (Normal Recorder office business hours are between 
8:15 a.m. and 4:45 p.m., eastern standard or day-light saving time as 
appropriate during the year.) The Recorder will transmit a copy of each 
document filed to the other party, and the original to the Hearing 
Official.
    (b) Docketing. The Recorder will maintain a docket record of Debt 
Collection Act hearing petition proceedings and will assign each 
employee Petition a docket number. After notification of the docket 
number, the employee and General Counsel should refer to it on any 
further filings regarding the Petition.
    (c) Time computation. A filing period under the rules in this part 
excludes the day the period begins, and includes the last day of the 
period unless the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in 
which event the period runs until the close of business on the next 
business day.
    (d) Representation of parties. After the filing of the Petition, 
further document transmittals for, or communications with, the 
Postmaster/Installation Head or Postal Service shall be through their 
representative, the General Counsel, or, if an appropriate notice of 
appearance is filed, the General Counsel's designee. If a notice of 
appearance by an attorney authorized to practice law in any of the 
United States or the District of Columbia or a territory of the United 
States is filed in behalf of an employee, further transmissions of 
documents and other communications with the employee shall be made 
through his or her attorney rather than directly with the employee.


<R05>
Sec. 961.7  Answer to Petition and Supplement to Petition.

    If the employee's Petition states reasons to support the employee's 
position, within 15 days from notice of the Petition, the General 
Counsel shall file an Answer to the Petition, and attach all available 
relevant records and documents in support of the Postal Service's claim, 
and a list of witnesses the Postal Service intends to call if an oral 
hearing is granted. If the employee files a Supplement to the Petition, 
the General Counsel, within ten (10) calendar days from the filing of 
the Supplement with the Recorder must file any Supplemental Answer and 
records to support the position of the Postal Service.

[[Page 297]]


<R05>
Sec. 961.8  Hearing Official authority and responsibilities.

    The Hearing Official shall provide a full and fair hearing. The 
proceedings must be expedited to ensure issuance of the final decision 
no later than 60 days after the filing of the employee's hearing 
Petition. The Hearing Official's authority includes, but is not limited 
to, the following:
    (a) Ruling on all offers, motions or requests by the parties;
    (b) Issuing any notices, orders or memoranda to the parties 
concerning the hearing proceedings;
    (c) Using telephone conferences with the parties to expedite the 
proceedings. A memorandum of a telephone conference will be transmitted 
to both parties;
    (d) Determining if an oral hearing should be held; and setting the 
place, date and time for the hearing or the taking of testimony by 
telephone conference;
    (e) Administering oaths or affirmations to witnesses, and conducting 
the hearing in a manner to maintain discipline and decorum while 
assuring that relevant, reliable and probative evidence is elicited on 
the issues in dispute, but irrelevant, immaterial or repetitious 
evidence is excluded;
    (f) Establishing the record in the case;
    (g) Issuing the final decision orally or in writing no later than 
sixty (60) days after the filing of the employee's hearing Petition. 
When an oral decision is rendered, a written confirmation will 
thereafter be sent to the parties. The decision must include the 
determination of the amount and validity of the alleged debt and, where 
applicable, the repayment schedule. It should also include findings and 
reasons.


<R05>
Sec. 961.9  Effect of Hearing Official's decision; motion for reconsideration.

    The Hearing Official's decision shall be the final administrative 
determination on the employee's debt or repayment schedule. No 
reconsideration of the decision will be allowed unless a motion for 
reconsideration is filed by either party within 10 days from receipt of 
the decision and shows good reasons for reconsideration. Reconsideration 
will be allowed only in the discretion of the Hearing Official. A motion 
for reconsideration by the employee will not operate to stay the 
collection action authorized by the Hearing Official's decision.


<R05>
Sec. 961.10  Waiver of employee rights.

    The Hearing Official may determine the employee has waived his or 
her right to a hearing and the employee's pay shall be offset in 
accordance with the Postal Service's offset schedule, if the employee:
    (a) Files a Petition for hearing after the end of the 15-day period 
allowed by the Act for filing the Petition, and fails to demonstrate to 
the satisfaction of the Hearing Official good cause for the delay;
    (b) Has received notice to appear at an oral hearing but fails to do 
so without showing circumstances beyond the employee's control;
    (c) Fails to file required submissions or to comply with orders of 
the Hearing Official, and the failure makes it difficult or impossible 
to hold the hearing or to issue the decision within the statutory time;
    (d) Files a withdrawal of his or her Petition for a hearing with the 
Recorder.


<R05>
Sec. 961.11  Ex parte communications.

    Ex parte communications between a Hearing Official or his staff and 
a party shall not be made. This prohibition does not apply to procedural 
matters. A memorandum of any communication between the Hearing Official 
and a party will be transmitted to both parties.


<R03>
PART 962--RULES OF PRACTICE IN PROCEEDINGS RELATIVE TO THE PROGRAM FRAUD CIVIL REMEDIES ACT--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
962.1  Purpose.
962.2  Definitions.
962.3  Petition for hearing.
962.4  Referral of complaint.
962.5  Scope of hearing; evidentiary standard.
962.6  Notice of hearing.
962.7  Hearing location.
962.8  Rights of parties.
962.9  Responsibilities and authority of presiding officer.

[[Page 298]]

962.10  Prehearing conferences.
962.11  Respondent access to information.
962.12  Depositions; interrogatories; admission of facts; production and 
          inspection of documents.
962.13  Subpoenas.
962.14  Enforcement of subpoenas.
962.15  Sanctions.
962.16  Disqualification of reviewing official or presiding official.
962.17  Ex parte communications.
962.18  Post-hearing briefs.
962.19  Transcript of proceedings.
962.20  Initial decision.
962.21  Appeal of initial decision to judicial officer.
962.22  Form and filing of documents.
962.23  Service of notice of hearing, other documents.
962.24  Computation of time.
962.25  Continuances and extensions.
962.26  Settlement.
962.27  Limitations.

    Authority: 31 U.S.C. Chapter 38; 39 U.S.C. 401.

    Source: 52 FR 12904, Apr. 20, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 962.1  Purpose.

    This part establishes the procedures governing the hearing and 
appeal rights of any person alleged to be liable for civil penalties and 
assessments under the Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act of 1986 (codified 
at 31 U.S.C. 3801-3812).


<R05>
Sec. 962.2  Definitions.

    (a) Attorney refers to an individual authorized to practice law in 
any of the United States or the District of Columbia or a territory of 
the United States.
    (b) Complaint refers to the administrative Complaint served by the 
Reviewing Official on a Respondent pursuant to Sec. 273.8 of this title.
    (c) Initial Decision refers to the written decision which the 
Presiding Officer is required by Sec. 962.20 to render, and includes a 
revised initial decision issued following a remand.
    (d) Investigating Official refers to the Chief Postal Inspector of 
the Postal Service or any designee within the United States Postal 
Inspection Service who serves in a position for which the rate of basic 
pay is not less than the minimum rate of basic pay for grade GS-16 under 
the General Schedule.
    (e) Judicial Officer refers to the Judicial Officer or Acting 
Judicial Officer of the United States Postal Service or for purposes 
other than specified in Sec. 962.21 any designee within the Judicial 
Officer Department.
    (f) Party refers to the Postal Service or the Respondent.
    (g) Person refers to any individual, partnership, corporation, 
association, or private organization.
    (h) Postmaster General refers to the Postmaster General of the 
United States or his designee.
    (i) Presiding Officer refers to an Administrative Law Judge 
designated by the Judicial Officer to conduct a hearing authorized by 31 
U.S.C. 3803.
    (j) Recorder refers to the Recorder of the United States Postal 
Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza West SW., Washington, DC 20260-6100.
    (k) Representative refers to an attorney or other advocate.
    (l) Respondent refers to any person alleged to be liable for a civil 
penalty or assessment under 31 U.S.C. 3802.
    (m) Reviewing Official refers to the General Counsel of the Postal 
Service or any designee within the Law Department who serves in a 
position for which the rate of basic pay is not less than the minimum 
rate of basic pay for grade GS-16 under the General Schedule.


<R05>
Sec. 962.3  Petition for hearing.

    Within 30 days of receiving the Postal Service's Complaint, issued 
pursuant to Sec. 273.8 of this title, alleging liability under 31 U.S.C. 
3802, the Respondent may request a hearing under the Program Fraud Civil 
Remedies Act by filing a written Hearing Petition with the Recorder in 
accordance with Sec. 962.22(b). The Respondent's Petition must include 
the following:
    (a) The words ``Petition for Hearing Under the Program Fraud Civil 
Remedies Act,'' or other words reasonably identifying it as such;
    (b) The name of the Respondent as well as his or her work and home 
addresses, and work and home telephone numbers; or other address and 
telephone number where the Respondent may be contacted about the hearing 
proceedings;

[[Page 299]]

    (c) A statement of the date the Respondent received the Complaint 
issued by the Reviewing Official;
    (d) A statement indicating whether the Respondent requests an oral 
hearing or a decision on the record;
    (e) If the Respondent requests an oral hearing, a statement 
proposing a city for the hearing site, with justification for holding 
the hearing in that city, as well as recommended dates for the hearing; 
and
    (f) A statement admitting or denying each of the allegations of 
liability made in the Complaint, and stating any defense on which the 
Respondent intends to rely.


<R05>
Sec. 962.4  Referral of complaint.

    (a) If the Respondent fails to request a hearing within the 
specified period, the Reviewing Official shall transmit the Complaint to 
the Judicial Officer for referral to a Presiding Officer, who shall 
issue an initial decision based upon the information contained in the 
Complaint.
    (b) If the Respondent files a Hearing Petition, the Reviewing 
Official, upon receiving a copy of the Petition, shall promptly transmit 
to the Presiding Officer a copy of the Postal Service's Complaint.


<R05>
Sec. 962.5  Scope of hearing; evidentiary standard.

    (a) A hearing under this part shall be conducted by the Presiding 
Officer on the record (1) to determine whether the Respondent is liable 
under 31 U.S.C. 3802, and (2) if so, to determine the amount of any 
civil penalty or assessment to be imposed.
    (b) The Postal Service must prove its case against a Respondent by a 
preponderance of the evidence.
    (c) The parties may offer at a hearing on the merits such relevant 
evidence as they deem appropriate and as would be admissible under the 
generally accepted rules of evidence applied in the courts of the United 
States in nonjury trials, subject, however, to the sound discretion of 
the Presiding Officer in supervising the extent and manner of 
presentation of such evidence. In general, admissibility will hinge on 
relevancy and materiality. However, relevant evidence may be excluded if 
its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair 
prejudice, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or 
needless presentation of cumulative evidence.


<R05>
Sec. 962.6  Notice of hearing.

    (a) Within a reasonable time after receiving the Respondent's 
Hearing Petition and the Complaint, the Presiding Officer shall serve, 
in accordance with Sec. 962.23, upon the Respondent and the Reviewing 
Official, a Notice of Hearing containing the information set forth in 
paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) The Notice of Hearing required by paragraph (a) of this section 
must include:
    (1) The tentative hearing site, date, and time;
    (2) The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is 
to be held;
    (3) The nature of the hearing;
    (4) The matters of fact and law to be decided;
    (5) A description of the procedures governing the conduct of the 
hearing; and
    (6) Such other information as the Presiding Officer deems 
appropriate.


<R05>
Sec. 962.7  Hearing location.

    An oral hearing under this part shall be held
    (a) In the judicial district of the United States in which the 
Respondent resides or transacts business; or
    (b) In the judicial district of the United States in which the claim 
or statement upon which the allegation of liability under 31 U.S.C. 3802 
was made, presented, or submitted; or
    (c) In such other place as may be agreed upon by the Respondent and 
the Presiding Officer.


<R05>
Sec. 962.8  Rights of parties.

    Any party to a hearing under this part shall have the right
    (a) To be accompanied, represented, and advised, by a representative 
of his own choosing;
    (b) To participate in any prehearing or post-hearing conference held 
by the Presiding Officer;
    (c) To agree to stipulations of fact or law, which shall be made 
part of the record;

[[Page 300]]

    (d) To make opening and closing statements at the hearing;
    (e) To present oral and documentary evidence relevant to the issues 
at the hearing;
    (f) To submit rebuttal evidence;
    (g) To conduct such cross-examination as may be required for a full 
and true disclosure of the facts; and
    (h) To submit written briefs, proposed findings of fact, and 
proposed conclusions of law.


<R05>
Sec. 962.9  Responsibilities and authority of presiding officer.

    (a) The Presiding Officer shall conduct a fair and impartial 
hearing, avoid delay, maintain order, and assure that a record of the 
proceeding is made.
    (b) The Presiding Officer's authority includes, but is not limited 
to, the following:
    (1) Establishing, upon adequate notice to all parties, the date and 
time of the hearing, as well as, in accordance with Sec. 962.7, 
selecting the hearing site;
    (2) Holding conferences, by telephone or in person, to identify or 
simplify the issues, or to consider other matters that may aid in the 
expeditious disposition of the proceeding;
    (3) Continuing or recessing the hearing in whole or in part for a 
reasonable period of time;
    (4) Administering oaths and affirmations to witnesses;
    (5) Issuing subpoenas, requiring the attendance and testimony of 
witnesses and the production of all information, documents, reports, 
answers, records, accounts, papers, and other data and documentary 
evidence which the Presiding Officer considers relevant and material to 
the hearing;
    (6) Ruling on all offers, motions, requests by the parties, and 
other procedural matters;
    (7) Issuing any notices, orders, or memoranda to the parties 
concerning the proceedings;
    (8) Regulating the scope and timing of discovery;
    (9) Regulating the course of the hearing and the conduct of the 
parties and their representatives;
    (10) Examining witnesses;
    (11) Receiving, ruling on, excluding, or limiting evidence in order 
to assure that relevant, reliable and probative evidence is elicited on 
the issues in dispute, but irrelevant, immaterial or repetitious 
evidence is excluded;
    (12) Deciding cases, upon motion of a party, in whole or in part by 
summary judgment where there is no disputed issue of material fact;
    (13) Establishing the record in the case; and
    (14) Issuing a written initial decision containing findings of fact, 
conclusions of law, and determinations with respect to whether a penalty 
or assessment should be imposed, and if so, the amount of such penalty 
or assessment.


<R05>
Sec. 962.10  Prehearing conferences.

    (a) At a reasonable time in advance of the hearing, and with 
adequate notice to all parties, the Presiding Officer may conduct, in 
person or by telephone, one or more prehearing conference to discuss the 
following:
    (1) Simplification of the issues;
    (2) The necessity or desirability of amendments to the pleadings, 
including the need for a more definite statement;
    (3) Stipulations or admissions of fact or as to the contents and 
authenticity of documents;
    (4) Limitation of the number of witnesses;
    (5) Exchange of witness lists, copies of prior statements of 
witnesses, and copies of hearing exhibits;
    (6) Scheduling dates for the exchange of witness lists and of 
proposed exhibits;
    (7) Discovery;
    (8) Possible changes in the scheduled hearing date, time or site; 
and
    (9) Any other matters related to the proceeding.
    (b) Within a reasonable time after the completion of a prehearing 
conference, the Presiding Officer shall issue an order detailing all 
matters agreed upon by the parties, or ordered by the Presiding Officer, 
at such conference.


<R05>
Sec. 962.11  Respondent access to information.

    (a)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, the 
Respondent, at any time after receiving the Notice of Hearing required 
by Sec. 962.6, may review, and upon payment

[[Page 301]]

of a duplication fee established under Sec. 265.8(c) of this title, may 
obtain a copy of, all relevant and material documents, transcripts, 
records, and other materials, which relate to the allegations of 
liability, and upon which the findings and conclusions of the 
Investigating Official under Sec. 273.5 of this title are based.
    (2) The Respondent is not entitled to review or obtain a copy of any 
document, transcript, record, or other material which is privileged 
under Federal law.
    (b) At any time after receiving the Notice of Hearing required by 
Sec. 962.6, the Respondent shall be entitled to obtain all exculpatory 
information in the possession of the Investigating Official or the 
Reviewing Official relating to the allegations or liability under 31 
U.S.C. 3802. Paragraph (a)(2) of this section does not apply to any 
document, transcript, record, or other material, or any portion thereof, 
in which such exculpatory information is contained.
    (c) Requests to review or copy material under this section must be 
directed to the Reviewing Official who must respond within a reasonable 
time.


<R05>
Sec. 962.12  Depositions; interrogatories; admission of facts; production and inspection of documents.

    (a) General Policy and protective orders. The parties are encouraged 
to engage in voluntary discovery procedures. In connection with any 
discovery procedure permitted under this part, the Presiding Officer may 
issue any order which justice requires to protect a party or person from 
annoyance, embarrassment, oppression, or undue burden or expense. Such 
orders may include limitations on the scope, method, time and place for 
discovery, and provisions for protecting the secrecy of confidential 
information or documents. Each party shall bear its own expenses 
relating to discovery.
    (b) Depositions. (1) After the issuance of a Notice of Hearing 
described in Sec. 962.6, the parties may mutually agree to, or the 
Presiding Officer may, upon application of either party and for good 
cause shown, order the taking of testimony of any person by deposition 
upon oral examination or written interrogatories before any officer 
authorized to administer oaths at the place of examination, for use as 
evidence or for purposes of discovery. The application for order shall 
specify whether the purpose of the deposition is discovery or for use as 
evidence.
    (2) The time, place, and manner of taking depositions shall be as 
mutually agreed by the parties, or failing such agreement, governed by 
order of the Presiding Officer.
    (3) No testimony taken by depositions shall be considered as part of 
the evidence in the hearing unless and until such testimony is offered 
and received in evidence at such hearing. Depositions will not 
ordinarily be received in evidence if the deponent is present and can 
testify personally at the hearing. In such instances, however, the 
deposition may be used to contradict or impeach the testimony of the 
witness given at the hearing. In cases submitted for a decision on the 
record, the Presiding Officer may, in his discretion, receive 
depositions as evidence in supplementation of that record.
    (c) Interrogatories to parties. After the issuance of a Notice of 
Hearing described in Sec. 962.6, a party may serve on the other party 
written interrogatories to be answered separately in writing, signed 
under oath and returned within 30 days. Upon timely objection by the 
party, the Presiding Officer will determine the extent to which the 
interrogatories will be permitted.
    (d) Admission of facts. After the issuance of a Notice of Hearing 
described in Sec. 962.6, a party may serve upon the other party a 
request for the admission of specified facts. Within 30 days after 
service, the party served shall answer each requested fact or file 
objections thereto. The factual propositions set out in the request 
shall be deemed admitted upon the failure of a party to respond to the 
request for admission.
    (e) Production and inspection of documents. Upon motion of any party 
showing good cause therefor, and upon notice, the Presiding Officer may 
order the other party to produce and permit the inspection and copying 
or photographing of any designated documents or objects, not privileged, 
specifically identified, and their relevance and materiality to the 
cause or causes

[[Page 302]]

in issue explained, which are reasonably calculated to lead to the 
discovery or admissible evidence. If the parties cannot themselves agree 
thereon, the Presiding Officer shall specify just terms and conditions 
in making the inspection and taking the copies and photographs.
    (f) Limitations. Under no circumstances may a discovery procedure be 
used to reach
    (1) Documents, transcripts, records, or other material which a 
person is entitled to review pursuant to Sec. 962.11;
    (2) The notice sent to the Attorney General from the Reviewing 
Official under Sec. 273.6 of this title; or
    (3) Other documents which are privileged under Federal law.


<R05>
Sec. 962.13  Subpoenas.

    (a) General. Upon written request of either party filed with the 
Recorder or on his own initiative, the Presiding Officer may issue a 
subpoena requiring:
    (1) Testimony at a deposition. The deposing of a witness in the city 
or county where he resides or is employed or transacts his business in 
person, or at another location convenient for him that is specifically 
determined by the Presiding Officer;
    (2) Testimony at a hearing. The attendance of a witness for the 
purpose of taking testimony at a hearing; and
    (3) Production of books and papers. In addition to paragraphs (a)(1) 
and (a)(2) of this section, the production by the witness at the 
deposition or hearing of books and papers designated in the subpoena.
    (b) Voluntary cooperation. Each party is expected (1) to cooperate 
and make available witnesses and evidence under its control as requested 
by the other party, without issuance of a subpoena, and (2) to secure 
voluntary attendance of desired third-party books, papers, documents, or 
other tangible things whenever possible.
    (c) Requests for subpoenas. (1) A request for a subpoena shall 
normally be filed at least:
    (i) 15 days before a scheduled deposition where the attendance of a 
witness at a deposition is sought;
    (ii) 30 days before a scheduled hearing where the attendance of a 
witness at a hearing is sought.
    (2) A request for a subpoena shall state the reasonable scope and 
general relevance to the case of the testimony and of any books, papers, 
documents, or other tangible things sought.
    (3) The Presiding Officer, in his discretion, may honor requests for 
subpoenas not made within the time limitations specified in this 
paragraph.
    (d) Requests to quash or modify. Upon written request by the person 
subpoenaed or by a party, made within 10 days after service but in any 
event not later than the time specified in the subpoena for compliance, 
the Presiding Officer may (1) quash or modify the subpoena if it is 
unreasonable and oppressive or for other good cause shown, or (2) 
require the person in whose behalf the subpoena was issued to advance 
the reasonable cost of producing subpoenaed books and papers. Where 
circumstances require, the Presiding Officer may act upon such a request 
at any time after a copy has been served upon the opposing party.
    (e) Form; issuance. (1) Every subpoena shall state the title of the 
proceeding, shall cite 31 U.S.C. 3804(b) as the authority under which it 
is issued, and shall command each person to whom it is directed to 
attend and give testimony, and if appropriate, to produce specified 
books and papers at a time and place therein specified. In issuing a 
subpoena to a requesting party, the Presiding Officer shall sign the 
subpoena and may, in his discretion, enter the name of the witness and 
otherwise leave it blank. The party to whom the subpoena is issued shall 
complete the subpoena before service.
    (2) Where the witness is located in a foreign country, a letter 
rogatory or subpoena may be issued and served under the circumstances 
and in the manner provided in 28 U.S.C. 1781-1784.
    (f) Service. (1) The party requesting issuance of a subpoena shall 
arrange for service.
    (2) A subpoena requiring the attendance of a witness at a deposition 
or hearing may be served at any place. A subpoena may be served by a 
United States marshall or deputy marshall, or by any other person who is 
not a party and not less than 18 years of age. Service of a subpoena 
upon a person named

[[Page 303]]

therein shall be made by personally delivering a copy to that person and 
tendering the fees for one day's attendance and the mileage provided by 
28 U.S.C. 1821 or other applicable law.
    (3) The party at whose instance a subpoena is issued shall be 
responsible for the payment of fees and mileage of the witness and of 
the officer who serves the subpoena. The failure to make payment of such 
charges on demand may be deemed by the Presiding Officer as sufficient 
ground for striking the testimony of the witness and the evidence the 
witness has produced.


<R05>
Sec. 962.14   Enforcement of subpoenas.

    In the case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena issued 
pursuant to Secs. 962.9(b)(5) and 962.13, the district courts of the 
United States have jurisdiction to issue an appropriate order for the 
enforcement of such subpoena. Any failure to obey such order of the 
court may be punishable as contempt. In any case in which the Postal 
Service seeks the enforcement of a subpoena under this section, the 
Postal Service shall request the Attorney General to petition the 
district court for the district in which a hearing under this part is 
being conducted or in which the person receiving the subpoena resides or 
conducts business to issue such an order.


<R05>
Sec. 962.15   Sanctions.

    (a) The Presiding Officer may sanction a person, including any party 
or representative, for
    (1) Failing to comply with a lawful order or prescribed procedure;
    (2) Failing to prosecute or defend an action; or
    (3) Engaging in other misconduct that interferes with the speedy, 
orderly, or fair conduct of the hearing.
    (b) Any such sanction, including but not limited to those listed in 
paragraphs (c), (d), and (e) of this section, shall reasonably relate to 
the severity and nature of the failure or misconduct.
    (c) Failure to comply with an order. When a party fails to comply 
with an order, including an order for taking a deposition, the 
production of evidence within the party's control, or a request for 
admission, the Presiding Officer may:
    (1) Draw an inference in favor of the requesting party with regard 
to the information sought;
    (2) Prohibit such party from introducing evidence concerning, or 
otherwise relying upon, testimony relating to the information sought;
    (3) Permit the requesting party to introduce secondary evidence 
concerning the information sought; and
    (4) Strike any part of the pleadings or other submissions of the 
party failing to comply with such request.
    (d) Failure to prosecute or defend. If a party fails to prosecute or 
defend an action under this part commenced by service of a Complaint, 
the Presiding Officer may dismiss the action or enter an order of 
default.
    (e) Failure to make timely filing. The Presiding Officer may refuse 
to consider any motion or other pleading, report, or response which is 
not filed in a timely fashion.


<R05>
Sec. 962.16   Disqualification of reviewing official or presiding official.

    If a Respondent believes, in good faith, that the Reviewing Official 
or Presiding Officer should be disqualified because of personal bias, or 
other reason, the Respondent may file a timely and sufficient affidavit 
alleging such belief with supporting evidence. If the Presiding Officer 
finds that such allegations concerning the Reviewing Official are 
meritorious, he may direct the Reviewing Official to disqualify himself 
and request the appointment of a new Reviewing Official. Where a 
Respondent seeks the disqualification of a Presiding Officer, such 
Presiding Officer, may, in his discretion, disqualify himself at any 
time during the proceeding. In the event a Reviewing Official or 
Presiding Officer withdraws from a hearing, the proceeding shall be 
stayed until the assignment of a new Reviewing Official or Presiding 
Officer.


<R05>
Sec. 962.17   Ex parte communications.

    Communications between a Presiding Officer and a party shall not be 
made on any matter in issue unless on notice and opportunity for all 
parties to participate. This prohibition does not

[[Page 304]]

apply to procedural matters. A memorandum of any communication between 
the Presiding Officer and a party shall be transmitted by the Presiding 
Officer to all parties.


<R05>
Sec. 962.18   Post-hearing briefs.

    Post-hearing briefs and reply briefs may be submitted upon such 
terms as established by the Presiding Officer at the conclusion of the 
hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 962.19   Transcript of proceedings.

    Testimony and argument at hearings shall be reported verbatim, 
unless the Presiding Officer orders otherwise. Transcripts or copies of 
the proceedings may be obtained by the parties at such rates as may be 
fixed by contract between the reporter and the Postal Service.


<R05>
Sec. 962.20   Initial decision.

    (a) After the conclusion of the hearing, and the receipt of briefs, 
if any, from the parties, the Presiding Officer shall issue a written 
initial decision, including his or her findings and determinations. Such 
decision shall include the findings of fact and conclusions of law which 
the Presiding Officer relied upon in determining whether the Respondent 
is liable under 31 U.S.C. 3802, and, if liability is found, shall set 
forth the amount of any penalties and assessments imposed.
    (b) The Presiding Officer shall promptly send to each party a copy 
of his or her initial decision, and a statement describing the right of 
any person determined to be liable under 31 U.S.C. 3802, to appeal, in 
accordance with Sec. 962.21, the decision of the Presiding Officer to 
the Judicial Officer.
    (c) Unless the Respondent appeals the Presiding Officer's initial 
decision, such decision, including the findings and determinations, is 
final.


<R05>
Sec. 962.21   Appeal of initial decision to judicial officer.

    (a) Notice of appeal and supporting brief. (1) A Respondent may 
appeal an adverse initial decision by filing, within 30 days after the 
Presiding Officer issues an initial decision, a Notice of Appeal with 
the Recorder. The Judicial Officer may extend the filing period if the 
Respondent files a request for an extension within the initial 30-day 
period and demonstrates good cause for such extension.
    (2) The Respondent's Notice of Appeal must be accompanied by a 
written brief specifying the Respondent's exceptions, and any reasons 
for such exceptions, to the Presiding Officer's initial decision.
    (3) Within 30 days of receiving the Respondent's brief, the 
Reviewing Official may file with the Judicial Officer a response to the 
Respondent's specified exceptions to the Presiding Officer's initial 
decision.
    (b) Form of review. (1) Review by the Judicial Officer will be based 
entirely on the record and written submissions.
    (2) The Judicial Officer may affirm, reduce, reverse, or remand any 
penalty or assessment determined by the Presiding Officer.
    (3) The Judicial Officer shall not consider any objection that was 
not raised in the hearing unless the interested party demonstrates that 
the failure to raise the objection before the Presiding Officer was 
caused by extraordinary circumstances.
    (4) If any party demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Judicial 
Officer .hat additional evidence not presented at the hearing is 
material and that there were reasonable grounds for the failure to 
present such evidence, the Judicial Officer shall remand the matter to 
the Presiding Officer for consideration of such additional evidence.
    (c) Decision of judicial officer. (1) The Judicial Officer shall 
promptly serve each party to the appeal with a copy of his decision and 
a statement describing the right to judicial review under 31 U.S.C. 3805 
of any Respondent determined to be liable under 31 U.S.C. 3802.
    (2) The decision of the Judicial Officer constitutes final agency 
action and becomes final and binding on the parties 60 days after it is 
issued unless a petition for judicial review is filed.


<R05>
Sec. 962.22  Form and filing of documents.

    (a) Every pleading filed in a proceeding under this part must
    (1) Contain a caption setting forth the title of the action, the 
docket number (after assignment by the Recorder), and a designation of 
the document (e.g., ``Motion to Quash Subpoena'');

[[Page 305]]

    (2) Contain the name, address, and telephone number of the party or 
other person on whose behalf the paper was filed, or the name, address 
and telephone number of the representative who prepared such paper; and
    (3) Be signed by the party or other person submitting the document, 
or by such party's or person's representative.
    (b) The original and three copies of all pleadings and documents in 
a proceeding conducted under this part shall be filed with the Recorder, 
Judicial Officer Department, United States Postal Service, 475 L'Enfant 
Plaza West SW., Washington, DC 20260-6100. Normal Recorder business 
hours are between 8:15 a.m. and 4:45 p.m., eastern standard or daylight 
saving time. The Recorder will transmit a copy of each document filed to 
the other party, and the original to the Presiding Officer.
    (c) Pleadings or document transmittals to, or communications with, 
the Postal Service, other than to the Recorder under paragraph (b) of 
this section, shall be made through the Reviewing Official or designated 
Postal Service attorney. If a notice of appearance by a representative 
is filed on behalf of a Respondent, pleadings or document transmittals 
to, or communications with, the Respondent shall be made through his 
representative.


<R05>
Sec. 962.23  Service of notice of hearing, other documents.

    Unless otherwise specified, service of a Notice of Hearing or any 
other document under this part must be effected by registered or 
certified mail, return-receipt requested, or by personal delivery. In 
the case of personal service, the person making service shall, if 
possible, secure from the party or other person sought to be served, or 
his or her agent, a written acknowledgement of receipt, showing the date 
and time of such receipt. If the person upon whom service is made 
declines to acknowledge receipt, the person effecting service shall 
execute a statement, indicating the time, place and manner of service, 
which shall constitute evidence of service.


<R05>
Sec. 962.24  Computation of time.

    (a) In computing any period of time provided for by this part, or 
any order issued pursuant to this part, the time begins with the day 
following the act, event, or default, and includes the last day of the 
period, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday observed by 
the Federal Government, in which event it includes the next business 
day.
    (b) When the applicable period of time is less than seven days, 
intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays observed by the 
Federal Government shall be excluded from the computation.


<R05>
Sec. 962.25  Continuances and extensions.

    Continuances and extensions may be granted under these rules for 
good cause shown.


<R05>
Sec. 962.26  Settlement.

    (a) Either party may make offers of settlement or proposals of 
adjustment at any time.
    (b) The Reviewing Official has the exclusive authority to compromise 
or settle any allegations or determinations of liability under 31 U.S.C. 
3802 without the consent of the Presiding Officer, except during the 
pendency of an appeal to the appropriate United States district court 
pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 3805 or during the pendency of an action to 
collect any penalties or assessments pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 3806.
    (c) The Attorney General has the exclusive authority to compromise 
or settle any penalty or assessment the determination of which is the 
subject of a pending petition for judicial review, or a pending action 
to recover such penalty or assessment.
    (d) The Reviewing Official may recommend settlement terms to the 
Attorney General, as appropriate.

[59 FR 51860, Oct. 13, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 962.27  Limitations.

    A hearing under this part concerning a claim or statement allegedly 
made, presented, or submitted in violation of 31 U.S.C. 3802 shall be 
commenced within six years after the date on which such claim or 
statement is made, presented, or submitted.

[[Page 306]]


<R03>
PART 963--RULES OF PRACTICE IN PROCEEDINGS RELATIVE TO VIOLATIONS UNDER 39 U.S.C. 3008--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
963.1  Authority for the rules.
963.2  Scope of the rules.
963.3  Petition; notice of hearing; answer; filing and copies of 
          documents; summary judgment.
963.4  Presiding Officer.
963.5  Appearances.
963.6  Computation of time.
963.7  Location of hearing.
963.8  Change of place of hearing.
963.9  Election as to hearing.
963.10  Continuances and extensions.
963.11  Default.
963.12  Settlement agreements.
963.13  Subpoenas and witness fees not authorized.
963.14  Discovery.
963.15  Evidence.
963.16  Transcript.
963.17  Proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law.
963.18  Initial decision.
963.19  Appeal.
963.20  Final agency decision.
963.21  Official record.
963.22  Public information.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 204, 401, 3008.

    Source: 52 FR 18912, May 20, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 963.1  Authority for the rules.

    These rules of practice are issued by the Judicial Officer of the 
U.S. Postal Service pursuant to authority delegated by the Postmaster 
General (39 CFR 226.2(e)(1)).

[52 FR 18912, May 20, 1987, as amended at 59 FR 10751, Mar. 8, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 963.2  Scope of the rules.

    These rules of practice are applicable to cases in which the 
Prohibitory Order Processing Center Manager (hereinafter, ``Manager'') 
has issued a complaint, pursuant to 39 U.S.C. 3008(d), alleging 
violation of a prohibitory order, and in which the alleged violator has 
petitioned for a hearing in the matter. As provided in 39 U.S.C. 
3008(h), subchapter II of chapter 5 (relating to administrative 
procedure) and chapter 7 (relating to judicial review) of part I of 
title 5, U.S.C., do not apply to the hearings authorized by 39 U.S.C. 
3008(d).

[52 FR 18912, May 20, 1987, as amended at 59 FR 10751, Mar. 8, 1994, 62 
FR 4459, Jan. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 963.3  Petition; notice of hearing; answer; filing and copies of documents; summary judgment.

    (a) Petition. Anyone against whom a complaint has been issued 
pursuant to 39 U.S.C 3008(d) may submit to the Manager a petition for 
hearing on the alleged violation. The petition must be in writing, 
signed by the petitioner or his or her attorney, and filed with the 
Manager on or before the 15th day after receipt of the complaint. The 
petition shall state the reasons why the petitioner believes the 
complaint to be erroneous. No petition received after the 15th day will 
be considered to have been filed on time, unless it was duly sent to the 
Manager via certified mail, deposited in the U.S. mail on or before the 
15th day. The Manager will forward each timely petition to the Recorder, 
Judicial Officer Department, U.S. Postal Service, Washington, DC 20260-
6100.
    (b) Notice of hearing. Upon receiving a petition, the Recorder shall 
schedule a hearing for a date not later than 30 days after the date of 
receipt, issue and send a notice of hearing to the parties, and send a 
copy of the petition to the General Counsel of the U.S. Postal Service.
    (c) Answer. The General Counsel shall file with the Recorder an 
answer to the petition within 15 days after the date of receiving a copy 
thereof. A certified copy of the material documents from the Manager's 
case file (i.e., of the PS Forms 1500, Application for Listing and/or 
Prohibitory Order, 2152, Prohibitory Order, and 2153, Complaint, 
underlying mail pieces, and pertinent return receipts) shall be appended 
to the answer.
    (d) Filing and copies of documents. With the exception of the 
initial petition, all documents shall be filed with the Recorder in 
triplicate at the address set forth above. The Recorder shall promptly 
provide copies to the other party to the proceeding and to the presiding 
officer.

[[Page 307]]

    (e) Summary Judgment. Upon motion of either the General Counsel or 
the petitioner, or on his or her own initiative, the presiding officer 
may find that the petition and answer present no genuine and material 
issues of fact requiring an evidentiary hearing, and thereupon may 
render an initial decision upholding or dismissing the complaint. The 
initial decision shall become the final agency decision if a timely 
appeal is not taken.

[52 FR 18912, May 20, 1987; 52 FR 20599, June 2, 1987, as amended at 59 
FR 10752, Mar. 8, 1994; 62 FR 4459, Jan. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 963.4  Presiding Officer.

    (a) The presiding officer shall be an Administrative Law Judge or an 
Administrative Judge qualified in accordance with law. The Judicial 
Officer assigns cases under this part. Judicial Officer includes 
Associate Judicial Officer upon delegation thereto. The Judicial Officer 
may, on his or her own initiative or for good cause found, preside at 
the reception of evidence.
    (b) The presiding officer has authority to:
    (1) Take such action as may be necessary properly to preside over 
the proceeding and render decision therein;
    (2) Render an initial decision, if the presiding officer is not the 
Judicial Officer, which becomes the final agency decision unless a 
timely appeal is taken; the Judicial Officer may issue a tentative or a 
final decision.

[52 FR 18912, May 20, 1987, as amended at 62 FR 4459, Jan. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 963.5  Appearances.

    (a) Petitioner. A petitioner may appear and be heard in person or by 
attorney. An attorney may practice before the Postal Service in 
accordance with applicable rules issued by the Judicial Officer (see 
Part 951 of this chapter). When a petitioner is represented by an 
attorney, all pleadings and other papers to be served on petitioner 
after entry of the attorney's appearance shall be mailed to the 
attorney. A petitioner must promptly file notice of any change of 
attorney.
    (b) Postal Service. The Postal Service will be represented by its 
General Counsel or any attorney designated by the General Counsel.


<R05>
Sec. 963.6  Computation of time.

    A designated period of time under these rules means calendar days, 
excludes the day the period begins, and includes the last day of the 
period unless the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in 
which case the period runs until the close of business on the next 
business day.


<R05>
Sec. 963.7  Location of hearing.

    Hearings are held at the headquarters of the Postal Service, 
Washington, DC 20260, or other locations designated by the presiding 
officer.


<R05>
Sec. 963.8  Change of place of hearing.

    Not later than the date fixed for the filing of the answer, a party 
may file a request that a hearing be held to receive evidence in his or 
her behalf at a place other than that designated for hearing in the 
notice. The party shall support his or her request with a statement 
outlining:
    (a) The evidence to be offered in such place;
    (b) The names and addresses of the witnesses who will testify;
    (c) The reasons why such evidence cannot be produced at Washington, 
DC.
The presiding officer shall consider the convenience and necessity of 
the parties and the relevance of the evidence to be offered.

[52 FR 18912, May 20, 1987, as amended at 62 FR 4459, Jan. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 963.9  Election as to hearing.

    If both parties elect, an oral hearing may be waived and the matter 
submitted for decision on the basis of the petition and answer, and of 
any documentary evidence or briefs requested by the presiding officer. 
The written election to waive oral hearing must be received by the 
Recorder no later than 10 days prior to the scheduled hearing date.


<R05>
Sec. 963.10  Continuances and extensions.

    Continuances and extensions will be granted by the presiding officer 
for good cause shown.

[[Page 308]]


<R05>
Sec. 963.11  Default.

    If a petitioner, without notice or cause satisfactory to the 
presiding officer, fails to appear at the hearing or comply with any of 
the provisions of these rules or an order issued by the presiding 
officer, the petitioner may be deemed to have abandoned his or her 
petition and to have acquiesced in the allegations of the complaint. The 
presiding officer thereupon may find the petitioner to be in default and 
refer the matter to the Judicial Officer for dismissal of the petition.

[52 FR 18912, May 20, 1987, as amended at 62 FR 4459, Jan. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 963.12  Settlement agreements.

    These rules do not preclude the disposition of any matter by 
agreement between the parties at any stage of the proceeding.


<R05>
Sec. 963.13  Subpoenas and witness fees not authorized.

    The Postal Service is not authorized to issue subpoenas requiring 
the attendance or testimony of witnesses, nor to pay fees and expenses 
for a petitioner's witnesses or for depositions requested by a 
petitioner.


<R05>
Sec. 963.14  Discovery.

    Discovery is to be conducted on a voluntary basis to the extent 
possible. The presiding officer may, upon application of either party, 
order such discovery as he or she deems reasonable and necessary. 
Discovery may include one or more of the following: production of 
documents, requests for admissions, interrogatories, depositions, and 
witness lists. The presiding officer will establish the terms upon which 
requested discovery will be allowed.

[52 FR 18912, May 20, 1987, as amended at 62 FR 4459, Jan. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 963.15  Evidence.

    (a) In general, admissibility will hinge on relevancy and 
materiality. However, relevant evidence may be excluded if its probative 
value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, or 
by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless 
presentation of cumulative evidence.
    (b) Testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation and witnesses 
are subject to cross-examination.
    (c) Agreed statements of fact are encouraged and may be received in 
evidence.


<R05>
Sec. 963.16  Transcript.

    Testimony and argument at hearings shall be reported verbatim, 
unless the presiding officer otherwise orders. Transcripts or copies of 
the proceedings are supplied to the parties at such rate as may be fixed 
by contract between the reporter and Postal Service. Any party desiring 
a copy of the transcript shall order it from the contract reporter in a 
timely manner to avoid delay in filing briefs.


<R05>
Sec. 963.17  Proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law.

    (a) Each party who participates in the hearing may, unless the 
presiding officer orders otherwise, submit proposed findings of fact, 
conclusions of law, orders, and supporting reasons, either in writing or 
orally at the discretion of the presiding officer. Unless given orally, 
the date set for filing of proposed findings of fact, conclusions of 
law, orders, and supporting reasons shall be within 15 days after the 
delivery of the official transcript to the Recorder, who shall notify 
both parties of the date of its receipt. The filing date for proposed 
findings of fact, conclusions of law, orders, and supporting reasons 
shall be the same for both parties. If not submitted by such date, 
unless extension of time for the filing thereof is granted, they will 
not be included in the record or given consideration.
    (b) Except when presented orally before the close of the hearing, 
proposed findings of fact shall be set forth in serially numbered 
paragraphs and shall state with particularity all evidentiary facts in 
the record with appropriate citations to the transcript or exhibits 
supporting the proposed findings. Each proposed conclusion shall be 
stated separately.

[52 FR 18912, May 20, 1987; 52 FR 20599, June 2, 1987]

[[Page 309]]


<R05>
Sec. 963.18  Initial decision.

    Unless given orally at the conclusion of the hearing, the presiding 
officer shall render an initial decision as expeditiously as practicable 
following the conclusion of the hearing and the receipt of the proposed 
findings and conclusions, if any. The initial decision becomes the final 
agency decision if a timely appeal is not taken.


<R05>
Sec. 963.19  Appeal.

    Either party may file exceptions in a brief on appeal to the 
Judicial Officer within 15 days after receipt of the initial or 
tentative decision unless additional time is granted. A reply brief may 
be filed within 15 days after the receipt of the appeal brief by the 
opposing party. The Judicial Officer has all powers of a presiding 
officer and is authorized to decide all issues de novo.


<R05>
Sec. 963.20  Final agency decision.

    The Judicial Officer, or by delegation the Associate Judicial 
Officer, renders the final agency decision which will be served upon the 
parties. If the decision is that the Postal Service's prohibitory order 
was violated, the Recorder shall provide a certified copy of the record 
to the General Counsel for use in seeking court enforcement of the 
order.


<R05>
Sec. 963.21  Official record.

    The transcript of testimony together with all pleadings, orders, 
exhibits, briefs, and other documents filed in the proceeding constitute 
the official record of the proceeding.


<R05>
Sec. 963.22  Public information.

    The Law Librarian of the Postal Service maintains for public 
inspection in the Law Library copies of all initital, tentative, and 
final agency decisions and orders. The Recorder maintains the complete 
official record of every proceeding.


<R03>
PART 964--RULES OF PRACTICE GOVERNING DISPOSITION OF MAIL WITHHELD FROM DELIVERY PURSUANT TO 39 U.S.C. 3003, 3004--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
964.1  Authority for rules.
964.2  Scope of rules.
964.3  Customer petitions; notice of hearing; answer; summary judgment.
964.4  Hearings.
964.5  Election as to hearing.
964.6  Default.
964.7  Presiding officers.
964.8  Subpoenas and witness fees not authorized.
964.9  Discovery; interrogatories; admission of facts; production; and 
          inspection of documents.
964.10  Evidence.
964.11  Transcript.
964.12  Computation of time.
964.13  Continuances and extensions.
964.14  Proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law.
964.15  Decisions.
964.16  Appeal.
964.17  Final agency decision.
964.18  Compromise and informal disposition.
964.19  Orders.
964.20  Modification or revocation of orders.
964.21  Official record.
964.22  Public information.
964.23  Ex Parte communications.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 204, 401, 3003, 3004.
    Source: 52 FR 36763, Oct. 1, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 964.1  Authority for rules.

    These rules of practice are issued by the Judicial Officer of the 
United Postal Service pursuant to authority delegated by the Postmaster 
General (39 CFR 224.1(c)(4)).


<R05>
Sec. 964.2  Scope of rules.

    The rules in this part provide for administrative review of cases in 
which the Chief Postal Inspector or his delegate, acting pursuant to 39 
U.S.C. 3003(a), has withheld from delivery mail which he believes is 
involved in a scheme described in section 3003(a), and cases in which 
the Chief Postal Service Inspector or his delegate, acting pursuant to 
39 U.S.C. 3004, determines that letters or parcels sent in the mail are 
addressed to places not the residence or regular business address of the 
person for whom they are intended to enable the person to escape 
identification.


<R05>
Sec. 964.3  Customer petitions; notice of hearing; answer; summary judgment.

    (a) Petition. Any addressee who receives notice from the Chief 
Postal Inspector or his delegate that his mail has been withheld 
pursuant to 39 U.S.C.

[[Page 310]]

3003(a) or 3004 may oppose such action by filing with the Judicial 
Officer a written Petition stating the reasons for his or her 
opposition. The Petition, signed by the Petitioner or his attorney, 
shall be filed by sending the Petition via certified mail to the 
Recorder, Judicial Officer Department, U.S. Postal Service, Washington, 
DC 20260-6100. The Petition must be postmarked within 14 days of the 
date upon which the Petitioner received the notice. The failure of an 
addressee who has received notice of withheld mail to file a Petition 
opposing such action with the Judicial Officer shall constitute a waiver 
of hearing and further procedural steps by the addressee. The General 
Counsel of the Postal Service shall thereupon file the matter with the 
Judicial Officer for issuance of a final order pursuant to Sec. 964.19. 
Such referral shall contain a statement of the basis for the detention, 
evidence that the notice of the detention and the addressee's right to 
petition for review under this part were served on the addressee in 
person or by mailing a copy to the address to which the detained mail is 
directed, the date of such service, and a copy of the proposed order 
sought by the General Counsel.
    (b) Notice of hearing. On receipt of the Petition, the Recorder 
shall schedule a hearing on a date not later than 28 days after the date 
of receipt. A Notice of Hearing shall be sent to the Petitioner. A copy 
of the Notice of Hearing and the Petition shall be sent to the General 
Counsel of the U.S. Postal Service.
    (c) Answer. The General Counsel of the Postal Service shall file an 
Answer to the Petition within 10 days of receipt of the Petition from 
the Recorder.
    (d) Summary judgment. Upon motion of either the General Counsel or 
the Petitioner, or upon his own initiative, the presiding officer may 
find that the Petition and Answer present no material issues of fact 
requiring an evidentiary hearing and thereupon may render an initial 
decision granting or dismissing the Petition. The initial decision shall 
become the final agency decision if a timely appeal is not taken 
pursuant to Sec. 964.16 of this part.

[52 FR 36763, Oct. 1, 1987, as amended at 53 FR 4849, Feb. 18, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 964.4  Hearings.

    Hearings are held at the Headquarters of the U.S. Postal Service, 
Washington, DC, or such other location as may be designated by the 
presiding officer. Not later than 10 days prior to the date fixed for 
the hearing, a party may file a request that a hearing be held to 
receive evidence in his behalf at a place other than that designated for 
hearing in the notice. He shall support his request with a statement 
outlining:
    (a) The evidence to be offered in such place;
    (b) The names and addresses of the witnesses who will testify; and
    (c) The reasons why such evidence cannot be produced at Washington, 
DC.
    The presiding officer shall give consideration to the convenience 
and necessity of the parties and the relevance of the evidence to be 
offered


<R05>
Sec. 964.5  Election as to hearing.

    If both parties elect, they may waive an oral hearing and submit the 
matter for decision on the basis of the Petition and Answer, subject to 
the authority of the presiding officer to require the parties to furnish 
such further evidence or such briefs as necessary. The request to waive 
oral hearing should be filed not later than 10 days prior to the date 
set for hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 964.6  Default.

    If a Petitioner fails to appear at the hearing without notice or 
without adequate cause the presiding officer may issue an order 
dismissing the Petition and refer the matter to the Judicial Officer for 
issuance of the order provided for under Sec. 964.19. If a Petitioner 
fails to appear at the hearing without notice or without adequate cause 
the presiding officer may issue an order dismissing the Petition. An 
order of dismissal issued under this section may be appealed to the 
Judicial Officer within 10 days from the date of the order.

[52 FR 36763, Oct. 1, 1987, as amended at 53 FR 4849, Feb. 18, 1988]

[[Page 311]]


<R05>
Sec. 964.7  Presiding officers.

    (a) The presiding officer shall be an Administrative Law Judge 
qualified in accordance with law. The Judicial Officer shall assign 
cases upon rotation as far as practicable. The Judicial Officer may on 
his own initiative or for good cause shown, preside at the reception of 
evidence.
    (b) The presiding officer has authority to:
    (1) Administer oaths and affirmations;
    (2) Examine witnesses;
    (3) Rule upon offers of proof, admissibility of evidence and matters 
of procedure;
    (4) Order any pleadings amended upon motion of a party at any time 
prior to the close of the hearing;
    (5) Maintain discipline and decorum and exclude from the hearing any 
person acting in an indecorous manner;
    (6) Require the filing of briefs or memoranda of law on any matter 
upon which he is required to rule;
    (7) Order prehearing conferences for the purpose of the settlement 
or simplification of issues by the parties or for any other purpose he 
believes will facilitate the processing of the proceeding;
    (8) Order the proceeding reopened at any time prior to his decision 
for the receipt of additional evidence;
    (9) Render an initial decision, which becomes the final agency 
decision unless a timely appeal is taken: The Judicial Officer may issue 
a tentative or a final decision;
    (10) Rule upon applications and requests filed under Sec. 964.9 of 
this part.


<R05>
Sec. 964.8  Subpoenas and witness fees not authorized.

    The Postal Service is not authorized to issue subpoenas requiring 
the attendance or testimony of witnesses, nor to pay fees and expenses 
for a Petitioner's witnesses or for depositions requested by a 
Petitioner.


<R05>
Sec. 964.9  Discovery; interrogatories; admission of facts; production and inspection of documents.

    (a) General policy and protective orders. The parties are encouraged 
to engage in voluntary discovery procedures. In connection with any 
discovery procedure permitted under this part, the presiding officer may 
issue any order which justice requires to protect a party or person from 
annoyance, embarrassment, oppression, or undue burden or expense. Such 
orders may include limitations on the scope, method, time and place for 
discovery, and provisions for protecting confidential information or 
documents from unwarranted public disclosure. Each party shall bear its 
own expenses relating to discovery.
    (b) Depositions. (1) After the issuance of a notice of hearing 
described in Sec. 964.3 of this part, the parties may mutually agree to, 
or the presiding officer may, upon application of either party and for 
good cause shown, order the taking of testimony of any person by 
deposition upon oral examination or written interrogatories before any 
officer authorized to administer oaths at the place of examination, for 
use as evidence or for purposes of discovery. The application for order 
shall specify whether the purpose of the deposition is discovery or for 
use as evidence, or both.
    (2) The time, place, and manner of taking depositions shall be as 
mutually agreed by the parties, or failing such agreement, governed by 
order of the presiding officer.
    (3) No testimony taken by depositions shall be considered as part of 
the evidence in the hearing unless and until such testimony is offered 
and received in evidence at such hearing. Depositions will not 
ordinarily be received in evidence if the deponent is present and can 
testify personally at the hearing. In such instances, however, the 
deposition may be used to contradict or impeach the testimony of the 
witness given at the hearing. In cases submitted on the record, the 
presiding officer may, in his discretion, receive depositions as 
evidence in supplementation of the record.
    (c) Interrogatories to parties. Not later than 5 days after the 
filing of the Answer described in Sec. 964.3, a party may serve on the 
other party written interrogatories to be answered separately in

[[Page 312]]

writing, signed under oath and returned within 10 days. Upon timely 
objection by the party, the presiding officer will determine the extent 
to which the interrogatories will be permitted.
    (d) Admission of facts. Not later than 5 days after the filing of 
the Answer described in Sec. 964.3, a party may serve upon the other 
party a request for the admission of specified facts. Within 10 days 
after receipt of the request for admissions, the party served shall 
admit or answer each specified fact or file objections thereto. Any 
factual propositions set out in the request to which a party fails to 
respond shall be deemed admitted.
    (e) Production and inspection of documents. Upon motion of any party 
showing good cause therefor, and upon notice, the presiding officer may 
order the other party to produce and permit the inspection and copying 
or photographing of any designated documents and or objects, provided 
that such documents and objects are not privileged, their relevance to 
the cause or causes in issue is explained, and they are reasonably 
calculated to lead to the discovery of admissible evidence. If the 
parties cannot themselves agree thereon, the presiding officer shall 
specify the terms and conditions for making the inspection and taking 
the copies and photographs.


<R05>
Sec. 964.10  Evidence.

    (a) In general, admissibility will hinge on relevancy and 
materiality. However, relevant evidence may be excluded if its probative 
value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, or 
by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless 
presentation of cumulative evidence.
    (b) Testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation and witnesses 
shall be subject to cross-examination.
    (c) Agreed statements of fact are encouraged and may be received in 
evidence.


<R05>
Sec. 964.11  Transcript.

    Testimony and argument at hearings shall be reported verbatim, 
unless the presiding officer orders otherwise. Transcripts or copies of 
the proceedings are supplied to the parties at such rate as may be fixed 
by contract between the reporter and Postal Service. Any party desiring 
a copy of the transcript shall order it from the contract reporter in a 
timely manner to avoid delay in filing briefs.


<R05>
Sec. 964.12  Computation of time.

    A designated period of time under these rules means calendar days, 
excludes the day the period begins, and includes the last day of the 
period unless the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in 
which case the period runs until the close of business on the next 
business day.


<R05>
Sec. 964.13  Continuances and extensions.

    Continuances and extensions will be granted by the presiding officer 
for good cause shown.


<R05>
Sec. 964.14  Proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law.

    (a) Each party to a proceeding, except one who fails to answer the 
Petition or, having answered, either fails to appear at the hearing or 
indicates in the answer that he does not desire to appear, may, unless 
at the discretion of the presiding officer such is not appropriate, 
submit proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, orders and 
supporting reasons either in oral or written form in the discretion of 
the presiding officer. The presiding officer may also require parties to 
submit proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, orders, and 
supporting reasons. Unless given orally, the date set for filing of 
proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, orders and supporting 
reasons shall be within 15 days after the delivery of the official 
transcript to the Recorder who shall notify both parties of the date of 
its receipt. The filing date for proposed findings of fact, conclusions 
of law, orders and supporting reasons shall be the same for both 
parties. If not submitted by such date, unless extension of time for the 
filing thereof is granted, they will not be included in the record or 
given consideration.
    (b) Except when presented orally before the close of the hearing, 
proposed findings of fact shall be set forth in serially numbered 
paragraphs and shall state with particularity all evidentiary

[[Page 313]]

facts in the record with appropriate citations to the transcript or 
exhibits supporting the proposed finding. Each proposed conclusion shall 
be separately stated.


<R05>
Sec. 964.15  Decisions.

    (a) Initial decision by Administrative Law Judge. A written initial 
decision shall be rendered by an Administrative Law Judge with all due 
speed. The initial decision shall include findings and conclusions with 
the reasons therefor upon all the material issues of fact or law 
presented in the record, and the appropriate orders or denial thereof. 
The initial decision shall become the final agency decision unless an 
appeal is taken in accordance with Sec. 964.16.
    (b) Tentative or final decision by the Judicial Officer.When the 
Judicial Officer presides at the hearing he shall issue a final or a 
tentative decision. Such decision shall include findings and conclusions 
with the reasons therefor upon all the material issues of fact or law 
presented in the record, and the appropriate orders or denial thereof. 
The tentative decision shall become the final agency decision unless 
exceptions are filed in accordance with Sec. 964.16.


<R05>
Sec. 964.16  Appeal.

    (a) Either party may file exceptions in a brief on appeal to the 
Judicial Officer within 15 days after receipt of the initial or 
tentative decision unless additional time is granted. A reply brief may 
be filed within 15 days after receipt of the appeal brief by the 
opposing party. The Judicial Officer has all powers of a presiding 
officer and is authorized to decide all issues de novo.
    (b) Briefs upon appeal or in support of exceptions to a tentative 
decision by the Judicial Officer and replies thereto shall be filed in 
triplicate with the Recorder and contain the following matter in the 
order indicated:
    (1) A subject index of the matters presented, with page references; 
a table of cases alphabetically arranged; a list of statutes and texts 
cited with page references.
    (2) A concise abstract or statement of the case in briefs on appeal 
or in support of exceptions.
    (3) Numbered exceptions to specific findings and conclusions of 
fact, conclusions of law, or recommended orders of the presiding officer 
in briefs on appeal or in support of exceptions.
    (4) A concise argument clearly setting forth points of fact and of 
law relied upon in support of or in opposition to each exception taken, 
together with specific references to the parts of the record and the 
legal or other authorities relied upon.


<R05>
Sec. 964.17  Final agency decision.

    The Judicial Officer renders the final agency decision and order 
which will be served upon the parties and upon the postmaster at the 
office where the mail at issue is being held.

[52 FR 36763, Oct. 1, 1987, as amended at 53 FR 4849, Feb. 18, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 964.18  Compromise and informal disposition.

    Nothing in these rules precludes the compromise, settlement, and 
informal disposition of proceedings initiated under these rules at any 
time prior to the issuance of the final agency decision.


<R05>
Sec. 964.19  Orders.

    If an order is issued by the Judicial Officer which prohibits 
delivery of mail to a Petitioner it shall be incorporated in the record 
of the proceeding. The Recorder shall cause notice of the order to be 
published in the Postal Bulletin and cause the order to be transmitted 
to such postmasters and other officers and employees of the Postal 
Service as may be required to place the order into effect.

[52 FR 36763, Oct. 1, 1987, as amended at 53 FR 4849, Feb. 18, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 964.20  Modification or revocation of orders.

    A party against whom an order or orders have been issued may file an 
application for modification or revocation thereof. The Recorder shall 
transmit a copy of the application to the General Counsel, who shall 
file a written reply within 10 days after receipt or such other period 
as the Judicial Officer may fix. A copy of the reply shall be sent to 
the applicant by the Recorder.

[[Page 314]]

Thereafter an order granting or denying such application will be issued 
by the Judicial Officer.


<R05>
Sec. 964.21  Official record.

    The transcript of testimony together with all pleadings, orders, 
exhibits, briefs, and other documents filed in the proceeding constitute 
the official record of the proceeding.


<R05>
Sec. 964.22  Public information.

    The Law Librarian of the Postal Service maintains for public 
inspection in the Law Library copies of all initial, tentative, and 
final agency decisions and orders. The Recorder maintains the complete 
official record of every proceeding.


<R05>
Sec. 964.23  Ex parte communications.

    The provisions of 5 U.S.C. 551(14), 556(d), and 557(d) prohibiting 
ex parte communications are made applicable to proceedings under these 
rules of practice.


<R03>
PART 965--RULES OF PRACTICE IN PROCEEDINGS RELATIVE TO MAIL DISPUTES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
965.1  Authority for rules.
965.2  Scope of rules.
965.3  Notice to parties.
965.4  Presiding officers.
965.5  Submittals by parties.
965.6  Comments by parties.
965.7  Default.
965.8  Hearings.
965.9  Evidence.
965.10  Transcript.
965.11  Initial decision.
965.12  Appeal.
965.13  Compromise and informal disposition.
965.14  Public information.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 204, 401.

    Source: 52 FR 29012, Aug. 5, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 965.1  Authority for rules.

    These rules of practice are issued by the Judicial Officer of the 
U.S. Postal Service pursuant to authority delegated by the Postmaster 
General. (39 CFR 224.1(c)(4)).


<R05>
Sec. 965.2  Scope of rules.

    The rules in this part shall be applicable to mail dispute cases 
forwarded to the Judicial Officer Department by Regional Counsel 
pursuant to Domestic Mail Manual 153.72.


<R05>
Sec. 965.3  Notice to parties.

    Upon receipt of a mail dispute case from Regional Counsel, the 
Recorder, Judicial Officer Department, United States Postal Service, 475 
L'Enfant Plaza West, SW., Washington, DC 20260-6100, will send a notice 
of docketing and submittal due date to the parties together with a copy 
of these rules.


<R05>
Sec. 965.4  Presiding officers.

    (a) The presiding officer shall be an Administrative Law Judge or an 
Administrative Judge qualified in accordance with law. The Judicial 
Officer assigns cases under this part. Judicial Officer includes 
Associate Judicial Officer upon delegation thereto. The Judicial Officer 
may, on his own initiative or for good cause found, preside at the 
reception of evidence.
    (b) The presiding officer has authority to:
    (1) Take such action as may be necessary to preside properly over 
the proceeding and render decision therein;
    (2) Render an initial decision, if the presiding officer is not the 
Judicial Officer, which becomes the final agency decision unless a 
timely appeal is taken; the Judicial Officer may issue a tentative or a 
final decision.


<R05>
Sec. 965.5  Submittals by parties.

    Within 15 days after receipt of the Recorder's notice, each party 
shall file with the Recorder a sworn statement of the facts supporting 
its claim to receipt of the mail together with a copy of each document 
on which it relies in making such claim. All such submittals shall be in 
duplicate. Upon receipt of such evidence, the Recorder shall send a copy 
of each submittal to the opposing party.


<R05>
Sec. 965.6  Comments by parties.

    Within 10 days of receipt of the other party's evidence, each party 
may file with the Recorder a statement setting

[[Page 315]]

forth in detail its disagreements, if any, with its opponent's statement 
and documents. The Recorder will send to each party a copy of the other 
party's comments.


<R05>
Sec. 965.7  Default.

    A party who fails to file the submittal required by Sec. 965.5 may 
be held in default and the presiding officer may issue an initial 
decision that mail be delivered to the other party.


<R05>
Sec. 965.8  Hearings.

    (a) In the discretion of the presiding officer an oral hearing may 
be granted at the request of either, or both, parties or on the 
presiding officer's own initiative if there is a dispute as to a 
material issue of fact which can only be resolved by examination of 
witnesses.
    (b) Hearings are held at the headquarters of the U.S. Postal 
Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza West, SW., Washington, DC 20260-6100, or at 
such other place as may be designated by the presiding officer.


<R05>
Sec. 965.9  Evidence.

    (a) In general, admissibility will hinge on relevancy and 
materiality. However, relevant evidence may be excluded if its probative 
value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, or 
by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless 
presentation of cumulative evidence.
    (b) Testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation and witnesses 
are subject to cross-examination.
    (c) Agreed statements to fact are encouraged and may be received in 
evidence.


<R05>
Sec. 965.10  Transcript.

    Testimony and argument at hearings shall be reported verbatim, 
unless the presiding officer otherwise orders. Transcripts or copies of 
the proceedings are supplied to the parties at such rate as may be fixed 
by contract between the reporter and Postal Service.


<R05>
Sec. 965.11  Initial decision.

    The presiding officer shall render an initial decision in writing, 
based on the record, as expeditiously as possible, but to the extent 
practicable within 10 working days of closing of the record. The 
decision will be brief, containing summary findings of fact, conclusions 
of law, and reasons therefor. If there has been a hearing the presiding 
officer may in his discretion render an oral decision. A typed copy of 
such oral decision will subsequently be furnished to the parties to 
establish the date for commencement of time for requesting review of the 
initial decision.


<R05>
Sec. 965.12  Appeal.

    The initial or tentative decision will become final 10 days after 
its issuance and receipt by the parties unless the Judicial Officer, or 
by delegation the Associate Judicial Officer, in his sole discretion, 
grants review upon appeal of either party filed within that period, or 
on his own motion within that period. If an appeal is denied, the 
initial or tentative decision becomes the final agency decision on the 
issuance of such denial. The judicial Officer's decision on appeal is 
the final agency decision with no further agency review or appeal 
rights.


<R05>
Sec. 965.13  Compromise and informal disposition.

    Nothing in these rules precludes the compromise, settlement, and 
informal disposition of proceedings initiated under these rules at any 
time prior to the issuance of the final agency decision.


<R05>
Sec. 965.14  Public Information.

    The Law Librarian of the Postal Service maintains for public 
inspection in the Law Library copies of all initial, tenatative, and 
final agency decisions and orders. The Recorder maintains the complete 
official record of every proceeding.


<R03>
PART 966--RULES OF PRACTICE IN PROCEEDINGS RELATIVE TO ADMINISTRATIVE OFFSETS INITIATED BY THE POSTAL INSPECTION SERVICE--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
966.1  Authority for rules.
966.2  Scope of rules.
966.3  Definitions.
966.4  Petition for a hearing and supplement to petition.

[[Page 316]]

966.5  Effect of petition filing.
966.6  Filing, docketing and serving documents; computation of time; 
          representation of parties.
966.7  Answer to petition.
966.8  Hearing Official authority and responsibilities.
966.9  Opportunity for oral hearing.
966.10  Initial decision.
966.11  Appeal of initial or tentative decision to Judicial Officer.
966.12  Waiver of rights.
966.13  Ex parte communications.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 204, 401, 2601.
    Source: 54 FR 15754, Apr. 19, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 966.1  Authority for rules.

    These rules of practice are issued by the Judicial Officer pursuant 
to authority delegated by the Postmaster General.


<R05>
Sec. 966.2  Scope of rules.

    The rules in this part apply to any petition filed by a former 
postal employee:
    (a) To challenge the Postal Service's determination that he or she 
is liable for a debt based on a loss from the mails or from Postal 
Service revenues; and/or
    (b) To challenge the administrative offset schedule proposed by the 
Postal Service for collecting any such debt.


<R05>
Sec. 966.3  Definitions.

    (a) Administrative Offset refers to the withholding of money payable 
by the Postal Service or the United States to, or held by the Postal 
Service or the United States for, a former employee in order to satisfy 
a debt determined to be owed by the former employee to the Postal 
Service.
    (b) Chief Postal Inspector refers to the Chief Postal Inspector of 
the Inspection Service Department or his or her representative.
    (c) Debt refers to any amount determined by the Postal Service to be 
owed to the Postal Service by a former employee as a result of a loss 
from the mails or from Postal Service revenues.
    (d) Former Employee refers to an individual whose employment with 
the Postal Service has ceased. An employee is considered formally 
separated from the Postal Service rolls as of close of business on the 
effective date of his or her separation Postal Service Form 50.
    (e) Hearing Official refers to an Administrative Law Judge qualified 
to hear cases under the Administrative Procedure Act, an Administrative 
Judge appointed under the Contract Disputes Act of 1978, or any other 
qualified person licensed to practice law designated by the Judicial 
Officer to preside over a hearing conducted pursuant to these 
regulations.
    (f) Inspection Service refers to the Inspection Service Department 
of the Postal Service.
    (g) Judicial Officer refers to the Judicial Officer, Associate 
Judicial Officer, or Acting Judicial Officer of the Postal Service.
    (h) Reconsideration refers to the review of a debt conducted by the 
Inspection Service at the request of the former employee alleged to be 
responsible for such debt following the former employee's receipt of a 
written request for payment.
    (i) Recorder refers to the Recorder, Judicial Officer Department, 
United States Postal Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza, SW., Washington, DC 
20260-6100.


<R05>
Sec. 966.4  Petition for a hearing and supplement to petition.

    (a) A former employee, who is alleged to be responsible for a debt 
and who has previously requested and received reconsideration of the 
debt by the Inspection Service, may obtain review of:
    (1) The Inspection Service's final determination of the existence or 
amount of the debt, or
    (2) The administrative offset schedule proposed by the Inspection 
Service for collecting any such debt, by mailing, within thirty (30) 
calendar days of receiving written notice of the Inspection Service's 
determination upon reconsideration, a written, signed petition, 
requesting a written or oral hearing, to the Recorder, Judicial Officer 
Department, United States Postal Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza, SW., 
Washington, DC 20260-6100.
A former employee must have previously requested the Inspection Service 
to reconsider the Postal Service's debt determination to be entitled to 
a hearing under this part.

[[Page 317]]

    (b) The petition must include the following:
    (1) The words, ``Petition for Review Under 39 CFR part 966'';
    (2) The former employee's name and social security number;
    (3) The former employee's home address and telephone number, and any 
other address and telephone number at which the former employee may be 
contacted about these proceedings;
    (4) A statement of the date the former employee received the 
Inspection Service's final notice of debt determination and a copy of 
the notice;
    (5) A statement indicating whether the former employee elects an 
oral hearing or a decision based solely on written submissions;
    (6) If the former employee requests an oral hearing, a statement 
describing the evidence he or she will produce which makes an oral 
hearing necessary, including a list of witnesses, with their addresses, 
whom the former employee expects to call; a summary of the testimony the 
witnesses are expected to present; the city requested for the hearing 
site, with justification for holding the hearing in that city; and at 
least three proposed dates for the hearing at least forty-five (45) days 
after the filing of the petition for review;
    (7) A statement of the grounds upon which the former employee 
objects to the Postal Service's determination of the debt or to the 
administrative offset schedule proposed by the Postal Service for 
collecting any such debt. This statement should identify with reasonable 
specificity and brevity the facts, evidence, and legal arguments, if 
any, which support the former employee's position; and
    (8) Copies of all records in the former employee's possession which 
relate to the debt and which the former employee may enter into the 
record of the hearing.
    (c) The former employee may, if necessary, file with the Recorder 
additional information as a supplement to the petition at any time prior 
to the filing of the answer to the petition under Sec. 966.7, or at such 
later time as permitted by the Hearing Official upon a showing of good 
cause.


<R05>
Sec. 966.5  Effect of petition filing.

    Upon receipt and docketing of the former employee's petition, the 
Recorder will notify the Chief Postal Inspector that the petition has 
been filed and that a timely filed petition stays further collection 
action.


<R05>
Sec. 966.6  Filing, docketing and serving documents; computation of time; representation of parties.

    (a) Filing. All documents required under this part must be filed by 
the former employee or the Chief Postal Inspector in triplicate with the 
Recorder. (Normal Recorder office business hours are between 8:15 a.m. 
and 4:45 p.m., eastern standard or daylight saving time as appropriate 
during the year.) The Recorder will transmit a copy of each document 
filed to the other party, and the original to the Hearing Official.
    (b) Docketing. The Recorder will maintain a docket record of 
proceedings under this part and will assign each petition a docket 
number. After notification of the docket number, the former employee and 
Chief Postal Inspector should refer to it on any further filings 
regarding the petition.
    (c) Time computation. A filing period under the rules in this part 
excludes the day the period begins, and includes the last day of the 
period unless the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in 
which event the period runs until the close of business on the next 
business day.
    (d) Representation of parties. After the filing of the petition, 
further document transmittals for, or communications with, the Postal 
Service shall be through its representative, the Chief Postal Inspector. 
If a former employee is represented by an attorney authorized to 
practice law in any of the United States or the District of Columbia or 
a territory of the United States, further transmissions of documents and 
other communications with the former employee shall be made through his 
or her attorney rather than directly with the former employee.


<R05>
Sec. 966.7  Answer to petition.

    Within thirty (30) days from notice of the petition, the Chief 
Postal Inspector shall file an answer to the petition, and

[[Page 318]]

attach all available relevant records and documents in support of the 
Postal Service's claim, or the administrative offset schedule proposed 
by the Postal Service for collecting any such claim; a list of witnesses 
the Postal Service intends to call if an oral hearing is requested and 
the request is granted; a synopsis of the testimony of each witness; a 
statement of concurrence or objection to the proposed location and dates 
for the oral hearing; and a statement of the basis for the determination 
of debt or offset schedule if not contained in the relevant records or 
documents. If the former employee files a supplement to the petition, 
the Chief Postal Inspector may file any supplemental answer and records 
to support the position of the Postal Service within twenty (20) 
calendar days from the date of receipt of the supplement filed with the 
Recorder.


<R05>
Sec. 966.8  Hearing Official authority and responsibilities.

    In conducting a hearing under this part, the Hearing Official's 
authority includes, but is not limited to, the following:
    (a) Ruling on all offers, motions, or requests by the parties;
    (b) Issuing any notices, orders, or memoranda to the parties 
concerning the hearing procedures;
    (c) Conducting telephone conferences with the parties to expedite 
the proceedings (a memorandum of a telephone conference will be 
transmitted to both parties);
    (d) Determining if an oral hearing is necessary and setting the 
place, date, and time for such hearing;
    (e) Administering oaths or affirmations to witnesses;
    (f) Conducting the hearing in a manner to maintain discipline and 
decorum while assuring that relevant, reliable and probative evidence is 
elicited on the issues in dispute, and that irrelevant, immaterial or 
repetitious evidence is excluded;
    (g) Establishing the record in the case;
    (h) Issuing an initial decision or one on remand; and
    (i) Granting, at the request of either party, reasonable time 
extensions.


<R05>
Sec. 966.9  Opportunity for oral hearing.

    An oral hearing generally will be held only in those cases which, in 
the opinion of the Hearing Official, cannot be resolved by a review of 
the documentary evidence, such as when the existence, or amount, of a 
debt turns on issues of credibility or veracity. When the Hearing 
Official determines that an oral hearing is not necessary, the decision 
shall be based solely on written submissions.


<R05>
Sec. 966.10  Initial decision.

    (a) After the receipt of written submissions or after the conclusion 
of the hearing and the receipt of any post-hearing briefs, the Hearing 
Official shall issue a written initial decision, including findings of 
fact and conclusions of law, which the Hearing Official relied upon in 
determining whether the former employee is indebted to the Postal 
Service, or in upholding or revising the administrative offset schedule 
proposed by the Postal Service for collecting a former employee's debt. 
When the Judicial Officer presides at a hearing he or she shall issue a 
final or a tentative decision. The initial or tentative decision shall 
become the final agency decision unless appeal is taken pursuant to 
Sec. 966.11.
    (b) The Hearing Official shall promptly send to each party a copy of 
the initial or tentative decision, and a statement describing the right 
of appeal to the Judicial Officer in accordance with Sec. 966.11.
    (c) Unless the former employee or Chief Postal Inspector appeals the 
Hearing Official's initial or tentative decision within thirty (30) days 
from receipt of the decision, such decision shall become the final 
agency decision, and an order to that effect will be issued by the 
Judicial Officer.


<R05>
Sec. 966.11  Appeal of initial or tentative decision to Judicial Officer.

    (a) Notice of appeal and supporting brief. (1) A former employee or 
the Chief Postal Inspector may appeal an adverse decision by a Hearing 
Official by filing a Notice of Appeal with the Recorder within thirty 
(30) days after receipt of the decision. The Judicial Officer may extend 
the filing period upon

[[Page 319]]

written application of either party for good cause shown.
    (2) The Notice of Appeal must be accompanied by a written brief 
specifying exceptions to findings of fact and conclusions of law, and 
any reasons for such exceptions, to the Hearing Official's decision.
    (3) No later than thirty (30) days after receiving the Notice of 
Appeal and accompanying brief, the opposing party may file a response 
with the Recorder.
    (b) Form of review. (1) Review by the Judicial Officer will be based 
on the entire record and written submissions.
    (2) Objections or new issues not raised in the hearing will not be 
considered unless the interested party demonstrates that the failure to 
raise the objection or issue before the Hearing Official was caused by 
extraordinary circumstances.
    (3) The Judicial Officer shall have all powers of a Hearing Official 
and on appeal may order the hearing reopened for the presentation of 
additional evidence or, in his or her discretion, remand the case to the 
Hearing Official for further action.
    (c) Decision of Judicial Officer. The Judicial Officer shall affirm, 
reverse, or modify any decision appealed under this section and shall 
promptly serve each party to the appeal with a copy of this or her 
decision and a statement that such decision constitutes the final agency 
decision.


<R05>
Sec. 966.12  Waiver of rights.

    The Hearing Official may determine the former employee has waived 
his or her right to a hearing and administrative offset may be initiated 
if the former employee:
    (a) Files a petition for hearing after the end of the prescribed 
thirty (30) day period, and fails to demonstrate to the satisfaction of 
the Hearing Official good cause for the delay;
    (b) Has received notice to appear at an oral hearing but fails to do 
so without showing circumstances beyond the former employee's control;
    (c) Fails to file required submissions or to comply with orders of 
the Hearing Official; or
    (d) Files a withdrawal of his or her petition for a hearing with the 
Recorder.


<R05>
Sec. 966.13  Ex parte communications.

    Ex parte communications between a Hearing Official or his or her 
staff and a party shall not be made. This prohibition does not apply to 
procedural matters. A memorandum of any such procedural communication 
will be transmitted to both parties.


[[Page 321]]


<R02>
                   CHAPTER III--POSTAL RATE COMMISSION


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

                         SUBCHAPTER A--PERSONNEL
Part                                                                Page
3000            Standards of conduct........................         322
3001            Rules of practice and procedure.............         324
3002            Organization................................         447
3003            Privacy Act rules...........................         450

[[Page 322]]


<R03>
                         SUBCHAPTER A--PERSONNEL

<R05>


<R03>
PART 3000--STANDARDS OF CONDUCT--Table of Contents

<R05>


                      Subpart A--General Provisions

Sec.
3000.735-101 Cross-reference to employee ethical conduct standards and 
          financial disclosure regulations.
3000.735-102 Counseling and advisory services.
3000.735-103 Financial interests.
3000.735-104 Outside employment.

                   Subpart B--Ex Parte Communications

3000.735-501  Ex parte communications prohibited.
3000.735-502  Public record of ex parte communications.

Appendix A to Part 3000--Code of Ethics for Government Service

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 3603; E.O. 12674, 54 FR 15159, 3 CFR, 1989 
Comp., p. 215, as modified by E.O. 12731, 55 FR 42547, 3 CFR, 1990 
Comp., p. 306; 5 CFR parts 2634 and 2635.

    Source: 36 FR 5412, Mar. 23, 1971, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                      Subpart A--General Provisions

    Source: 58 FR 42874, Aug. 12, 1993, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 3000.735-101  Cross-reference to employee ethical conduct standards and financial disclosure regulations.

    Employees of the Postal Rate Commission (Commission) are subject and 
should refer to the executive branch-wide Standards of Ethical Conduct 
at 5 CFR part 2635, the Commission regulation at 5 CFR part 5601 which 
supplements the executive branch-wide standards, and the executive 
branch-wide financial disclosure regulation at 5 CFR part 2634.


<R05>
Sec. 3000.735-102  Counseling and advisory services.

    (a) The Chairman of the Commission shall appoint the Designated 
Agency Ethics Official (DAEO) for the Commission. The DAEO may appoint 
deputy ethics officials to assist in carrying out the responsibilities 
of the designated agency ethics official. The DAEO shall advise 
employees as to the applicability and interpretation of laws and 
regulations involving the standards of conduct for employees of the 
Commission. The DAEO shall furnish advice to employees for the purpose 
of aiding employees in avoiding conflicts of interest, situations, 
actions or conduct that may reflect adversely on the Commission.
    (b) The DAEO shall develop and execute an ethics agency training 
plan providing for an initial orientation for new employees and annual 
ethics training.


<R05>
Sec. 3000.735-103  Financial interests.

    (a) An employee shall not, either directly or indirectly, have any 
financial interest (whether by ownership of any stock, bond, security, 
or otherwise) in any entity or person whose interests may be 
significantly affected by rates of postage, fees for postal services, 
the classification of mail, or the operation of the Postal Service. This 
paragraph does not proscribe interests in an entity or person whose use 
of the mail is merely an incidental or a minor factor in the general 
conduct of its business.
    (b) The Chairman from time to time determines the appropriate 
maximum limit for an interest in stocks, bonds or other forms of 
securities in any one entity or person. If an employee has an interest 
above the maximum limit, the DAEO will so advise the Chairman. If the 
Chairman finds the interest so substantial as to be deemed likely to 
affect the integrity of the service which the Government may expect of 
him or her, the Chairman may direct, in writing, the employee to divest 
a portion of the financial interest to bring the investment below the 
maximum limit.


<R05>
Sec. 3000.735-104  Outside employment.

    (a) An employee shall not engage in outside employment or 
professional practice, either on a paid or unpaid basis, with or for a 
company or other person whose interests are significantly affected by 
rates of postage, fees for postal services, the classification of

[[Page 323]]

mail or the operations of Postal Service.
    (b) An employee who wishes to engage in outside employment either on 
a paid or unpaid basis shall obtain the prior written approval of the 
DAEO. A request for such approval shall be submitted in writing with 
sufficient description of the employment to enable the DAEO to make an 
informed determination that the outside employment is not prohibited by 
law or regulation, including 5 CFR part 2635 or 5 CFR part 5601.
    (c) An employee who has been assigned to a particular matter which 
affects the financial interests of a prospective employer and who is 
required, in accordance with 5 CFR 2635.604(a), to disqualify himself 
from participation in that matter shall, notwithstanding the guidance in 
5 CFR 2635.604 (b) and (c), provide notice of disqualification to his 
supervisor upon determining that he will not participate in the matter.


<R04>
                   Subpart B--Ex Parte Communications


<R05>
Sec. 3000.735-501   Ex parte communications prohibited.

    Decision-making Commission personnel, as defined in Sec. 3001.7(a), 
shall not, either in an official or unofficial capacity, participate in 
any ex parte communication--either oral or written--with any person 
regarding (1) a particular matter (substantive or procedural) at issue 
in contested proceedings before the Commission or (2) the substantive 
merits of a matter that is likely to become a particular matter at issue 
in contested proceedings before the Comission. A particular matter is at 
issue in contested proceedings before the Commission when it is a 
subject of controversy in a hearing held under 39 U.S.C. 3624 or 
3661(c). However, this section does not prohibit participation in off-
the-record proceedings conducted under regulations adopted by the 
Commission for hearings held under 39 U.S.C. 3624 or 3661(c).

[45 FR 65581, Oct. 3, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 3000.735-502   Public record of ex parte communications.

    As ex parte communications (either oral or written) may occur 
inadvertently notwithstanding Sec. 3000.735-501, the employee who 
receives such a communication, shall--within 2 workdays after the 
receipt of such a communication--prepare a written report concerning the 
communication. The report shall identify the employee and the person or 
persons who participated in the ex parte communication; the 
circumstances which resulted in the communication; the substance of the 
communication; and the relationship of the communication to a particular 
matter at issue or likely to become at issue in contested proceedings 
before the Commission. When the ex parte communication concerns a 
particular matter at issue in a proceeding before the Commission, a copy 
of the report shall be submitted to each party to the proceeding. The 
report is a public record of the Commission and a copy thereof shall be 
available to any member of the public on request. This section does not 
apply to ex parte communications under paragraph 3000.735-501(b).

[36 FR 5412, Mar. 23, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 24899, Sept. 11, 1973]

     Appendix A to Part 3000--Code of Ethics For Government Service

    Resolved by the House of Representatives (the Senate concurring), 
That it is the sense of the Congress that the following Code of Ethics 
should be adhered to by all Government employees, including office-
holders:

                  code of ethics for government service

    Any person in Government service should:
    1. Put loyalty to the highest moral principles and to country above 
loyalty to persons, party, or Government department.
    2. Uphold the Constitution, laws, and legal regulations of the 
United States and of all governments therein and never be a party to 
their evasion.
    3. Give a full day's labor for a full day's pay; giving to the 
performance of his duties his earnest effort and best thought.
    4. Seek to find and employ more efficient and economical ways of 
getting tasks accomplished.
    5. Never discriminate unfairly by the dispensing of special favors 
or privileges to anyone, whether for remuneration or not; and never 
accept, for himself or his family, favors or benefits under 
circumstances which

[[Page 324]]

might be construed by reasonable persons as influencing the performance 
of his governmental duties.
    6. Make no private promises of any kind binding upon the duties of 
office, since a Government employee has no private word which can be 
binding on public duty.
    7. Engage in no business with the Government, either directly or 
indirectly, which is inconsistent with the conscientious performance of 
his governmental duties.
    8. Never use any information coming to him confidentially in the 
performance of governmental duties as a means for making private profit.
    9. Expose corruption wherever discovered.
    10. Uphold these principles, ever conscious that public office is a 
public trust.
    Passed July 11, 1958.


<R03>
PART 3001--RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE--Table of Contents

<R05>


                Subpart A--Rules of General Applicability

Sec.
3001.1  Construction of rules.
3001.2  [Reserved]
3001.3  Scope of rules.
3001.4  Method of citing rules.
3001.5  Definitions.
3001.6  Appearances.
3001.7  Ex parte communications.
3001.8  No participation by investigative or prosecuting officers.
3001.9  Filing of documents.
3001.10  Form and number of copies of documents.
3001.11  General contents of documents.
3001.12  Service of documents.
3001.13  Docket and hearing calendar.
3001.14  Consolidation and separation of proceedings.
3001.15  Computation of time.
3001.16  Continuances and extensions of time.
3001.17  Notice of proceeding.
3001.18  Nature of proceedings.
3001.19  Notice of prehearing conference or hearing.
3001.20  Formal intervention.
3001.20a  Limited participation by persons not parties.
3001.20b  Informal expression of views by persons not parties or limited 
          participators (commenters).
3001.21  Motions.
3001.22  Requests for waiver.
3001.23  Presiding officers.
3001.24  Prehearing conferences.
3001.25  Interrogatories for purpose of discovery.
3001.26  Requests for production of documents or things for purpose of 
          discovery.
3001.27  Requests for admissions for purpose of discovery.
3001.28  Failure to comply with orders for discovery.
3001.29  Settlement conferences.
3001.30  Hearings.
3001.31  Evidence.
3001.31a  In camera orders.
3001.32  Appeals from rulings of the presiding officer.
3001.33  Depositions.
3001.34  Briefs.
3001.35  Proposed findings and conclusions.
3001.36  Oral argument before the presiding or other designated officer.
3001.37  Oral argument before the Commission.
3001.38  Omission of intermediate decisions.
3001.39  Intermediate decisions.
3001.40  Exceptions to intermediate decisions.
3001.41  Rulemaking proceedings.
3001.42  Public information and requests.
3001.42a  Protection of trade secrets and commercial or financial 
          information.
3001.43  Public attendance at Commission meetings.

  Subpart B--Rules Applicable to Requests for Changes in Rates or Fees

3001.51  Applicability.
3001.52  Filing of formal requests.
3001.53  Filing of prepared direct evidence.
3001.54  Contents of formal requests.
3001.55  Service by the Postal Service.
3001.56  Failure to comply.
3001.57  Market response rate requests for Express Mail service--purpose 
          and duration of rules.
3001.57a  Market response rate requests--data filing requirements.
3001.57b  Market response rate requests--expedition of public notice and 
          procedural schedule.
3001.57c  Express Mail market response--rule for decision.

Subpart C--Rules Applicable to Requests for Establishing or Changing the 
                      Mail Classification Schedule

3001.61  Applicability.
3001.62  Filing of formal requests.
3001.63  Filing of prepared direct evidence.
3001.64  Contents of formal requests.
3001.65  Service by the Postal Service.
3001.66  Failure to comply.
3001.67  Requests involving experimental changes.
3001.67a  Requests involving experimental changes--procedures for 
          limitation of issues.
3001.67b  Requests involving experimental changes--unavailability of 
          data.
3001.67c  Requests involving experimental changes--plans for data 
          collection.
3001.67d  Requests involving experimental changes--time limit.

[[Page 325]]

3001.68  Text of the Domestic Mail Classification Schedule.
3001.69  Expedited minor classification cases-applicability.
3001.69a  Expedited minor classification cases-filing of formal request 
          and prepared direct evidence.
3001.69b  Expedited minor classification cases-expedition of procedural 
          schedule.
3001.69c  Expedited minor classification cases-time limits.
Appendix A to Subpart C--Postal Service Rates and Charges

  Subpart D--Rules Applicable to Requests for Changes in the Nature of 
                             Postal Services

3001.71  Applicability.
3001.72  Filing of formal requests.
3001.73  Filing of prepared direct testimony.
3001.74  Contents of formal requests.
3001.75  Service by the Postal Service.

       Subpart E--Rules Applicable to Rate and Service Complaints

3001.81  Applicability.
3001.82  Scope and nature of complaints.
3001.83  Contents of complaints.
3001.84  Answers by the Postal Service.
3001.85  Informal procedures.
3001.86  Proceedings on the record.
3001.87  Commission determinations.

  Subpart F--Rules Applicable to the Filing of Testimony by Intervenors

3001.91  Applicability and general policy.
3001.92  Submissions by intervenors.

  Subpart G--Rules Applicable to the Filing of Periodic Reports by the 
                           U.S. Postal Service

3001.101  Applicability and general policy.
3001.102  Filing of reports.

Subpart H--Rules Applicable to Appeals of Postal Service Determinations 
                  To Close or Consolidate Post Offices

3001.110  Applicability.
3001.111  Initiation of review proceedings.
3001.112  The record on review.
3001.113  Filing of the record.
3001.114  Suspension pending review.
3001.115  Participant statement or brief.
3001.116  Oral argument.
3001.117  Posting of documents by Postal Service for inspection by 
          affected postal patrons.

  Subpart I--Rules Applicable to Requests for Market Tests of Proposed 
                       Mail Classification Changes

3001.161  Applicability.
3001.162  Filing of market test proposal and supporting direct evidence.
3001.163  Procedures--expedition of public notice and procedural 
          schedule.
3001.164  Rule for decision.
3001.165  Data collection and reporting requirements.
3001.166  Suspension, continuation or termination of proceeding.

Subpart J--Rules Applicable to Requests for Provisional Service Changes 
                           of Limited Duration

3001.171  Applicability.
3001.172  Filing of formal request and prepared direct evidence.
3001.173  Procedures-expedition of public notice and procedural 
          schedule.
3001.174  Rule for decision.
3001.175  Data collection and reporting requirements.
3001.176  Continuation or termination of provisional service.

           Subpart K--Rules for Use of Multi-Year Test Periods

3001.181  Use of multi-year test period for proposed new services.
3001.182  Filing of formal request and prepared direct evidence.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 404(b), 3603, 3622-3624, 3661, 3662.

    Source: 36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                Subpart A--Rules of General Applicability


<R05>
Sec. 3001.1   Construction of rules.

    The rules in this part shall be liberally construed to secure just 
and speedy determination of issues.

[38 FR 4327, Feb. 13, 1973]
Sec. 3001.2  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.3   Scope of rules.

    The rules of practice in this part are applicable to proceedings 
before the Postal Rate Commission under the Act, including those which 
involve a hearing on the record before the Commission or its designated 
presiding officer. They do not preclude the informal disposition of any 
matters coming before

[[Page 326]]

the Commission not required by statute to be determined upon notice and 
hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.4   Method of citing rules.

    This part shall be referred to as the ``rules of practice.'' Each 
section, paragraph, or subparagraph shall include only the numbers and 
letters to the right of the decimal point. For example, ``3001.24 
Prehearing conferences'' shall be referred to as ``section 24.''


<R05>
Sec. 3001.5   Definitions.

    (a) Act means the Postal Reorganization Act (84 Stat. 719, title 39, 
U.S.C.), as amended.
    (b) Postal Service means the U.S. Postal Service established by the 
Act.
    (c) Commission or Commissioner means, respectively, the Postal Rate 
Commission established by the Act or a member thereof.
    (d) Secretary means the Secretary or the Acting Secretary of the 
Commission.
    (e) Presiding officer means the Chairman of the Commission in 
proceedings conducted by the Commission en banc or the Commissioner or 
Administrative Law Judge of the Commission designated to preside at 
hearings or conferences.
    (f) Person means an individual, a partnership, corporation, trust, 
unincorporated association, public or private organization, or 
governmental agency.
    (g) Party means the Postal Service, a complainant, an appellant, or 
a person who has intervened in a proceeding before the Commission.
    (h) Participant means any party and the officer of the Commission 
who is designated to represent the interests of the general public and, 
for purposes of Secs. 3001.11(e), 3001.12, 3001.21, 3001.23, 3001.24, 
3001.29, 3001.30, 3001.31, and 3001.32 only, it also means persons who 
are limited participators.
    (i) Complainant means a person or interested party who as permitted 
by section 3662 of the Act files a complaint with the Commission in the 
form and manner hereinafter prescribed.
    (j) Hearing means a hearing under sections 556 and 557 of title 5, 
U.S.C. (80 Stat. 386), as provided by sections 3624, 3661, and 3662 of 
the Act.
    (k) Record means the transcript of testimony and exhibits, together 
with all papers and requests filed in the proceeding, which constitutes 
the exclusive record for decision.
    (l) Effective date of an order or notice issued by the Commission or 
an officer thereof means the date of issuance unless otherwise 
specifically provided.
    (m) Appellant means a person who as permitted by 39 U.S.C. 404(b) 
appeals to the Commission a determination of the Postal Service to close 
or consolidate a post office.
    (n) Commission meeting means the deliberations of at least three 
Commissioners where such deliberations determine or result in the joint 
conduct or disposition of official Commission business, but does not 
include deliberations required or permitted by Sec. 3001.43(d) or 
Sec. 3001.43(e).
    (o) Ex parte communication means an oral or written communication 
not on the public record with respect to which reasonable prior notice 
to all participants and limited participators is not given, but it shall 
not include requests for status reports on any matter or proceeding 
covered by subchapter II of chapter 5 of title 5 or a proceeding 
conducted pursuant to subpart H of this part.
    (p) Domestic Mail Classification Schedule means the classification 
schedule, including schedules of full and phased rates and fees, adopted 
by the Decision of the Governors of the U.S. Postal Service Re 
Recommended Decision of the Postal Rate Commission Regarding the Proper 
Scope and Extent of the Mail Classification Schedule, issued April 3, 
1979, and any amendments thereto adopted pursuant to the procedures of 
subchapter III, chapter 36, title 39 of the U.S.C.

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 4327, Feb. 13, 1973; 42 
FR 8142, Feb. 2, 1977; 42 FR 10992, Feb. 25, 1977; 42 FR 13290, Mar. 10, 
1977; 44 FR 26075, May 4, 1979; 58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.6   Appearances.

    (a) By whom. An individual may appear in his/her own behalf; a 
member of a partnership may represent the partnership; and an officer 
may represent a corporation, trust, unincorporated association, or 
governmental agency. A

[[Page 327]]

person may be represented in a proceeding by an attorney at law admitted 
to practice and in good standing before the Supreme Court of the United 
States, the highest court of any State or Territory of the United States 
or the District of Columbia, or the Court of Appeals or the District 
Court for the District of Columbia.
    (b) Authority to act. When an officer of any party or an attorney 
acting in a representative capacity appears in person or signs a paper 
filed with the Commission, his/her personal appearance or signature 
shall constitute a representation to the Commission that he/she is 
authorized to represent the particular party in whose behalf he/she 
acts. Any person appearing before or transacting business with the 
Commission in a representative capacity may be required by the 
Commission or the presiding officer to file evidence of his/her 
authority to act in such capacity.
    (c) Designation for service. A person intending to appear before the 
Commission or its presiding officer in a representative capacity for a 
party in a proceeding shall file with the Commission a notice of 
appearance in the form prescribed by the Secretary unless the person is 
named in an initial filing of the party whom he/she represents as a 
person to whom communications from the Commission in regard to the 
filing are to be addressed. Failure to file a notice required by this 
paragraph shall constitute a waiver of the right to service of 
documents.
    (d) Standards of conduct. Individuals practicing before the 
Commission shall conform to the standards of ethical conduct required of 
practitioners in the courts of the United States.
    (e) Disqualification and suspension. After hearing, the Com ission 
may disqualify and deny, temporarily or permanently, the privilege of 
appearing and practicing before it in any way to any individual who is 
found not to possess the requisite qualifications, or to have engaged in 
unethical or improper professional conduct. Contumacious conduct at any 
hearing before the Commission or its presiding officer shall be ground 
for exclusion of any individual from such hearing and for summary 
suspension for the duration of the hearing by the Commission or the 
presiding officer.

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 4327, Feb. 13, 1973; 51 
FR 8827, Mar. 14, 1986; 58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.7  Ex parte communications.

    (a) Definitions--(1) Decision-making Commission personnel. Subject 
to the exception stated in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section, the 
following categories of persons are designated ``decision-making 
Commission personnel'':
    (i) The Commissioners and their personal office staffs;
    (ii) The General Counsel and his/her staff;
    (iii) The Director of the Office of Technical Analysis and Planning 
and his/her staff.
    (iv) Any other employee who may reasonably be expected to be 
involved in the decisional process.
    (2) Non-decision-making Commission personnel. The following 
categories of persons are designated ``non-decision-making Commission 
personnel'';
    (i) All Commission personnel other than decision-making Commission 
personnel;
    (ii) Decision-making Commission personnel not participating in the 
decisional process owing to the prohibitions of Sec. 3001.8 or 39 CFR 
3000.735, Subpart C.
    (b) Prohibition. In any agency proceeding that is required to be 
conducted in accordance with section 556 of Title 5 or a proceeding 
conducted pursuant to Subpart H of this part, except to the extent 
required for the disposition of ex parte matters as authorized by law:
    (1) Interested persons outside the Commission and non-decision-
making Commission personnel shall not make or knowingly cause to be made 
to any Commission decision-making personnel ex parte communications 
relevant to the merits of the proceeding;
    (2) Commission decision-making personnel shall not make or knowingly 
cause to be made to any interested person outside the Commission or to 
non-decision-making Commission personnel ex parte communications 
relevant to the merits of the proceeding;

[[Page 328]]

    (3) Commission decision-making personnel who receive ex parte 
communications relevant to the merits of the proceeding shall decline to 
listen to such communications and explain that the matter is pending for 
determination. Any recipient thereof shall advise the communicator that 
he/she will not consider the communication and shall promptly and fully 
inform the Commission in writing of the substance of and the 
circumstances attending the communication, so that the Commission will 
be able to take appropriate action.
    (4) Commission decision-making personnel who receive, or who make or 
knowingly cause to be made, communications prohibited by this paragraph 
shall place on the public record of the proceeding:
    (i) All such written communications;
    (ii) Memoranda stating the substance of all such oral 
communications; and
    (iii) All written responses, and memoranda stating the substance of 
all oral responses, to the materials described in paragraphs (b)(4)(i) 
and (b)(4)(ii) of this section.
    (5) Requests for an opportunity to rebut, on the record, any facts 
or contentions contained in an ex parte communication which have been 
placed on the public record of the proceeding pursuant to paragraph 
(b)(4) of this section may be filed in writing with the Commission. The 
Commission will grant such requests only where it determines that the 
dictates of fairness so require. Generally, in lieu of actually 
receiving rebuttal material, the Commission will direct that the alleged 
factual assertion and the proposed rebuttal be disregarded in arriving 
at a decision.
    (c) Applicability. (1) The prohibitions of paragraph (b) of this 
section shall apply beginning at the time at which a proceeding is 
noticed for hearing or appeal unless the person responsible for the 
communication has knowledge that it will be noticed, in which case the 
prohibitions shall apply beginning at the time of his/her acquisition of 
such knowledge.
    (2) Paragraph (b) of this section does not constitute authority to 
withhold information from Congress.
    (d) Violations of ex parte rules. (1) Upon notice of a communication 
knowingly made or knowingly caused to be made by a party in violation of 
paragraph (b) of this section, the Commission, administrative law judge, 
or other employee presiding at the hearing may, to the extent consistent 
with the interests of justice and the policy of the underlying statutes, 
require the party to show cause why his/her claim or interest in the 
proceeding should not be dismissed, denied, disregarded, or otherwise 
adversely affected on account of such violation.
    (2) The Commission may, to the extent consistent with the interests 
of justice and the policy of the underlying statutes administered by the 
Commission, consider a violation of paragraph (b) of this section 
sufficient grounds for a decision adverse to a party who has knowingly 
committed such violation or knowingly caused such violation to occur.

[45 FR 65580, Oct. 3, 1980, as amended at 58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.8   No participation by investigative or prosecuting officers.

    In any proceeding noticed pursuant to Sec. 3001.17, no officer, 
employee or agent of the Commission who appears in the hearing in a 
proceeding before the Commission as an attorney or witness or who 
actively participates in the preparation of evidence or argument 
presented by such persons, shall participate or advise as to the 
intermediate decision or Commission decision in that proceeding except 
as a witness or counsel in public proceedings.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.9   Filing of documents.

    (a) Filing with the Commission. The filing of any written document 
required by these rules or any applicable statute, rule, regulation or 
order of the Commission, or by direction of the presiding officer shall 
be made by filing with the Office of the Secretary, Postal Rate 
Commission, Washington, DC 20268-0001, during normal business hours on a 
date no later than that specified for such filing. Documents received 
after the close of normal business hours or on a Saturday, Sunday, or 
holiday, shall be deemed to be filed on the next regular business day.

[[Page 329]]

    (b) Acceptance for filing. Only such documents as conform to the 
requirements of this part and any other applicable rule, regulation or 
order of the Commission shall be accepted for filing. Unacceptable 
filings will be rejected by the Secretary and will not be included in 
the file in the proceeding involved. The Secretary shall notify the 
sender of any unacceptable document and all parties to the proceeding in 
which such document was tendered that such document was rejected. 
Acceptance for filing shall not waive any failure to comply with the 
rules, and such failure may be cause for subsequently striking all or 
any part of any document.

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.10   Form and number of copies of documents.

    (a) Production. If not printed, documents filed with the Commission 
shall be produced on paper of letter size, 8 to 8\1/2\ inches wide by 
10\1/2\ to 11 inches long, with left- and right-hand margins not less 
than 1 inch and other margins not less than 0.75 inches, except tables, 
charts or special documents attached thereto may be larger if required, 
provided that they are folded to the size of the document to which they 
are attached. The impression shall be on only one side of the paper 
unless there are more than ten pages. The text shall be not less than 
one and one-half spaced except that footnotes and quotations may be 
single spaced. Any typeface not smaller than elite or a comparable size 
expressed in points or characters per inch may be used. If the document 
is bound, it shall be bound on the left side. Copies of documents for 
filing and service may be reproduced by any duplicating process that 
produces clear and legible copies.
    (b) Printed. Printed documents filed with the Commission shall, 
insofar as practicable, not be less than 10-point type adequately 
leaded, on unglazed paper cut or folded to a size of 8 to 8\1/2\ inches 
wide and 10\1/2\ to 11 inches long, with inside margin not less than 1 
inch wide, and with double-leaded text and single-leaded, indented 
quotations.
    (c) Number of copies. Except for correspondence or as otherwise 
required by the Commission, the Secretary, or the presiding officer in 
any proceeding, all persons shall file with the Secretary, an original 
and 24 fully conformed copies of each document required or permitted to 
be filed under this part. The copies need not be signed but shall show 
the full name of the person signing the original document and the 
certificate of service attached thereto.

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 19045, July 17, 1973; 58 
FR 38976, July 21, 1993; 60 FR 12115, Mar. 6, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.11   General contents of documents.

    (a) Caption and title. The caption of a document filed with the 
Commission in any proceeding shall clearly show the docket designation 
and title of the proceeding before the Commission. The title of such 
document shall show the name of the person in whose behalf the filing is 
made and a brief description of the document or the nature of the relief 
sought therein (i.e., motion for extension, brief on exceptions, 
complaint, notice of intervention, answer to complaint). If the document 
is filed on behalf of more than one person, a single name only need be 
included in the title.
    (b) Designation of person to receive service. The first page of the 
initial document filed by any person in any proceeding shall state the 
name and full post office address of the person or persons who may be 
served with any documents relating to the proceeding.
    (c) Contents. In the event there is no rule, regulation or order of 
the Commission which specifically prescribes the contents of any 
document to be filed, such document shall contain a proper 
identification of the parties concerned and a concise but complete 
statement of the relief sought and of the facts and citations of 
authority and precedent relied upon.
    (d) Improper matter. Defamatory, scurrilous, or unethical matter 
shall not be included in any document filed with the Commission.
    (e) Subscription. The original of any document filed with the 
Commission shall be signed in ink by the participant filing the same or 
by an authorized officer, employee, attorney or

[[Page 330]]

other representative, and all other copies of such document filed with 
the Commission and served on the participants in any proceeding shall be 
fully conformed thereto. The signature of any person subscribing any 
document filed with the Commission constitutes a certification that he/
she has read the document being subscribed and filed; that he/she knows 
the contents thereof; that if executed in any representative capacity, 
the document has been subscribed and executed in the capacity specified 
in the document with full power and authority so to do; that to the best 
of his/her knowledge, information and belief every statement contained 
in the document is true and no such statements are misleading; and that 
such document is not filed for purposes of delay.
    (f) Table of contents. All documents other than briefs filed with 
the Commission consisting of 20 or more pages shall contain a subject-
index of the matter in such document with page references.
    (g) Certificate of service. There shall be attached to the original 
of each document filed with the Commission a certificate of service 
signed in ink showing service on all participants in a proceeding as 
prescribed by Sec. 3001.12. All other copies filed and served shall be 
fully conformed thereto.
[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.12   Service of documents.

    (a) Service by the Commission. Notices, orders, and other similar 
documents issued by the Commission or presiding officer shall be served 
by the Secretary upon the participants in the proceeding individually or 
by such groups as may be directed by the Commission or presiding 
officer.
    (b) Service by the parties. Every document filed by any person with 
the Commission in a proceeding shall be served by the person filing such 
document upon the participants in the proceeding individually or by such 
groups as may be directed by the Commission or presiding officer except 
for discovery requests governed by Secs. 3001.25 (a) and (c), 3001.26 
(a) and (c), and 3001.27 (a) and (c). Special requests relating to 
discovery must be served individually upon the party conducting 
discovery and state the witness who is the subject of the special 
request.
    (c) Limitation on extent of service. To avoid the imposition of an 
unreasonable burden upon participants, the Commission or the presiding 
officer may, by appropriate order, limit service to service upon 
participants intending to actively participate in the hearing, or upon a 
person or persons designated for properly representative groups, or by 
requiring the making of documents available for convenient public 
inspection, or by any combination of such methods.
    (d) Service list. The Secretary shall maintain a current service 
list in each proceeding which shall include the participants in that 
proceeding and the person or persons designated for service of documents 
by each party with the address designated in the party's initial 
pleading in such proceeding or a notice of appearance as provided in 
Sec. 3001.6(c); provided, however, the Secretary is not required to 
include on such list more than two designated representatives for any 
party to the proceeding. The service list shall show the participants 
actively participating in the hearing and representative groups 
established pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section. Service on the 
persons, active participants or groups on the Secretary's service list 
in any proceeding, as directed by the Commission or hearing officer, 
shall be deemed service in compliance with the requirements of this 
section.
    (e) Method of service. Service may be made by First-Class Mail or 
personal delivery to the address shown for the persons designated on the 
Secretary's service list. Service of any document upon the Postal 
Service shall be made by delivering or mailing six copies thereof to the 
Office of the Assistant General Counsel, Office of Rate and 
Classification Law, U.S. Postal Service, Washington, DC 20260-1140.
    (f) Date of service. Whenever service is made by mail, the date of 
mailing shall be the date of service. Whenever service is made by 
personal delivery, the date of such delivery shall be the date of 
service.
    (g) Form of certificate of service. The certificate of service shall 
show the

[[Page 331]]

name of the participant or his/her counsel making service, the date and 
place of service, and include the statement that ``I hereby certify that 
I have this day served the foregoing document upon all participants of 
record in this proceeding in accordance with section 12 of the rules of 
practice.''

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 4327, Feb. 13, 1973; 51 
FR 8827, Mar. 14, 1986; 58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993; 58 FR 38976, July 
21, 1993; 60 FR 12115, Mar. 6, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.13   Docket and hearing calendar.

    The Secretary shall maintain a docket of all proceedings, and each 
proceeding as initiated shall be assigned an appropriate designation. 
The Secretary shall maintain a hearing calendar of all proceedings which 
have been set for hearing. Proceedings shall be heard on the date set in 
the hearing order, except that the Commission may for cause, with or 
without motion, at any time with due notice to the parties advance or 
postpone the date of hearing. The docket and hearing calendar shall be 
available for public inspection during the office hours of the 
Commission, insofar as consistent with the proper discharge of the 
Commission's duties.

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.14   Consolidation and separation of proceedings.

    The Commission, with or without motion, may order proceedings 
involving related issues or facts to be consolidated for hearing of any 
or all matters in issue in such proceedings. The Commission may sever 
proceedings which have been consolidated, or order separate proceedings 
on any issue presented, if it appears that separate proceedings will be 
more convenient, expeditious, or otherwise appropriate.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.15   Computation of time.

    Except as otherwise provided by law, in computing any period of time 
prescribed or allowed by this part, or by any notice, order, rule or 
regulation of the Commission or a presiding officer, the day of the act, 
event, or default after which the designated period of time begins to 
run is not to be included. The last day of the period so computed is to 
be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday for the 
Commission, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day 
which is neither a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday. A part-day holiday 
shall be considered as other days and not as a holiday. In computing a 
period of time which is 5 days or less, all Saturdays, Sundays, and 
legal holidays of the Commission are to be excluded.

[38 FR 4327, Feb. 13, 1973; 51 FR 8827, Mar. 14, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.16   Continuances and extensions of time.

    Continuances of any proceeding or hearing and extensions of time for 
making any filing or performing any act required or allowed to be done 
within a specified time or by a specified date may be granted by the 
Commission or the presiding officer upon motion for good cause shown 
unless the time for performance or filing is limited by statute. 
Requests for extension of time shall be by written motion timely filed 
with the Commission stating the facts on which the application rests, 
except that after a hearing has convened, such requests shall be made by 
written or oral motion to the presiding officer. Requests for 
continuances or extensions of time may as a matter of discretion be 
acted upon without waiting for answers thereto.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.17   Notice of proceeding.

    (a) When issued. The Commission shall issue a notice of a proceeding 
to be determined on the record with an opportunity for any interested 
person to request a hearing whenever:
    (1) The Postal Service files a formal request that the Commission 
submit a recommended decision on changes in postal rates or fees or 
establishing or changing the mail classification schedule;
    (2) The Commission proposes on its own initiative to issue a 
recommended decision on changes in the mail classification schedule;
    (3) The Postal Service files a request with the Commission to issue 
an advisory opinion on a proposed change in the nature of postal 
services which will generally affect service on a nationwide or 
substantially nationwide basis;

[[Page 332]]

    (4) The Commission in the exercise of its discretion determines that 
an opportunity for hearing should be provided with regard to a complaint 
filed pursuant to subpart E of this part; or
    (5) The Commission in the exercise of its discretion determines to 
institute any other proceeding under the Act.
    (a-1) Appellate proceedings under 39 U.S.C. 404(b). The Commission 
shall issue a notice of proceeding to be determined on a record compiled 
by the Postal Service whenever:
    (1) An appeal of a determination of the Postal Service to close or 
consolidate a post office is taken to the Postal Rate Commission 
pursuant to subpart H of this part; or
    (2) An application to suspend the effective date of a determination 
of the Postal Service to close or consolidate a post office pending 
appeal to the Postal Rate Commission is made pursuant to subpart H of 
this part.
    (b) Publication and service of notice. Each notice of proceeding 
shall be published in the Federal Register and served on the Postal 
Service, the complainant in a complaint proceeding, and the appellant in 
the appeal of a Postal Service determination to close or consolidate a 
post office.
    (c) Contents of notice. The notice of a proceeding shall include the 
following:
    (1) The general nature of the proceeding involved in terms of 
categories listed in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section;
    (2) A reference to the legal authority under which the proceeding is 
to be conducted;
    (3) A concise description of proposals for changes in rates or fees, 
proposals for the establishment of or changes in the mail classification 
schedule, proposals for changes in the nature of postal services; in the 
case of a complaint, an identification of the complainant and a concise 
description of the subject matter of the complaint or, in the case of an 
appeal, an identification of the appellant and a summarization of the 
Postal Service determination to close or consolidate under review;
    (4) The date by which notices of intervention and requests for 
hearing must be filed; and
    (5) Such other information as the Commission may desire to include.

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 42 FR 10992, Feb. 25, 1977; 42 
FR 13826, Mar. 14, 1977; 58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.18   Nature of proceedings.

    (a) Proceedings to be set for hearing. In any case noticed for a 
proceeding to be determined on the record pursuant to Sec. 3001.17, the 
Commission shall hold a public hearing if a hearing is requested by any 
party to the proceeding or if the Commission in the exercise of its 
discretion determines that a hearing is in the public interest. The 
Commission may give notice of its determination that a hearing shall be 
held in its original notice of the proceeding or in a subsequent notice 
issued pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section and Sec. 3001.19.
    (b) Procedure in hearing cases. In proceedings which are to be set 
for hearing, the Commission shall issue a notice of hearing or 
prehearing conference pursuant to Sec. 3001.19. After the completion of 
the hearing, the Commission or the presiding officer shall receive such 
briefs and hear such oral argument as may be ordered by the Commission 
or the presiding officer pursuant to Secs. 3001.34 to 3001.37, and the 
Commission shall then issue a recommended decision, advisory opinion, or 
public report, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of 
Secs. 3001.38 to 3001.39.
    (c) Procedure in non-hearing cases. In any case noticed for a 
proceeding to be determined on the record in which a hearing is not 
requested by any party or ordered by the Commission, the Commission or 
the presiding officer shall issue a notice of the procedure to be 
followed with regard to the filing of briefs and oral argument, and a 
recommended decision, advisory opinion, or public report, as 
appropriate, shall then be issued pursuant to the provisions of 
Secs. 3001.34 to 3001.39. The Commission or presiding officer may, if 
necessary or desirable, call procedural conferences by issuance of a 
notice pursuant to Sec. 3001.19.

[[Page 333]]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.19   Notice of prehearing conference or hearing.

    In any proceeding noticed for a proceeding on the record pursuant to 
Sec. 3001.17, the Commission shall give due notice of any prehearing 
conference or hearing by including the time and place of the conference 
or hearing in the notice of proceeding or by subsequently issuing a 
notice of prehearing conference or hearing. Such notice of prehearing 
conference or hearing shall give the title and docket designation of the 
proceeding, a reference to the original notice of proceeding and the 
date of such notice, the time and place of the conference or hearing and 
the designation of the presiding officer. Similar notice shall be issued 
of the time and place where a hearing will be reconvened unless 
announcement was made thereof by the presiding officer at the 
adjournment of an earlier session of the prehearing conference or 
hearing. Such notices shall be published in the Federal Register and 
served on all participants in the proceeding involved.

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.20  Formal intervention.

    (a) Who may intervene. A notice of intervention will be entertained 
in those cases that are noticed for a proceeding pursuant to 
Sec. 3001.17 from any person claiming an interest of such nature that 
intervention is allowed by the Act, or appropriate to its 
administration.
    (b) Contents. A notice of intervention shall clearly and concisely 
set forth the nature and extent of the intervenor's interest in the 
issues to be decided, including the classifications of postal service 
utilized by the intervenor giving rise to his/her interest in the 
proceeding, and to the extent known, the position of the intervenor with 
regard to the proposed changes in postal rates, fees, classifications, 
or services, or the subject matter of the complaint, as described in the 
notice of the proceeding. Such notice shall state whether or not the 
intervenor requests a hearing or in lieu thereof, a conference, and 
whether or not the intervenor intends to actively participate in a 
hearing. Such notice shall also include on page one thereof the name and 
full mailing address of no more than two persons who are to receive 
service of any documents relating to such proceeding.
    (c) Form and time of filing. Notices of intervention shall be filed 
no later than the date fixed for such filing in any notice or order with 
respect to the proceeding issued by the Commission or its Secretary, 
unless in extraordinary circumstances for good cause shown, the 
Commission authorizes a late filing. Notices of intervention shall 
conform to the requirements of Secs. 3001.9 to 3001.11 and shall be 
served on the Postal Service and the complainant in a complaint 
proceeding pursuant to Sec. 3001.12.
    (d) Oppositions. Oppositions to notices of intervention may be filed 
by any participant in the proceeding no later than 10 days after the 
notice of intervention is filed. Pending Commission action, an 
opposition to intervention shall delay on a day-for-day basis, the date 
for responses to discovery requests filed by that intervenor.
    (e) Effect of intervention. A person filing a notice of intervention 
shall be a party to the proceeding subject, however, to a determination 
by the Commission, either in response to an opposition, or sua sponte, 
that party status is not appropriate under the Act. Intervenors are also 
subject to the right of the Commission or the presiding officer as 
specified in Sec. 3001.24 to require two or more intervenors having 
substantially like interests and positions to join together for purposes 
of service of documents, presenting evidence, making and arguing motions 
and objections, cross-examining witnesses, filing briefs, and presenting 
oral arguments to the Commission or presiding officer. No intervention 
shall be deemed to constitute a decision that the intervening party has 
such an interest in the proceeding that he/she would be aggrieved by an 
ultimate decision by order of the Commission.

[48 FR 15627, Apr. 12, 1983, as amended at 58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993; 
58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993]

[[Page 334]]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.20a  Limited participation by persons not parties.

    Notwithstanding the provisions of Sec. 3001.20, any person may 
appear as a limited participator in any case that is noticed for a 
proceeding pursuant to Sec. 3001.17, in accordance with the following 
provisions;
    (a) Form of intervention. Notices of intervention as a limited 
participator shall be in writing, shall set forth the nature and extent 
of the intervenor's interest in the proceeding, shall include the name 
and full mailing address of up to two persons who are to receive service 
of documents by the Secretary, and shall be served on the Postal Service 
(and on the complainant in a complaint proceeding) pursuant to 
Sec. 3001.12. Except where good cause for late filing is shown, notices 
of intervention as a limited participator shall be filed not later than 
the date fixed for the filing of notices of intervention pursuant to 
Sec. 3001.20(c).
    (b) Oppositions. Oppositions to notices to intervene as a limited 
participator may be filed by any participant in the proceeding no later 
than 10 days after the notice of intervention as a limited participator 
is filed.
    (c) Scope of participation. Subject to the provisions of 
Sec. 3001.30(f), limited participators may present evidence which is 
relevant to the issues involved in the proceeding and their testimony 
shall be subject to cross-examination on the same terms applicable to 
that of formal participants. Limited participants may file briefs or 
proposed findings pursuant to Secs. 3001.34 and 3001.35, and within 15 
days after the release of an intermediate decision, or such other time 
as may be fixed by the Commission, they may file a written statement of 
their position on the issues. The Commission or the presiding officer 
may require limited participators having substantially like interests 
and positions to join together for any or all of the above purposes. 
Limited participators are not required to respond to discovery requests 
under Sec. 3001.25 through Sec. 3001.28 except to the extent that those 
requests are directed specifically to testimony which the limited 
participators provided in the proceeding; however, limited 
participators, particularly those making contentions under 39 U.S.C. 
3622(b)(4), are advised that failure to provide relevant and material 
information in support of their claims will be taken into account in 
determining the weight to be placed on their evidence and arguments.

[48 FR 15627, Apr. 12, 1983, as amended at 58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993; 
60 FR 12115, Mar. 6, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.20b   Informal expression of views by persons not parties or limited participators (commenters).

    Notwithstanding the provisions of Secs. 3001.19a and 3001.20, any 
person may file with the Commission, in any case that is noticed for a 
hearing pursuant to Sec. 3001.17, an informal statement of views in 
writing, in accordance with the following provisions:
    (a) Contents of statement. A statement filed pursuant to this 
section shall set forth the name and full mailing address of the person 
by whom or on whose behalf it is filed, a concise statement of the issue 
or issues to which the comments contained therein apply, and a clear 
statement of any views, opinions, or suggestions which the person filing 
the statement wishes to lay before the Commission.
    (b) Disposition by the Commission or presiding officer. Statements 
filed pursuant to this section shall be made a part of the Commission's 
files in the proceeding. The Secretary shall maintain a file of such 
statements which shall be segregated from the evidentiary record in the 
proceeding, and shall be open to public inspection during the 
Commission's office hours. A statement or exhibit thereto filed pursuant 
to this section shall not be accepted in the ``record,'' as defined by 
Sec. 3001.5(k) except to the extent that it is (1) otherwise formally 
introduced in evidence, or (2) a proper subject of official notice, 
pursuant to Sec. 3001.31(j).
    (c) Ex parte communications--exception. A statement filed pursuant 
to this section shall not be considered an ex parte communication within 
the meaning of Sec. 3001.7.

[42 FR 8142, Feb. 9, 1977. Redesignated at 48 FR 15627, Apr. 12, 1983, 
as amended at 58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993]

[[Page 335]]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.21   Motions.

    (a) Scope and contents. An application for an order or ruling not 
otherwise specifically provided for in this part shall be by motion. 
Motions shall set forth with particularity the ruling or relief sought, 
the grounds and basis therefor, and the statutory or other authority 
relied upon, and shall be filed with the Secretary and served pursuant 
to the provisions of Secs. 3001.9 to 3001.12. All motions to dismiss 
proceedings or other motions which involve a final determination of the 
proceeding shall be addressed to the Commission. After a presiding 
officer is designated in any proceeding, and before the issuance of an 
initial decision pursuant to Sec. 3001.39 or certification of the record 
to the Commission pursuant to Sec. 3001.38, all other motions in that 
proceeding shall be addressed to the presiding officer.
    (b) Answers. Within 10 days after a motion is filed, or such other 
period as the Commission or presiding officer may fix, any participant 
to the proceeding may file and serve an answer in support of or in 
opposition to the motion pursuant to Secs. 3001.9 to 3001.12. Such 
answers shall state with particularity the position of the participant 
with regard to the ruling or relief requested in the motion and the 
grounds and basis and statutory or other authority relied upon. Unless 
the Commission or presiding officer otherwise provide, no reply to an 
answer or any further responsive document shall be filed.

[38 FR 4327, Feb. 13, 1973, as amended at 51 FR 8827, Mar. 14, 1986; 58 
FR 38976, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.22   Requests for waiver.

    Upon request by motion, any requirement of any subpart of this Part 
3001 may be waived in whole or in part to the extent permitted by law 
upon a showing that such waiver will not unduly prejudice the interests 
of other participants and is consistent with the public interest and the 
Commission's expeditious discharge of its responsibilities under the 
Act. A request for waiver shall not be entertained unless it is timely 
filed so as to permit Commission disposition of the request prior to the 
date specified for the requirement for which waiver is requested. The 
pendency of a request for waiver does not justify or excuse any person 
from timely meeting the requirements of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.23   Presiding officers.

    (a) Authority delegated. Presiding officers shall have the 
authority, within the Commission's powers and subject to its published 
rules, as follows:
    (1) To regulate the course of the hearing, including the recessing, 
reconvening, and adjournment thereof, unless otherwise directed by the 
Commission, as provided in Sec. 3001.16;
    (2) To administer oaths and affirmations;
    (3) To issue subpoenas authorized by law;
    (4) To rule upon offers of proof and receive relevant evidence;
    (5) To take or authorize that depositions be taken as provided in 
Sec. 3001.33;
    (6) To hold appropriate conferences before or during hearings and to 
rule on matters raised at such conferences including those specified in 
paragraph (d) of Sec. 3001.24;
    (7) To dispose of procedural requests or similar matters but not, 
before their initial or recommended decision, to dispose of motions made 
during hearings to dismiss proceedings or other motions which involve a 
final determination of the proceeding;
    (8) Within their discretion, or upon direction of the Commission, to 
certify any question to the Commission for its consideration and 
disposition;
    (9) To submit an initial or recommended decision in accordance with 
Secs. 3001.38 and 3001.39; and
    (10) To take any other action necessary or appropriate to the 
discharge of the duties vested in them, consistent with the statutory or 
other authorities under which the Commission functions and with the 
rules, regulations, and policies of the Commission.
    (b) Conduct of hearings. It is the duty of the presiding officer to 
conduct a fair and impartial hearing and to maintain order. Any 
disregard by participants or counsel of his/her rulings on matters of 
order and procedure shall be noted on the record, and where he/she deems 
it necessary shall be made the subject of a special written report to

[[Page 336]]

the Commission. In the event that participants or counsel should be 
guilty of disrespectful, disorderly, or contumacious language or conduct 
in connection with any hearing, the presiding officer immediately may 
submit to the Commission his/her report thereon, together with his/her 
recommendations, and in his/her discretion, suspend the hearing.
    (c) Ex parte communication. Except to the extent required for the 
disposition of ex parte matters as authorized by law and by the rules of 
the Commission, no presiding officer shall, in any proceeding in which 
the Commission may so direct, or in any proceeding required by statute 
to be determined on the record after opportunity for hearing, consult 
any person on any matter in issue unless upon notice and opportunity for 
all participants to be heard.
    (d) Disqualification. A presiding officer may withdraw from a 
proceeding when he/she deems himself disqualified, or may be withdrawn 
by the Commission for good cause found after timely affidavits alleging 
personal bias or other disqualifications have been filed.

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 49 FR 6490, Feb. 22, 1984; 51 
FR 8827, Mar. 14, 1986; 58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.24   Prehearing conferences.

    (a) Initiation and purposes. In any proceeding the Commission or the 
presiding officer may, with or without motion, upon due notice as to 
time and place, direct the participants in a proceeding to appear for a 
prehearing conference for the purposes of considering all possible ways 
of expediting the proceeding, including those in paragraph (d) of this 
section. It is the intent of the Commission to issue its recommended 
decision or advisory opinion on requests under sections 3622, 3623, and 
3661 of the Act with the utmost practicable expedition. The Commission 
directs that these prehearing procedures shall be rigorously pursued by 
the presiding officer and all participants to that end.
    (b) Informal off-the-record procedures. In order to make the 
prehearing conference as effective as possible, the presiding officer 
may, in his/her discretion, direct that conferences be held off the 
record at the beginning of a prehearing conference or at other 
appropriate times, without the presiding officer being present. Such 
informal off-the-record conferences shall be presided over by the 
Commission's officer designated to represent the interests of the 
general public or such other person as the participants may select. At 
such off-the-record conferences the participants shall be expected to 
reach agreement on those matters which will expedite the proceeding, 
including the matters specified in the notice of the prehearing 
conference, in the ruling of the presiding officer directing that the 
off-the-record conference be held and in paragraph (d) of this section. 
A report on the results of such off-the-record conference shall be made 
to the presiding officer on the record at a time specified by the 
presiding officer and he/she shall then determine the further prehearing 
procedures to be followed.
    (c) Required preparation and cooperation of all parties. All 
participants in any proceeding before the Commission are required and 
expected to come to the prehearing conference fully prepared to discuss 
in detail and resolve all matters specified in paragraph (d) of this 
section, and notice of the prehearing conference, and such other notice 
or agenda as may have been issued by the Commission or the presiding 
officer. All participants are required and expected to cooperate fully 
at all stages of the proceeding to achieve these objectives, through 
thorough advance preparation for the prehearing conference, including 
informal communications between the participants, requests for discovery 
and appropriate discovery procedures at the earliest possible time and 
no later than at the prehearing conference, and the commencement of 
preparation of evidence and cross-examination. The failure of any 
participant to appear at the prehearing conference or to raise any 
matters that could reasonably be anticipated and resolved at the 
prehearing conference shall not be permitted to unduly delay the 
progress of the proceeding and shall constitute a waiver of the rights 
of the participant with regard thereto, including all objections to the 
agreements reached, actions taken, or rulings issued by the presiding 
officer with regard thereto.

[[Page 337]]

    (d) Matters to be pursued. At the prehearing conference in any 
proceeding, the presiding officer and the participants shall consider 
and resolve the following matters:
    (1) The definition and simplification of the issues including any 
appropriate explanation, clarification, or amendment of any proposal, 
filing, evidence, complaint or other pleading filed by any participant;
    (2) Arrangement for timely completion of discovery from the Postal 
Service or any other participant concerning information desired by any 
participant with regard to any issues in the proceeding or prior 
filings, evidence or pleadings of any participant;
    (3) Agreement as to procedures for timely discovery with regard to 
any future evidentiary filings of any participant;
    (4) Stipulations, admissions or concessions as to evidentiary facts, 
and agreements as to documentary matters, exhibits and matters of 
official notice, which will avoid unnecessary proof or dispute;
    (5) Grouping parties with substantially like interests for purposes 
of presenting evidence, making and arguing motions and objections, 
cross-examining witnesses, filing briefs, and presenting oral argument 
to the Commission or presiding officer;
    (6) Disclosure of the number, identity and qualifications of 
witnesses, and the nature of their testimony, particularly with respect 
to the policies of the Act and, as applicable according to the nature of 
the proceeding, each factor stated in section 3622 or 3623 of the Act;
    (7) Limitation of the scope of the evidence and the number of 
witnesses to eliminate irrelevant, immaterial, or cumulative and 
repetitious evidence;
    (8) Procedures to direct and control the use of discovery prior to 
the hearing and submission of written testimony and exhibits on matters 
in dispute so as to restrict to a bare minimum the amount of hearing 
time required for oral cross-examination of witnesses;
    (9) Division of the proceeding where practicable into two or more 
phases for separate simultaneous hearings;
    (10) Fixing dates for the submission and service of such written 
testimony and exhibits as may be appropriate in advance of the hearing;
    (11) Order of presentation of the evidence and cross-examination of 
witnesses so that the hearing may proceed in the most expeditious and 
orderly manner possible; and
    (12) All other matters which would aid in an expeditious disposition 
of the proceeding, including consent of the participants to the conduct 
of the entire proceedings off the record.
    (e) Rulings by presiding officer. The presiding officer at such 
prehearing conference, irrespective of the consent of the participants, 
shall dispose of by ruling (1) any of the procedural matters itemized in 
paragraph (d) of this section and (2) such other procedural matters on 
which he/she is authorized to rule during the course of the hearing if 
ruling at this stage would expedite the proceeding. Either on the record 
at the conclusion of such prehearing conference, or by order issued 
shortly thereafter, the presiding officer shall state the agreements 
reached by the participants, the actions taken, and the rulings made by 
the presiding officer. Such rulings shall control the subsequent course 
of the proceedings unless modified at the hearing to prevent manifest 
injustice.
[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amened at 58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.25  Interrogatories for purpose of discovery.

    (a) Service and contents. In the interest of expedition and limited 
to information which appears reasonably calculated to lead to the 
discovery of admissible evidence, any participant may serve upon any 
other participant in a proceeding written interrogatories requesting 
nonprivileged information relevant to the subject matter in such 
proceeding, to be answered by the participant served, who shall furnish 
such information as is available to the participant. A participant 
through interrogatories may require any other participant to identify 
each person whom the other participant expects to call as a witness at 
the hearing and to state the subject matter on which the witness is 
expected to testify. The participant serving the interrogatories shall 
file a copy thereof with the Secretary

[[Page 338]]

pursuant to Sec. 3001.9 and shall serve a copy upon the Postal Service. 
Special requests for service by other participants shall be honored.
    (b) Answers. Each interrogatory shall be answered separately and 
fully in writing, unless it is objected to, in which event the reasons 
for objection shall be stated in the manner prescribed by paragraph (c) 
of this section. The party responding to the interrogatories shall serve 
the answers on the party who served the interrogatories within 20 days 
of the service of the interrogatories or within such other period as may 
be fixed by the presiding officer, but before the conclusion of the 
hearing. The answers are to be signed by the person making them. If the 
person responding to the interrogatory is unavailable to sign the answer 
when filed, a signature page must be filed within ten days thereafter 
with the Commission, but need not be served on participants. Copies of 
the answers to interrogatories shall be filed with the Secretary 
pursuant to Sec. 3001.9 and shall be served upon other participants 
pursuant to Sec. 3001.12(b).
    (c) Objections. In the interest of expedition, the bases for 
objection shall be clearly and fully stated. If objection is made to 
part of an interrogatory, the part shall be specified. A participant 
claiming privilege shall identify the specific evidentiary privilege 
asserted and state the reasons for its applicability. A participant 
claiming undue burden shall state with particularity the effort which 
would be required to answer the interrogatory, providing estimates of 
cost and work hours required, to the extent possible. An interrogatory 
otherwise proper is not necessarily objectionable because an answer 
would involve an opinion or contention that relates to fact or the 
application of law to fact, but the Commission or presiding officer may 
order that such an interrogatory need not be answered until a prehearing 
conference or other later time. Objections are to be signed by the 
attorney making them. The party objecting to interrogatories shall serve 
the objections on the party who served the interrogatories within 10 
days of the service of the interrogatories. Copies of objections to 
interrogatories shall be filed with the Secretary pursuant to 
Sec. 3001.9 and shall be served upon the proponent of the interrogatory 
and the Postal Service. Special requests for service by other 
participants shall be honored.
    (d) Compelled answers. The Commission, or the presiding officer, 
upon motion of any participant to the proceeding, may compel answer to 
an interrogatory to which an objection has been raised if the objection 
is found not to be valid, or may compel an additional answer if the 
initial answer is found to be inadequate. Such compelled answers shall 
be served on the party who moved to compel the answer within 10 days of 
the date of the order compelling an answer or within such other period 
as may be fixed by the presiding officer, but before the conclusion of 
the hearing. Copies of the answers shall be filed with the Secretary 
pursuant to Sec. 3001.9 and on participants pursuant to Sec. 3001.12(b).
    (e) Supplemental answers. A participant who has answered 
interrogatories is under the duty to seasonably amend a prior answer if 
he/she obtains information upon the basis of which he/she knows that the 
answer was incorrect when made or is no longer true. (A participant 
filing a supplemental answer shall indicate whether the answer merely 
supplements the previous answer to make it current, or whether it is 
intended as a complete replacement for the answer previously given.)
    (f) Orders. The Commission or the presiding officer may order that 
any participant or person shall answer on such terms and conditions as 
are just and may for good cause make any protective order, including an 
order limiting or conditioning interrogatories, as justice requires to 
protect a party or person from undue annoyance, embarrassment, 
oppression, or expense.

[45 FR 65578, Oct. 3, 1980, as amended at 58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993; 60 
FR 12115, Mar. 6, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.26  Requests for production of documents or things for purpose of discovery.

    (a) Service and contents. In the interest of expedition and limited 
to information which appears reasonably calculated to lead to the 
discovery of admissible evidence, any participant may serve on any other 
participant to the

[[Page 339]]

proceeding a request to produce and permit the participant making the 
request, or someone acting in his/her behalf, to inspect and copy any 
designated documents or things which constitute or contain matters, not 
privileged, which are relevant to the subject matter involved in the 
proceeding and which are in the custody or control of the participant 
upon whom the request is served. The request shall set forth the items 
to be inspected either by individual item or category, and describe each 
item and category with reasonable particularity, and shall specify a 
reasonable time, place and manner of making inspection. The participant 
requesting the production of documents or things shall file a copy of 
the request with the Secretary pursuant to Sec. 3001.9 and shall serve 
copies thereof upon the Postal Service. Special requests for service by 
other participants shall be honored.
    (b) Answers. The participant upon whom the request is served shall 
serve a written answer on the participant who filed the request within 
20 days after the service of the request, or within such other period as 
may be fixed by the presiding officer. The answer shall state, with 
respect to each item or category, that inspection will be permitted as 
requested unless the request is objected to pursuant to paragraph (c) of 
this section. The participant answering the request shall sign and file 
a copy of the answer with the Secretary pursuant to Sec. 3001.9 and 
shall serve copies thereof upon other participants who request them.
    (c) Objections. In the interest of expedition, the bases for 
objection shall be clearly and fully stated. If objection is made to 
part of an item or category, the part shall be specified. A participant 
claiming privilege shall identify the specific evidentiary privilege 
asserted and state the reasons for its applicability. A participant 
claiming undue burden shall state with particularity the effort which 
would be required to answer the request, providing estimates of cost and 
work hours required, to the extent possible. Objections are to be signed 
by the attorney making them. The party objecting to a request shall 
serve the objection on the party requesting production of documents or 
things, upon the Secretary pursuant to Sec. 3001.9 and upon the Postal 
Service, within 10 days of the request for production. Special requests 
for service by other participants shall be honored.
    (d) Orders. The Commission or the presiding officer may, on such 
terms and conditions as are just and reasonable, order that any 
participant in a proceeding shall respond to a request for inspection, 
and may make any protective order of the nature provided in paragraph 
(f) of Sec. 3001.25 as may be appropriate. Upon motion of any 
participant to the proceeding, the Commission or the presiding officer 
may compel production of documents or things to which an objection has 
been raised if the objection is found not to be valid. Such compelled 
documents or things shall be made available to the party making the 
motion within 10 days of the date of the order compelling production or 
within such other period as may be fixed by the presiding officer, but 
before the conclusion of the hearing. Documents or things ordered to be 
produced shall also be made available to the Secretary pursuant to 
Sec. 3001.9 and to the other participants who request them.

[45 FR 65579, Oct. 3, 1980, as amended at 58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993; 60 
FR 12116, Mar. 6, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.27  Requests for admissions for purpose of discovery.

    (a) Service and content. In the interest of expedition any 
participant may serve upon any other participant a written request for 
the admission, for purposes of the pending proceeding only, of any 
relevant, unprivileged facts, including the genuineness of any documents 
or exhibits to be presented in the hearing. The participant requesting 
the admission shall file a copy of the request with the Secretary 
pursuant to Sec. 3001.9 and shall serve copies thereof upon the Postal 
Service. Special requests for service by other participants shall be 
honored.
    (b) Answers. Each matter of which an admission is requested shall be 
separately set forth and is admitted unless within 20 days after service 
of the request, or within such other period as may be fixed by the 
presiding officer, the participant to whom the request is

[[Page 340]]

directed serves upon the participant requesting the admission a written 
answer or files an objection pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section. 
A participant who answers a request for admission shall file a copy of 
the answer with the Secretary pursuant to Sec. 3001.9 and shall serve 
copies thereof upon other participants who request them.
    (c) Objections. In the interest of expedition, the bases for 
objection shall be clearly and fully stated. If objection is made to 
part of an item, the part shall be specified. A participant claiming 
privilege shall identify the specific evidentiary privilege asserted and 
state the reasons for its applicability. A participant claiming undue 
burden shall state with particularity the effort which would be required 
to answer the request, providing estimates of cost and work hours 
required to the extent possible. Objections are to be signed by the 
attorney making them. The party objecting to requests for admissions 
shall serve the objections on the party requesting admissions, upon the 
Secretary pursuant to Sec. 3001.9 and upon the Postal Service, within 10 
days of the request. Special requests for service by other participants 
shall be honored.
    (d) Orders. If the Commission or presiding officer determines that 
an answer does not comply with the requirements of this rule, it may 
order either that the matter is admitted or that an amended answer be 
served, or may determine that final disposition of the request be made 
at a pretrial conference or at a designated time prior to the hearing. 
Upon motion of any participant to the proceeding, the Commission or the 
presiding officer may compel answers to a request for admissions to 
which an objection has been raised if the objection is found not to be 
valid. Such compelled answers shall be served on the party who moved to 
compel the answers within 10 days of the date of the order compelling 
production or within such other period as may be fixed by the presiding 
officer, but before the conclusion of the hearing. Copies of the answers 
shall be filed upon the Secretary pursuant to Sec. 3001.9 and served 
upon other participants who request them.

[45 FR 65579, Oct. 3, 1980, as amended at 58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993; 60 
FR 12116, Mar. 6, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.28   Failure to comply with orders for discovery.

    If a participant or an officer or agent of a participant fails to 
obey an order of the Commission or the presiding officer to provide or 
permit discovery, pursuant to Secs. 3001.25 to 3001.27, the Commission 
or the presiding officer may make such orders in regard to the failure 
as are just, and among others, may direct that the matters regarding 
which the order was made or any other designated facts shall be taken to 
be established for the purposes of the proceeding in accordance with the 
claim of the participants obtaining the order, or prohibit the 
disobedient participant from introducing designated matters in evidence, 
or strike the evidence, complaint or pleadings or parts thereof.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.29   Settlement conferences.

    Any participant in a proceeding may submit offers of settlement or 
proposals of adjustment at any time and may request a conference between 
the participants to consider such offers or proposals. The Commission or 
the presiding officer shall afford the participants appropriate 
opportunity prior to or during the hearing for conferences for the 
purpose of considering such offers or proposals as time, the nature of 
the proceeding, and the public interest permit. Unaccepted offers of 
settlement or adjustment and proposed stipulations not agreed to shall 
be privileged and shall not be admissible in evidence against any 
participant claiming such privilege.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.30   Hearings.

    (a) How initiated. Hearings for the purpose of taking evidence shall 
be initiated by the issuance of a notice by the Commission as provided 
in Sec. 3001.19.
    (b) Presiding officer. All hearings shall be held before the 
Commission sitting en banc, or a duly designated presiding officer.
    (c) Entering of appearances. The Commission or the presiding officer 
before whom the hearing is held will cause to be entered on the record 
all appearances together with a notation showing in whose behalf each 
such appearance has been made.
    (d) Order of procedure. In public hearings before the Commission, 
the Postal

[[Page 341]]

Service shall open and close in proceedings which it has initiated under 
sections 3622, 3623, or 3661 of the Act, and a complainant shall open 
and close in proceedings on complaints filed under section 3662 of the 
Act. With respect to the order of presentation of all other 
participants, and in all other proceedings, unless otherwise ordered by 
the Commission, the presiding officer shall direct the order of 
presentation of evidence and issue such other procedural orders as may 
be necessary to assure the orderly and expeditious conclusion of the 
hearing.
    (e) Presentation by parties. Any participant shall have the right in 
public hearings of presentation of evidence, cross-examination, 
objection, motion, and argument. When objections to the admission or 
exclusion of evidence before the Commission or the presiding officer are 
made, the grounds relied upon shall be stated briefly. Formal exceptions 
to rulings are unnecessary.
    (f) Limitations on presentation of the evidence. The taking of 
evidence shall proceed with all reasonable diligence and dispatch, and 
to that end, the Commission or the presiding officer may limit 
appropriately (1) the number of witnesses to be heard upon any issue, 
(2) the examination by any participant to specific issues, and (3) the 
cross-examination of a witness to that required for a full and true 
disclosure of the facts necessary for the disposition of the proceeding 
and to avoid irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious testimony.
    (g) Motions during hearing. After a hearing has commenced in a 
proceeding, a request may be made by motion to the presiding officer for 
any procedural ruling or relief desired. Such motions shall set forth 
the ruling or relief sought, and state the grounds therefor and 
statutory or other supporting authority. Motions made during hearings 
may be stated orally upon the record, except that the presiding officer 
may require that such motions be reduced to writing and filed 
separately. Any participant shall have the opportunity to answer or 
object to such motions at the time and in the manner directed by the 
presiding officer.
    (h) Rulings on motions. The presiding officer is authorized to rule 
upon any such motion not formally acted upon by the Commission prior to 
the commencement of a prehearing conference or hearing where immediate 
ruling is essential in order to proceed with the prehearing conference 
or hearing, and upon any motion to the presiding officer filed or made 
after the commencement thereof, except that no motion made to the 
presiding officer, a ruling upon which would involve or constitute a 
final determination of the proceeding, shall be ruled upon affirmatively 
by the presiding officer except as a part of his intermediate decision. 
This section shall not preclude a presiding officer, within his 
discretion, from referring any motion made in hearing to the Commission 
for ultimate determination.
    (i) Transcript corrections. Corrections to the transcript of a 
hearing should not be requested except to correct a material substantive 
error in the transcription made at the hearing.

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 60 FR 12116, Mar. 6, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.31   Evidence.

    (a) Form and admissibility. In any public hearing before the 
Commission, or a presiding officer, relevant and material evidence which 
is not unduly repetitious or cumulative shall be admissible. Witnesses 
whose testimony is to be taken shall be sworn, or shall affirm, before 
their testimony shall be deemed evidence in the proceeding or any 
questions are put to them.
    (b) Documentary. Documents and detailed data and information shall 
be presented as exhibits. Where relevant and material matter offered in 
evidence is embraced in a document containing other matter not material 
or relevant or not intended to be put in evidence, the participant 
offering the same shall plainly designate the matter offered excluding 
the immaterial or irrelevant parts. If other matter in such document is 
in such bulk or extent as would unnecessarily encumber the record, such 
document may be marked for identification, and, if properly 
authenticated, the relevant and material parts thereof may be read into 
the record, or, if the Commission or the presiding officer so directs, a 
true copy of such matter in proper

[[Page 342]]

form shall be received in evidence as an exhibit. Copies of documents 
shall be delivered by the participant offering the same to the other 
participants or their attorneys appearing at the hearing, who shall be 
afforded an opportunity to examine the entire document and to offer in 
evidence in like manner other material and relevant portions thereof. 
Designation of a document as a library reference is a procedure for 
facilitating reference to the document in Commission proceedings and 
does not, by itself, confer any particular evidentiary status upon the 
document. The evidentiary status of the document is governed by this 
section.
    (c) Commission's files. In case any matter contained in a report or 
other document on file with the Commission is offered in evidence, such 
report or other document need not be produced or marked for 
identification, but may be offered in evidence by specifying the report, 
document, or other file containing the matter so offered.
    (d) Public document items. Whenever there is offered in evidence (in 
whole or in part) a public document, such as an official report, 
decision, opinion or published scientific or economic statistical data 
issued by any of the Executive Departments (or their subdivisions), 
legislative agencies or committees, or administrative agencies of the 
Federal Government (including Government-owned corporations) and such 
document (or part thereof) has been shown by the offeror thereof to be 
reasonably available to the public, such document need not be produced 
or physically marked for identification, but may be offered in evidence 
as a public document item by clearly identifying the document and the 
relevant parts thereof.
    (e) Prepared testimony. Unless the presiding officer otherwise 
directs, the direct testimony of witnesses shall be reduced to writing 
and offered either as such or as an exhibit.
    (f) Form of prepared testimony and exhibits. All prepared testimony 
and exhibits of a documentary character shall, so far as practicable, 
conform to the requirements of Sec. 3001.10 (a) and (b).
    (g) Copies to participants. Except as otherwise provided in these 
rules, copies of prepared testimony and exhibits shall be furnished to 
the presiding officer and to the participants or counsel, unless the 
presiding officer otherwise directs. In addition, unless otherwise 
directed by the presiding officer, eight copies of all prepared 
testimony and exhibits shall be furnished for the use of the Commission.
    (h) Reception and ruling. The presiding officer shall rule on the 
admissibility of evidence and otherwise control the reception of 
evidence so as to confine it to the issues in the proceeding.
    (i) Offers of proof. Any offer of proof made in connection with any 
ruling of the presiding officer rejecting or excluding proffered oral 
testimony shall consist of a statement of the substance of the evidence 
which counsel contends would be adduced by such testimony; and if the 
excluded evidence consists of evidence in documentary or written form, 
or of reference to documents or records, a copy of such evidence shall 
be marked for identification and shall constitute the offer of proof.
    (j) Official notice of facts. Official notice may be taken of such 
matters as might be judicially noticed by the courts of the United 
States or of any other matter peculiarly within the general knowledge of 
the Commission as an expert body: Provided, That any participant shall, 
on timely request, be afforded an opportunity to show the contrary.
    (k) Introduction and reliance upon studies and analyses--(1) 
General. In the case of all studies and analyses offered in evidence in 
hearing proceedings or relied upon as support for other evidence, other 
than the kinds described in paragraphs (k) (2) and (3) of this section, 
there shall be a clear statement of the study plan, all relevant 
assumptions and a description of the techniques of data collection, 
estimation and/or testing. In addition, there shall be a clear statement 
of the facts and judgments upon which conclusions are based, together 
with an indication of the alternative courses of action considered. 
Tabulations of input data shall be made available upon request at the 
offices of the Commission.
    (2) Statistical studies. All statistical studies offered in evidence 
in hearing proceedings or relied upon as support

[[Page 343]]

for other evidence shall include a comprehensive description of the 
assumptions made, the study plan utilized and the procedures undertaken. 
Where a computer analysis is employed to obtain the result of a 
statistical study, all of the submissions required by Sec. 3001.31(k)(3) 
shall be furnished, upon request. In addition, for each of the following 
types of statistical studies, the indicated information should be 
furnished:
    (i) Sample surveys. (a) A clear description of the survey design, 
including the definition of the universe under study, the sampling frame 
and units, and the validity and confidence limits than can be placed on 
major estimates; and
    (b) An explanation of the method of selecting the sample and the 
characteristics measured or counted.
    (ii) Experimental analyses. (a) A complete description of the 
experimental design, including a specification of the controlled 
conditions and how the controls were realized;
    (b) A complete description of the methods of making observations and 
the adjustments, if any, to observed data.
    (iii) Econometric Studies. (a) A presentation of the economic theory 
underlying the study;
    (b) A complete description of the econometric model(s) and the 
reasons for each major assumption and specification;
    (c) The definition of the variables selected and the justification 
for their selection;
    (d) For any alternative model whose computed econometric results 
influenced the choice of the preferred model, a statement of the reasons 
for rejecting that alternative, an identification of any differences 
between that alternative and the preferred model with respect to 
variable definitions, equation forms, data, or estimation methods, and, 
upon request, the computed econometric results for that alternative;
    (e) A reference to a detailed description in a text, manual, or 
technical journal for every econometric technique used in the estimation 
process and the reasons for selecting the technique, or, in the 
alternative, a description and analysis of the technique that is 
sufficient for a technical evaluation;
    (f) Summary descriptions and source citations for all input data 
and, upon request, a complete listing of the data. Complete descriptions 
of any alterations or transformations made to the data as received from 
the original sources, and the reasons for making the alterations;
    (g) A complete report of the econometric results including, where 
applicable:
    (1) coefficient estimates
    (2) standard errors and t-values,
    (3) goodness-of-fit statistics,
    (4) other appropriate test statistics,
    (5) the variance/covariance matrix of the estimates,
    (6) computed residuals for results computed from samples composed of 
fewer than 250 observations, and, upon request, other computed 
residuals;
    (h) Descriptions of all statistical tests of hypotheses and the 
results of such tests;
    (iv) All other studies involving statistical methodology. (a) The 
formula used for statistical estimates;
    (b) The standard errors of each component estimated;
    (c) Test statistics and the description of statistical tests and all 
related computations, and final results; and
    (d) Summary descriptions of input data, and upon request the actual 
input data shall be made available at the offices of the Commission.
    (3) Computer analyses. (i) In the case of computer studies or 
analyses which are being offered in evidence, or relied upon as support 
for other evidence, a foundation for the reception of such materials 
must be laid by furnishing a general description of the program that 
includes the objectives of the program, the processing tasks performed, 
the methods and procedures employed, and a listing of the input and 
output data and source codes (or a showing pursuant to paragraph 
(k)(3)(iii) of this section as to why such codes cannot be so furnished) 
and such description shall be furnished in all cases. For the purpose of 
completing such foundation, the following additional items shall be 
deemed presumptively necessary and shall be furnished upon request of a 
participant, the Commission, or the

[[Page 344]]

presiding officer, unless the presumption is overcome by an affirmative 
showing.
    (a) For all input data, designations of all sources of such data, 
and explanations of any modifications to such data made for use in the 
program;
    (b) Definitions of all input and output variables or sets of 
variables;
    (c) A description of input and output data file organization;
    (d) A machine-readable copy of all data bases;
    (e) For all source codes, documentation sufficiently comprehensive 
and detailed to satisfy generally accepted software documentation 
standards <SUP>1</SUP> appropriate to the type of program and to its 
intended use in the proceeding;
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    <SUP>1</SUP> Examples of such standards include Federal Information 
Processing Standards Publication 38; ADP Operating Standards, Handbook 
ADP-2, United States Postal Service, Management Information Systems 
Department, 1978; Computer Model Documentation Guide, NBS Special 
Publication 500-73, Sections II and III.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (f) The source program in machine-readable form;
    (g) All pertinent operating system and programming language manuals; 
and
    (h) If the requested program is user interactive, a representative 
sample run, together with any explanation necessary to illustrate the 
response sequence.
    (i) An expert on the design and operation of the program shall be 
provided at a technical conference to respond to any oral or written 
questions concerning information that is reasonably necessary to enable 
independent replication of the program output.

Paragraphs (k)(3)(i) (d) and (f) of this section shall be provided 
either in the form of magnetic tape or through access to a time-sharing 
service, at the option of the provider. Any machine-readable data file 
or program file so provided must be identified and described in 
accompanying hard-copy documentation. In addition, files in text format 
must be accompanied by hard-copy instructions for printing them. Files 
in machine code must be accompanied by hard-copy instructions for 
executing them
    (j) Computer simulation models offered in evidence or relied upon as 
support for other evidence, shall be bound by all applicable provisions 
of paragraph (k)(3) of this section and the separate requirements of 
paragraph (k)(2) of this section, to the extent that portions of the 
simulation model utilize or rely upon such studies. Information that 
compares the simulation model output results to the actual phenomena 
being modelled, using data other than those from which the model was 
developed, shall be separately identified and submitted as evidence 
supporting the test and validation of the simulation model. Separate 
statements concerning the model limitations, including limiting model 
design assumptions and range of data input utilized in model design, 
shall be provided. Where test and validation of the entire simulation 
model are not possible, test and validation information shall be 
provided for disaggregate portions of the model. If disaggregate testing 
and validation are not possible, separate statements to that effect and 
statements regarding operational experts' review of model validity shall 
be provided.
    (ii) Upon timely and otherwise proper request of a participant, or 
sua sponte, the Commission or the Presiding Officer may rule that 
matters other than those listed in paragraphs (k)(3)(i) (a) through (h) 
of this section are necessary to establish the foundation for reception 
of the evidence concerned and must be furnished.
    (iii) When the requestor is other than the Commission or the 
Presiding Officer, the cost of producing the material required in 
paragraph (k)(3)(i) (d), (f), and (g)of this section, shall be borne by 
the requesting party unless otherwise ordered, for good cause shown by 
the requestor. When the Commission or the Presiding Officer is the 
requestor, it may assume or equitably allocate such costs for good cause 
shown by the requestee.
    (iv) If the recipient of a request for materials pursuant to this 
paragraph (k)(3) of this section asserts that compliance with the 
request would conflict with patent, copyright, trade secret or contract 
rights applicable to the requested material, the recipient shall

[[Page 345]]

immediately notify the requestor and the Presiding Officer. If valid, 
the Presiding Officer shall devise means of accommodating such rights. 
Such means may include protective orders, including access under 
protective conditions to the computer facilities of the recipient of a 
request, making material available for inspection, compensation, or 
other procedures, according to the nature of the right affected by 
compliance with this paragraph (k)(3) of this section. If the Presiding 
Officer determines that compensation is necessary to accommodate the 
affected right, the cost of compensation shall be borne in the same 
manner that paragraph (k)(3)(iii) of this section prescribes for bearing 
the costs referenced there. If such right cannot be accommodated by 
reasonable compensation, or by protective orders or other procedures, 
and, as a result, materials required by this paragraph (k)(3) of this 
section cannot be provided, the Presiding Officer shall determine, in 
his/her discretion, whether evidence that relies upon the materials not 
provided shall be admissible or afforded limited weight.
    (4) Expedition. The offeror shall expedite responses to requests 
made pursuant to this section. Responses shall be served on the 
requesting party, and notice thereof filed with the Secretary in 
accordance with the provisions of Sec. 3001.12, no later than 20 days 
after a request is made.

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 45 FR 65580, Oct. 3, 1980; 47 
FR 12796, Mar. 25, 1982; 50 FR 43392, Oct. 25, 1985; 51 FR 8827, Mar. 
14, 1986; 51 FR 14992, Apr. 22, 1986; 54 FR 35494, Aug. 28, 1989; 58 FR 
38976, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.31a  In camera orders.

    (a) Definition. Except as hereinafter provided, documents and 
testimony made subject to in camera orders are not made a part of the 
public record, but are kept confidential, and only authorized parties, 
their counsel, authorized Commission personnel, and court personnel 
concerned with judicial review shall have access thereto. The right of 
the presiding officer, the Commission, and reviewing courts to disclose 
in camera data to the extent necessary for the proper disposition of the 
proceeding is specifically reserved.
    (b) In camera treatment of documents and testimony. Presiding 
officers shall have authority, but only in those unusual and exceptional 
circumstances when good cause is found on the record, to order documents 
or oral testimony offered in evidence whether admitted or rejected, to 
be placed in camera. The order shall specify the date on which in camera 
treatment expires and shall include: (1) A description of the documents 
and testimony; (2) a full statement of the reasons for granting in 
camera treatment; and (3) a full statement of the reasons for the date 
on which in camera treatment expires. Any party desiring, for the 
preparation and presentation of the case, to disclose in camera 
documents or testimony to experts, consultants, prospective witnesses, 
or witnesses, shall make application to the presiding officer setting 
forth the justification therefor. The presiding officer, in granting 
such application for good cause found, shall enter an order protecting 
the rights of the affected parties and preventing unnecessary disclosure 
of information. In camera documents and the transcript of testimony 
subject to an in camera order shall be segregated from the public record 
and filed in a sealed envelope, bearing the title and docket number of 
the proceeding, the notation ``In Camera Record under Sec. 3001.31a,'' 
and the date on which in camera treatment expires.
    (c) Release of in camera information. In camera documents and 
testimony shall constitute a part of the confidential records of the 
Commission and shall be subject to the provisions of Sec. 3001.42 of 
this chapter. However, the Commission, on its own motion or pursuant to 
a request, may make in camera documents and testimony available for 
inspection, copying, or use by any other governmental agency. The 
Commission shall, in such circumstances, give reasonable notice of the 
impending disclosure to the affected party. However, such notice may be 
waived in extraordinary circumstances for good cause.
    (d) Briefing of in camera information. In the submittal of proposed 
findings, briefs, or other papers, counsel for all parties shall make a 
good faith attempt to refrain from disclosing the specific details of in 
camera documents

[[Page 346]]

and testimony. This shall not preclude references in such proposed 
findings, briefs, or other papers to such documents or testimony 
including generalized statements based on their contents. To the extent 
that counsel consider it necessary to include specific details of in 
camera data in their presentations, such data shall be incorporated in 
separate proposed findings, briefs, or other papers marked 
``confidential,'' which shall be placed in camera and become a part of 
the in camera record.

[44 FR 33880, June 13, 1979, as amended at 48 FR 15901, Apr. 13, 1983; 
58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.32   Appeals from rulings of the presiding officer.

    (a) General policy. The Commission will not review a ruling of the 
presiding officer prior to its consideration of the entire proceeding 
except in extraordinary circumstances. This section specifies the 
showing which participants must make in order to appeal interlocutory 
rulings.
    (b) Appeals certified by the presiding officer. (1) Before the 
issuance of an initial decision pursuant to Sec. 3001.39(a) or the 
certification of the record to the Commission pursuant to 
Sec. 3001.38(a), rulings of the presiding officer may be appealed when 
the presiding officer certifies in writing that an interlocutory appeal 
is warranted. The presiding officer shall not certify an appeal unless 
the officer finds that (i) the ruling involves an important question of 
law or policy concerning which there is substantial ground for 
difference of opinion and (ii) an immediate appeal from the ruling will 
materially advance the ultimate termination of the proceeding or 
subsequent review will be an inadequate remedy.
    (2) A request for the presiding officer to certify an appeal shall 
be made within 5 days after the presiding officer's ruling has been 
issued. The request shall set forth with specificity the reasons that a 
participant believes that an appeal meets the criteria of paragraphs 
(b)(1) (i) and (ii) of this section. Such requests shall also state in 
detail the legal, policy, and factual arguments supporting the 
participant's position that the ruling should be modified. If the appeal 
is from a ruling rejecting or excluding evidence, such request shall 
include a statement of the substance of the evidence which the 
participant contends would be adduced by the excluded evidence and the 
conclusions intended to be derived therefrom.
    (3) The presiding officer may request responsive pleadings from 
other participants prior to ruling upon the request to certify an 
appeal.
    (c) Appeals not certified by the presiding officer. If the presiding 
officer declines to certify an appeal, a participant who has requested 
certification may apply to the Commission for review within 10 days. 
Unless the Commission directs otherwise, its review of the application 
will be based on the record and pleadings filed before the presiding 
officer pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section.
    (d) Action by the Commission. (1) The Commission may dismiss an 
appeal certified by the presiding officer if it determines that (i) the 
objection to the ruling should be deferred until the Commission's 
consideration of the entire proceeding or (ii) interlocutory review is 
otherwise not warranted or appropriate under the circumstances.
    (2) Where the presiding officer has declined to certify an appeal, 
the Commission will not allow an application for review unless it 
determines (i) that the presiding officer should have certified the 
matter, (ii) that extraordinary circumstances exist, and (iii) that 
prompt Commission decision is necessary to prevent grave detriment to 
the public interest.
    (3) The Commission may issue an order accepting an interlocutory 
appeal within 15 days after the presiding officer certifies the appeal 
or a participant files an application for review. If the Commission 
fails to issue such an order, leave to appeal from the presiding 
officer's interlocutory ruling shall be deemed to be denied. If the 
Commission issues an order accepting an appeal, it may rule upon the 
merits of the appeal in that order or at a later time.
    (e) Effect of appeals. Unless the presiding officer or the 
Commission so orders, the certification of an appeal or the filing of an 
application for review

[[Page 347]]

shall not stay the proceeding or the effectiveness of any ruling.
    (f) Review at conclusion of proceeding. If an interlocutory appeal 
is not allowed or requested, objection to the ruling may be raised on 
review of the presiding officer's initial decision, or, if the initial 
decision is omitted, at the conclusion of the proceeding.
    (g) Form, filing, and service of documents. Requests for 
certification, applications for review, and any responses shall be in 
writing and shall be in conformity with Secs. 3001.10 and 3001.11. They 
shall be filed and served pursuant to Secs. 3001.9 and 3001.12.

[38 FR 4328, Feb. 13, 1973, as amended at 42 FR 8143, Feb. 9, 1977; 51 
FR 8827, Mar. 14, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.33   Depositions.

    (a) When permissible. The testimony of a witness may be taken by 
deposition upon authorization by the Commission or the presiding officer 
on application of any participant before the hearing is closed. An 
authorization to take the deposition of a witness will be issued only if 
(1) the person whose deposition is to be taken would be unavailable at 
the hearing, or (2) the deposition is deemed necessary to perpetuate the 
testimony of the witness, or (3) the taking of the deposition is 
necessary to prevent undue and excessive expense to a participant and 
will not result in undue delay or an undue burden to other participants.
    (b) Application. An application for authorization to take testimony 
by deposition shall be filed in duplicate with the Commission or the 
presiding officer and shall state (1) the name, identification, and post 
office address of the witness, (2) the subject matter of the testimony, 
(3) the time and place of taking the deposition, (4) the name, 
identification, and post office address of the officer before whom the 
deposition is to be taken, and (5) the reasons why the testimony of such 
witness should be taken by deposition.
    (c) Authorization. If the application so warrants, the Commission or 
the presiding officer will issue and serve or cause to be served on the 
participants within a reasonable time in advance of the time fixed for 
taking testimony, an authorization for the taking of such testimony by 
deposition. Such authorization shall name the witness, and the time, 
place, and officer before whom the deposition shall be taken, and shall 
specify the number of copies of the deposition to be submitted to the 
Commission. The authorization may include such terms and conditions as 
the Commission or the presiding officer deems fair and reasonable.
    (d) Qualifications of officer before whom taken. Such deposition may 
be taken before a presiding officer or other authorized representative 
of the Commission, or any officer, not being counsel or attorney for any 
participant or having an interest in the proceeding, authorized to 
administer oaths by the laws of the United States or of the place where 
the deposition is to be taken.
    (e) Oath and reduction to writing. The officer before whom the 
deposition is to be taken shall put the witness on oath or affirmation 
and shall personally, or by some one acting under his/her direction and 
in his/her presence, record the examination of the witness. The 
examination shall be transcribed in the form specified in 
Sec. 3001.10(a), signed by the witness, and certified in the usual form 
by the officer. The original of the deposition, together with the number 
of copies required by the authorization to be made by such officer, 
shall be forwarded by the officer to the Secretary by personal delivery 
or registered mail. Upon receipt the Secretary shall hold the original 
for use in the hearing upon request by any participant and shall make 
copies available for public inspection.
    (f) Scope and conduct of examination. Unless otherwise directed in 
the authorization, the witness may be questioned regarding any matter 
which is relevant to the issues involved in the proceeding. Participants 
shall have the right of cross-examination and objection. In lieu of 
participation in the oral examination, participants may transmit written 
interrogatories to the officer who shall propound them to the witness.
    (g) Objections. The officer before whom the deposition is taken 
shall not have the power to rule upon procedural

[[Page 348]]

matters or the competency, materiality, or relevancy of questions. 
Procedural objections or objections to questions of evidence shall be 
stated briefly and recorded in the deposition without argument. 
Objections not stated before the officer shall be deemed waived.
    (h) When a part of the record. No portion of a deposition shall 
constitute a part of the record in the proceeding unless received in 
evidence by the presiding officer. If only a portion of the deposition 
is offered in evidence by a participant, any other participant may 
require him/her to introduce all of it which is relevant to the part 
introduced, and any participant may offer in evidence any other 
portions.
    (i) Fees. Witnesses whose depositions are taken and the officer 
taking the same shall be entitled to the same fees as are paid for like 
services in the District Courts of the United States to be paid directly 
by the participant or participants on whose application the deposition 
was taken.

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993; 58 
FR 38976, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.34   Briefs.

    (a) When filed. At the close of the taking of testimony in any 
proceeding, the Commission or the presiding officer shall fix the time 
for the filing and service of briefs, giving due regard to the timely 
issuance of a recommended decision or advisory opinion to the Postal 
Service within the contemplation of sections 3641(a) and 3661 of the 
Act. In addition, subject to such consideration, due regard shall be 
given to the nature of the proceeding, the complexity and importance of 
the issues involved, and the magnitude of the record. In cases subject 
to a limitation on the time available to the Commission for decision, 
the Commission shall generally direct that each participant shall file a 
single brief at the same time. In cases where, because of the nature of 
the issues and the record or the limited number of participants 
involved, the filing of initial and reply briefs, or the filing of 
initial, answering, and reply briefs, will not unduly delay the 
conclusion of the proceeding and will aid in the proper disposition of 
the proceeding, the participants may be directed to file more than one 
brief and at different times rather than a single brief at the same 
time. The presiding officer or the Commission may also order the filing 
of briefs during the course of the proceeding.
    (b) Contents. Each brief filed with the Commission shall be as 
concise as possible, within any page limitation specified by the 
Commission or the presiding officer, and shall include the following in 
the order indicated:
    (1) A subject index with page references, and a list of all cases 
and authorities relied upon, arranged alphabetically, with references to 
the pages where the citation appears;
    (2) A concise statement of the case from the viewpoint of the filing 
participant;
    (3) A clear, concise and definitive statement of the position of the 
filing participant as to the proposals of the Postal Service, the 
subject matter of the complaint, or recommended decision, advisory 
opinion, or public report to be issued;
    (4) A discussion of the evidence, reasons, and authorities relied 
upon with exact references to the record and the authorities; and
    (5) Proposed findings and conclusions with appropriate references to 
the record or the prior discussion of the evidence and authorities 
relied upon.
    (c) Incorporation by references. Briefs before the Commission or a 
presiding officer shall be completely self-contained and shall not 
incorporate by reference any portion of any other brief, pleading or 
document.
    (d) Excerpts from the record. Testimony and exhibits shall not be 
quoted or included in briefs except for short excerpts pertinent to the 
argument presented.
    (e) Filing and service. Briefs shall be filed in the form and manner 
and served as required by Secs. 3001.9 to 3001.12.

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 4328, Feb. 13, 1973; 51 
FR 8827, Mar. 14, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.35   Proposed findings and conclusions.

    The Commission or the presiding officer may direct the filing of 
proposed findings and conclusions with a brief

[[Page 349]]

statement of the supporting reasons for each proposed finding and 
conclusion.

[38 FR 4329, Feb. 13, 1973; 51 FR 8827, Mar. 14, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.36   Oral argument before the presiding or other designated officer.

    In any case in which the presiding officer is to issue an initial or 
recommended decision, or another designated officer of the Commission is 
to issue a recommended decision, such officer may permit the 
presentation of oral argument when, in his/her opinion, time permits, 
and the nature of the proceedings, the complexity or importance of the 
issues of fact or law involved, and the public interest warrants hearing 
such argument. Such officer shall determine the time and place for oral 
argument. He may specify the issue or issues on which oral argument is 
to be presented, the order in which the presentations shall be made, and 
the amount of time allowed each participant. A request for oral argument 
before the issuance of an intermediate decision shall be made during the 
course of the hearing on the record.

[36 FR 396,Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.37   Oral argument before the Commission.

    (a) When ordered. In any proceeding before the Commission for 
decision, the Commission, upon the request of any participant or on its 
own initiative, may order oral argument when, in the Commission's 
discretion, time permits, and the nature of the proceedings, the 
complexity or importance of the issues of fact or law involved, and 
public interest warrants such argument.
    (b) How requested. Any participant in a proceeding before the 
Commission for decision may request oral argument before the Commission 
by filing a timely motion pursuant to Sec. 3001.21. In a proceeding 
before the Commission on exceptions to an intermediate decision, such 
motion shall be filed no later than the date for the filing of briefs on 
exceptions. Motions requesting oral argument may be included in briefs 
or briefs on exceptions or in a separate document.
    (c) Notice of oral argument. The Commission shall rule on requests 
for oral argument, and if argument is allowed, the Commission shall 
notify the participants of the time and place set for argument, the 
amount of time allowed each participant, and the issue or issues on 
which oral argument is to be heard. Unless otherwise ordered by the 
Commission, oral argument shall be limited to matters properly raised on 
the record and in the briefs before the Commission.
    (d) Use of documents at oral argument. Charts, graphs, maps, tables 
and other written material may be presented to the Commission at oral 
argument only if limited to facts in the record of the case being argued 
and if copies of such documents are filed with the Secretary and served 
on all parties at least 7 days in advance of the argument. Enlargements 
of such charts, graphs, maps and tables may be used at the argument 
provided copies are filed and served as required by this paragraph.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.38   Omission of intermediate decisions.

    (a) Basis of omission. In any proceeding noticed pursuant to 
Sec. 3001.17, the Commission, on the motion of any participant or on its 
own initiative, may direct the certification of the record to the 
Commission and omit any intermediate decision upon a finding on the 
record that due and timely execution of its functions imperatively and 
unavoidably so requires. In proceedings in which all participants concur 
in a request by any participant that any intermediate decision be 
omitted, the Commission shall direct the certification of the record to 
the Commission and forthwith render a final decision unless the 
Commission denies such request within 10 days next following its filing 
or referral by the presiding officer.
    (b) Requests for omission. Requests for omission of the intermediate 
decision in any proceeding shall be made by motion pursuant to 
Sec. 3001.21 or made orally on the record before the presiding officer 
who shall promptly refer the same to the Commission. Such requests shall 
specify (1) the concurrence of other parties and (2) whether opportunity 
for

[[Page 350]]

filing briefs or presenting oral argument to the Commission is desired 
or waived. Failure of any party to object to such request shall 
constitute a waiver of any objections.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.39   Intermediate decisions.

    (a) Initial decision by presiding officer. In any proceedings in 
which a Commissioner or hearing officer has presided at the reception of 
evidence, such presiding officer, as soon as practicable after the 
conclusion of the hearing and the filing of briefs, shall certify and 
file with the Secretary, a copy of the record of the hearing and his/her 
initial decision on the matters and issues presented for decision in 
such proceeding.
    (b) Tentative decision. Prior to the issuance of an initial decision 
by the presiding officer, the Commission, with notice to the 
participants or by order in specific cases or by general rule for a 
class of cases, may direct the certification of the record to the 
Commission for the purpose of the issuance of a tentative decision. In 
such cases, the Commission may issue a tentative decision or require 
that the presiding officer or any designated responsible officer of the 
Commission recommend a decision.
    (c) Contents. All intermediate decisions (initial, recommended or 
tentative) shall include (1) findings and conclusions, and the reasons 
or basis therefor, on all the material issues of fact, law, or 
discretion presented on the record, and (2) the appropriate recommended 
decision, advisory opinion or public report pursuant to the Act. An 
intermediate decision in a proceeding under section 3622 or 3623 of the 
Act shall include a statement specifically responsive to the criteria 
established under section 3622 or 3623 of the Act, as the case may be; 
and an intermediate decision in a proceeding under section 3661 of the 
Act shall include a determination of the question of whether or not the 
proposed change in the nature of postal service conforms to the policies 
established under the Act.
    (d) Service and Commission review. All intermediate decisions shall 
be part of the record, shall be served on the participants to the 
proceeding by the Secretary pursuant to Sec. 3001.12 and shall be 
subject to review by the Commission on its own initiative, or the filing 
of exceptions by the participants pursuant to Sec. 3001.40.
    (e) Unavailability of presiding officer. In any proceeding in which 
the intermediate decision is not omitted pursuant to Sec. 3001.38, if a 
presiding officer becomes unavailable to issue an intermediate decision 
on a timely basis, the Commission shall, by a notice served on the 
participants require the record to be certified to it and it shall 
either designate a qualified responsible officer of the Commission to 
issue a recommended decision or will itself issued a tentative decision, 
as the Commission may deem appropriate.
    (f) Effect of intermediate decision. Unless briefs on exceptions are 
filed to an intermediate decision pursuant to Sec. 3001.40 or unless the 
Commission issues an order to review an intermediate decision on its own 
initiative, the intermediate decision shall become the final action of 
the Commission after 30 days from the date of issuance thereof. If 
briefs on exceptions are timely filed or the Commission initiates review 
on its own motion, the intermediate decision is stayed until further 
order of the Commission.

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.40   Exceptions to intermediate decisions.

    (a) Briefs on exceptions and opposing exceptions. Any participant in 
a proceeding may file exceptions to any intermediate decision by filing 
a brief on exceptions with the Commission within 30 days after the date 
of issuance of the intermediate decision or such other time as may be 
fixed by the Commission. Any participant to a proceeding may file a 
response to briefs on exceptions within 20 days after the time limited 
for the filing of briefs on exceptions or such other time as may be 
fixed by the Commission. No further response will be entertained unless 
the Commission, upon motion for good cause shown or on its own 
initiative, so orders.
    (b) Filing and contents. Briefs on exceptions and briefs opposing 
exceptions shall be filed in accordance with Sec. 3001.34. In briefs on 
exceptions, the discussion of evidence, reasons and authorities shall be 
specifically directed

[[Page 351]]

to the findings, conclusions and recommendations in the intermediate 
decision to which exception is taken. Briefs on exceptions should not 
include a discussion of evidence and authorities on matters and issues 
to which no exception to the intermediate decision is taken. Briefs on 
exceptions and briefs opposing exceptions need not contain a statement 
of the case to the extent that it was correctly stated in either the 
intermediate decision or the brief on exceptions of another participant 
to which reference is made.
    (c) Failure to except results in waiver. Any participant who fails 
to except or object to any part of an intermediate decision in its brief 
on exceptions may not thereafter raise such exceptions or objections 
which shall be deemed to have been waived.

(84 Stat. 759-761, 764; 39 U.S.C. 3603, 3622-3624, 3661, 3662)

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 4329, Feb. 13, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.41   Rulemaking proceedings.

    (a) General notice. Before the adoption of any rule of general 
applicability, or the commencement of any hearing on any such proposed 
rulemaking, the Commission will cause general notice to be given by 
publication in the Federal Register, such notice to be published therein 
not less than 30 days prior to the date fixed for the consideration of 
the adoption of a proposed rule or rules or for the commencement of the 
hearing, if any, on the proposed rulemaking, except where a shorter 
period is reasonable and good cause exists therefor. However, where the 
Commission, for good cause, finds it impracticable, unnecessary, or 
contrary to the public interest to give such notice, it may proceed with 
the adoption of rules without notice by incorporating therein a finding 
to such effect and a concise statement of the reasons therefor. Advance 
notice shall not be required for rules subject to 5 U.S.C. 553(d).
    (b) Contents of notice. The notice shall include (1) a statement of 
the time, place and nature of the public rulemaking proceedings; (2) 
reference to the legal authority under which the rule is proposed; and 
(3) either the terms or substance of the proposed rule or a description 
of the subjects and issues involved.
    (c) Participation. After notice given as provided in paragraph (a) 
of this section, the Commission shall give interested persons an 
opportunity to participate in the rulemaking through submission of 
written data, views, or arguments with or without opportunity for oral 
presentation.
    (d) General statement as to basis and purpose. After consideration 
of the relevant matter presented, the Commission shall incorporate in 
the rules adopted a concise general statement of their basis and 
purpose.
    (e) Exceptions. Except when notice or hearing is required by 
statute, the Commission may issue at any time rules of organization, 
procedure or practice, or interpretive rules, or statements of policy, 
without notice or public procedure, and this section is not to be 
construed as applicable to the extent that there may be involved any 
military, naval or foreign affairs function of the United States, or any 
matter relating to the Commission's management or personnel, or to U.S. 
property, loans, grants, benefits, or contracts.

(84 Stat. 759-761, 764; 39 U.S.C. 3603, 3622-3624, 3661, 3662)

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 38 FR 4329, Feb. 13, 1973]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.42   Public information and requests.

    This section prescribes the rules governing: Publication of 
recommended decisions, advisory opinions, and public reports; and 
records of the Commission.
    (a) Notice and publication. Service of intermediate and recommended 
decisions, advisory opinions and public reports upon parties to the 
proceedings is provided in Secs. 3001.12(a) and 3001.39(d). Descriptions 
of the Commission's organization, its methods of operation, statements 
of policy and interpretations, procedural and substantive rules, and 
amendments thereto will be filed with and published in the Federal 
Register. Commission recommended decisions, advisory opinions and public 
reports, Commission orders, and intermediate decisions will be released 
to

[[Page 352]]

the press and made available to the public promptly.
    (b) Public records. Except as provided in Sec. 3001.31a of this 
chapter, the public records of the Commission include:
    (1) All submittals and filings as follows:
    (i) Requests of the Postal Service for recommended decisions or 
advisory opinions, public reports, complaints (both formal and 
informal), and other papers seeking Commission action;
    (ii) Financial, statistical and other reports to the Commission, and 
other filings and submittals to the Commission in compliance with the 
requirements of any statute, Executive order, or Commission rule, 
regulation, or order;
    (iii) All answers, replies, responses, objections, protests, 
motions, stipulations, exceptions, other pleadings, notices, 
depositions, certificates, proofs of service, transcripts, and briefs in 
any matter or proceeding;
    (iv) All exhibits, attachments and appendices to, amendments and 
corrections of, supplements to, or transmittals or withdrawals of, any 
of the foregoing;
    (v) Any Commission correspondence relating to any of the foregoing.
    (2) All other parts of the formal record in any matter or proceeding 
set for formal or statutory hearing and any Commission correspondence 
related thereto. ``Formal record'' includes in addition to all the 
filings and submittals, any notice or Commission order initiating the 
matter or proceeding, and, if a hearing is held, the following: the 
designation of the presiding officer, transcript of hearings, all 
exhibits received in evidence, offers of proof, motions, stipulations, 
proofs of service, referrals to the Commission, and determination made 
by the Commission thereon, certifications to the Commission, and 
anything else upon which action of the presiding officer or the 
Commission may be based; it does not include any unaccepted offer of 
settlement made by a party in the course of a proceeding and not 
formally submitted to the Commission.
    (3) Any proposed testimony or exhibit filed with the Commission but 
not yet offered or received in evidence.
    (4) All presiding officer actions and all presiding officer 
correspondence and memoranda to or from others except within his own 
office.
    (5) All Commission orders, notices, findings, determinations, and 
other actions in any matter or proceeding and all Commission minutes 
which have been approved.
    (6) All Commission correspondence relating to any furnishing of data 
or information by the Postal Service.
    (7) Commission correspondence with respect to the furnishing of 
data, information, comments, or recommendations to or by another branch, 
department, or agency of the Government where furnished to satisfy a 
specific requirement of a statute or where made public by that branch, 
department or agency.
    (8) Commission correspondence and reports on legislative matters 
under consideration by the Office of Management and Budget or Congress 
but only if and after made public or released for publication by that 
Office or the Commission or Member of Congress involved.
    (9) Commission correspondence on the interpretation or applicability 
of any statute, rule, regulation, recommended decision, advisory 
opinion, or public report issued or administered by the Commission and 
letters of opinion on that subject signed by the General Counsel and 
sent to others than the Commission, a Commissioner, or any of the staff.
    (10) Copies of all filings by the Commission, and all orders, 
judgments, decrees, and mandates directed to the Commission in Court 
proceedings involving Commission action and all correspondence with the 
courts or clerks of court.
    (11) The Commission's administrative and operating manuals as 
issued.
    (12) All other records of the Commission except for those that are:
    (i)(a) Specifically authorized under criteria established by an 
Executive order to be kept secret in the interest of national defense or 
foreign policy and (b) are in fact properly classified pursuant to such 
Executive order;
    (ii) Related solely to the internal personnel rules and practices of 
the Commission;

[[Page 353]]

    (iii) Specifically exempted from disclosure by statute;
    (iv) Trade secrets and commercial or financial information obtained 
from a person and privileged or confidential;
    (v) Interagency or intra-agency memoranda or letters which would not 
be available by law to a party other than an agency in litigation with 
the Commission;
    (vi) Personnel and medical files and similar files, the disclosure 
of which would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal 
privacy.
    (vii) Investigatory records compiled for law enforcement purposes, 
to the extent specified in 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(7).
    (13) The following are examples of information which is not part of 
the public records of the Commission:
    (i) Written communications between or among the Commission, members 
of the Commission, the Secretary, and expressly designated members of 
the staff while particularly assigned, in accordance with all applicable 
legal requirements, to aid the Commission in the drafting of any 
recommended decision, advisory opinion or public report and findings, 
with or without opinion, or report in any matter or proceeding;
    (ii) Unaccepted offers of settlement in any matter or proceeding 
unless or until made public by act of the offeror.
    (c) Requests for Records. Requests for records shall be in writing 
and shall reasonably describe the records sought. Requests shall be 
addressed to the Secretary at the offices of the Commission. Requests 
which rely upon the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552, shall bear 
the caption ``Freedom of Information Act Request.'' Within 10 days 
(excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal public holidays) after receipt 
of a request for a Commission record, the Secretary shall:
    (1) General. Inform the requestor where and when the records may be 
inspected and, if ascertainable, of the charge for furnishing copies; or
    (2) Deny the request. A denial shall be in writing; it shall cite 
the specific exemption or exemptions under these rules authorizing the 
withholding of the records sought and shall inform the requestor that 
he/she may, within 20 days, appeal the denial to the Commission. Appeals 
to the Commission shall be in writing. The Commission may also review 
any decision of the Secretary on its own initiative. The Commission will 
consider all appeals and either grant or deny them in writing, within 20 
days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal public holidays) of the 
date the appeal is received. If on appeal the denial of the request for 
records is upheld, the Commission shall notify the person making such 
request of the provisions for judicial review of that determination 
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 552(c).
    (3) Extensions of time. The time period for decision on application 
pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section may be extended up to 10 
working days by the Secretary and the time period for decisions on 
appeals may be extended up to 10 working days by the Commission, 
provided, however, that the total period of extensions may not exceed 10 
working days. Such extensions shall be by written notice determining 
that an extension is warranted by unusual circumstances as specified in 
5 U.S.C. 552(a)(6)(B).
    (4) Fees--general information. Documents furnished pursuant to the 
Freedom of Information Act, as amended, are subject to fees governed by 
the following provisions. As used herein,
    (i) Direct costs means expenditures the Commission actually incurs 
in searching for, duplicating, and, where applicable, reviewing 
documents to respond to a request. They include (without limitation) the 
salary of the employee performing work (the basic pay rate of such 
employee plus 16 percent to cover benefits) and the cost of operating 
required machinery.
    (ii) Search means all time spent looking for material responsive to 
a request, including identification of pages or lines within documents. 
The term covers both manual and computerized searching.
    (iii) Duplication means making copies of documents necessary to 
respond to a request. Such copies may be paper, microform, audiovisual, 
or machine-readable.
    (iv) Review means examining documents located in response to a 
commercial-use request to determine whether any porton is exempt from 
mandatory disclosure, and processing

[[Page 354]]

or preparing documents for release, but not determination of general 
legal or policy issues regarding application of exemptions.
    (v) A commercial use request is a request from or on behalf of one 
seeking information for a use or purpose that furthers the commercial, 
trade, or profit interests of the requester or person on whose behalf 
the request is made. In determining the applicability of this term, the 
use to which a requester will put the document is considered first; 
where reasonable doubt exists as to the use, the Commission may seek 
clarification before assigning the request to a category.
    (vi) An educational institution is a preschool, a public or private 
elementary or secondary school, an institution of graduate or 
undergraduate higher education, an institution of professional 
education, and an institution of vocational education, which operates a 
program or programs of scholarly research.
    (vii) A noncommercial scientific institution is an institution, not 
operated on a ``commercial'' basis (as defined above), which is operated 
solely for the purpose of conducting scientific research whose results 
are not intended to promote any particular product or industry.
    (viii) A representative of the news media is any person actively 
gathering news for an entity organized and operated to publish or 
broadcast news to the public. ``News'' means information that concerns 
current events or would be of current interest to the public. Freelance 
journalists may be regarded as working for a news medium if they 
demonstrate (for example, by a publication contract or a past record of 
publication) a solid basis for expecting publication through such 
organization even though not actually employed by it.
    Except in the case of commercial-use requesters, the first 100 pages 
of duplication and the first two hours of search time will be provided 
without charge. A ``page'' for these purposes is a letter- or legal-size 
sheet, or the equivalent amount of information in a medium other than 
paper copy. ``Search time'' for these purposes refers to manual 
searching; if the search is performed by computer, the amount not 
charged for will be the search cost equivalent to two hours' salary of 
the person performing the search. No requester will be charged a fee 
when the cost of collecting the fee would equal or exceed the fee 
itself. In determining whether cost of collection would equal or exceed 
the fee, the allowance for two hours' search or 100 pages of duplication 
will be made before comparing the remaining fee and the cost of 
collection. Documents will be provided without charge when disclosure of 
the information would be in the public interest because it is likely to 
contribute significantly to public understanding of the operations or 
activities of the government and is not primarily in the commercial 
interest of the requester.
    (5) Fees--schedule; administrative provisions. Fees will be charged 
in accordance with the following provisions:
    (i) The level of fee charged depends on the category of requester:
    (a) A request appearing to be for commercial use will be charged the 
full direct costs of searching for, reviewing, and duplicating the 
records sought.
    (b) A request from an educational or noncommercial scientific 
institution will be charged for the cost of duplication only (excluding 
charges for the first 100 pages). To be eligible for this category, a 
requester must show that the request is made under the auspices of a 
qualifying institution and that the records are not sought for 
commercial use but are in furtherance of scholarly (in the case of 
educational institutions) or scientific (in the case of noncommercial 
scientific institutions) research.
    (c) A request from a representative of the news media will be 
charged the cost of duplication only (excluding charges for the first 
100 pages).
    (d) A request from any other requester will be charged the full 
direct cost of searching for and duplicating records responsive to the 
request, except that the first 100 pages of duplication and the first 
two hours of search will be furnished without charge.
    (e) A request from a record subject for records about himself or 
herself filed in a Commission system of records will be charged fees 
under the

[[Page 355]]

Privacy Act of 1974 (which permits charges only for duplication).
    (ii) Fees shall be calculated as follows:
    (a) Manual search: At the salary rate (basic pay plus 16 percent) of 
the employee(s) making the search. Search time will be charged for even 
if the Commission fails to locate records or if records located are 
found exempt from disclosure.
    (b) Computer search: At the actual direct cost of providing the 
search, including computer search time directly attributable to 
searching for records responsive to the request, runs, and operator 
salary apportionable to the search.
    (c) Review (commercial-use requests): At the salary rate (basic pay 
plus 16 percent) of the employee(s) conducting the review. Only the 
review necessary at the initial administrative level to determine the 
applicability of any exemption, and not review at the administrative 
appeal level of an exemption already applied, will be charged for.
    (d) Duplication: At 15 cents per page for paper copy, which the 
Commission has found to be the reasonable direct cost thereof. For 
copies of records prepared by computer (such as tapes or printouts), the 
actual cost of production, including operator time, will be charged.
    (e) Additional services: Postage, insurance, and other additional 
services that may be arranged for by the requester will be charged at 
actual cost.
    (iii) (a) Should it reasonably appear that a requester, or a group 
of requesters, have attempted to evade fees by breaking down a request 
into a series of requests, the Commission will aggregate the separate 
requests. The period of time within which such multiple requests are 
filed will be a major consideration in making such a determination. 
However, multiple requests from one requester covering unrelated 
subjects will not be aggregated.
    (b) Interest at the rate prescribed in 31 U.S.C. 3717 will be 
charged on unpaid fee bills, starting on the 31st day after the bill was 
sent. Receipt of a fee by the Commission, whether processed or not, will 
stay the accrual of interest.
    (c) Advance payment may be required only when the allowable fees are 
likely to exceed $250, in which case advance payment in part or in full 
may be required of requesters with no history of prompt payment, and 
satisfactory assurance of payment from requesters with such history; or 
when the requester has previously failed to pay a fee timely (within 30 
days of the billing date), in which case the Commission may require full 
payment of the amount owed, plus applicable interest, or a demonstration 
that the fee has in fact been paid, together with full advance payment 
of the estimated fee. When advance payment is required, the 
administrative time limits prescribed in subsection (a)(6) of the 
Freedom of Information Act (10 working days from receipt of initial 
requests, 20 working days from receipt of appeals of initial denials, 
and any permissible extensions of these limits) begin only after such 
payment has been received.
    (d) Procedure in event of subpoena. If an officer or employee of the 
Commission is served with a subpoena duces tecum, material which is not 
part of the public files and records of the Commission shall be produced 
only as authorized by the Commission. Service of such a subpoena shall 
immediately be reported to the Commission with a statement of all 
relevant facts. The Commission will thereupon enter such order or give 
such instructions as it deems advisable.

(84 Stat. 759-761, 764; 39 U.S.C. 3603, 3622-3624, 3661, 3662)

[38 FR 4329, Feb. 13, 1973, as amended at 40 FR 6972, Feb. 18, 1975; 42 
FR 25729, May 19, 1977; 44 FR 33881, June 13, 1979; 52 FR 13443, 13444, 
Apr. 23, 1987; 58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.42a  Protection of trade secrets and commercial or financial information.

    This section describes the procedures for evaluating Freedom of 
Information Act requests for information provided to the Commission by a 
submitter who believes it to be exempted from disclosure by 5 U.S.C. 
552(b)(4). Protection of information made available pursuant to 
proceedings subject to these rules, 39 CFR part 3001, including 
information provided pursuant to that subpart requiring the filing of 
periodic reports, is provided upon request to the Commission as 
described in rule 3001.31(a).

[[Page 356]]

Other information submitted to the Commission which the submitter 
believes to be a trade secret or commercial or financial information 
privileged or confidential and thereby exempt from Freedom of 
Information Act disclosure under 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(4), should be 
accompanied by a brief written statement of why that material is exempt. 
When a request pursuant to rule 3001.42(c) is made for information so 
designated, the Secretary promptly will notify the submitter, and 
provide an opportunity for filing an additional explanation of why the 
material should not be disclosed prior to decision on that request.

[47 FR 55393, Dec. 9, 1982, as amended at 58 FR 38976, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.43   Public attendance at Commission meetings.

    (a) Open Commission meetings. (1) Commissioners shall not jointly 
conduct or dispose of agency business other than in accordance with this 
section. Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, every 
portion of every meeting of the Commission shall be open to public 
observation. Access to documents being considered at Commission meetings 
shall be obtained in the manner set forth in Sec. 3001.42.
    (2) Members of the public may not participate in open meetings. They 
may record the proceedings, provided they use battery-operated recording 
devices at their seats. Cameras may be used by observers to photograph 
proceedings, provided it is done from their seats and no flash or 
lighting equipment is used. Persons may electronically record or 
photograph a meeting, as long as such activity does not impede or 
disturb the members of the Commission in the performance of their 
duties, or members of the public attempting to observe, or to record or 
photograph, the Commission meeting.
    (b) Physical arrangements for open meetings. The Secretary shall be 
responsible for seeing that ample space, sufficient visibility, and 
adequate acoustics are provided for public observation of the Commission 
meetings.
    (c) Closed Commission meetings. Except in a case where the 
Commission finds that the public interest requires otherwise, the second 
sentence of paragraph (a) shall not apply to any portion of a Commission 
meeting, and the requirements of paragraphs (d) and (e) shall not apply 
to any information pertaining to such meeting otherwise required by this 
section to be disclosed to the public, where the Commission properly 
determines that such portion or portions of its meetings or the 
disclosure of such information is likely to
    (1) Disclose matters that are (i) specifically authorized under 
criteria established by an Executive order to be kept secret in the 
interests of national defense or foreign policy and (ii) in fact 
properly classified pursuant to such Executive order;
    (2) Relate solely to the internal personnel rules and practices of 
the Commission;
    (3) Disclose matters specifically exempted from disclosure by 
statute (other than section 552 of title 5), provided that such statute 
(i) requires that the matter be withheld from the public in such a 
manner as to leave no discretion on the issue, or (ii) establishes 
particular criteria for withholding or refers to particular types of 
matters to be withheld;
    (4) Disclose trade secrets and commercial or financial information 
obtained from a person and privileged or confidential;
    (5) Involve accusing any person of a crime, or formally censuring 
any person;
    (6) Disclose information of a personal nature where disclosure would 
constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy;
    (7) Disclose investigatory records compiled for law enforcement 
purposes, or information which if written would be contained in such 
records, but only to the extent that the production of such records or 
information would (i) interfere with enforcement proceedings, (ii) 
deprive a person of a right to a fair trial or an impartial 
adjudication, (iii) constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal 
privacy, (iv) disclose the identity of a confidential source and, in the 
case of a record compiled by a criminal law enforcement authority in the 
course of a criminal

[[Page 357]]

investigation, or by an agency conducting a lawful national security 
intelligence investigation, confidential information furnished only by 
the confidential source, (v) disclose investigative techniques and 
procedures, or (vi) endanger the life or physical safety of law 
enforcement personnel;
    (8) Disclose information contained in or related to examination, 
operating, or condition reports prepared by, on behalf of, or for the 
use of an agency responsible for the regulation or supervision of 
financial institutions;
    (9) Disclose information the premature disclosure of which would be 
likely to significantly frustrate implementation of a proposed 
Commission action, except that paragraph (c)(9) shall not apply in any 
instance where the Commission has already disclosed to the public the 
content or nature of its proposed action, or where the Commission is 
required by law to make such disclosure on its own initiative prior to 
taking final Commission action on such proposal; or
    (10) Specifically concern the Commission's issuance of a subpoena or 
the Commission's participation in a civil action or proceeding, an 
action in a foreign court or international tribunal, or an arbitration, 
or the initiation, conduct or disposition by the Commission of a 
particular case of formal Commission adjudication pursuant to the 
procedures in section 554 of title 5 or otherwise involving a 
determination on the record after opportunity for a hearing as provided 
by section 3624(a) of title 39.
    (d) Procedures for closing meetings. (1) Action under paragraph (c) 
of this section shall be taken only when three Commissioners vote to 
take such action. A separate vote of the Commissioners shall be taken 
with respect to each agency meeting a portion or portions of which are 
proposed to be closed to the public pursuant to paragraph (c) of this 
section, or with respect to any information which is proposed to be 
withheld under paragraph (c) of this section. A single vote may be taken 
with respect to a series of meetings, a portion or portions of which are 
proposed to be closed to the public, or with respect to any information 
concerning such series of meetings, so long as each meeting in such 
series involves the same particular matters and is scheduled to be held 
no more than 30 days after the initial meeting in such series. The vote 
of each Commissioner participating in such vote shall be recorded and no 
proxies shall be allowed.
    (2) Whenever any person whose interests may be directly affected by 
a portion of a meeting requests that the Commission close such portion 
to the public for any of the reasons referred to in paragraph (c) (5), 
(6), or (7) of this section, the Commission upon request of any one of 
its members, shall vote by recorded vote whether to close such meeting.
    (3) Within 1 day of any vote taken pursuant to paragraph (d)(1) or 
(2) of this section, the Commission shall make publicly available a 
written copy of such vote reflecting the vote of each member on the 
question. If a portion of a meeting is to be closed to the public, the 
Commission shall, within 1 day of the vote taken pursuant to paragraph 
(d)(1) or (2) of this section, make publicly available a full written 
explanation of its action closing the portion together with a list of 
all persons expected to attend the meeting and their affiliation.
    (4) Any person may protest a Commission decision to hold a closed 
meeting under paragraph (d)(1) or (2) of this section by filing a motion 
to open the meeting. Such motion shall be addressed to the Commission 
and shall set forth with particularity the statutory or other authority 
relied upon, the reasons for which the movant believes the meeting 
should not be closed, and the reasons for which the movant believes that 
the public interest requires the meeting to be open. Such motion shall 
be filed with the Secretary no later than 24 hours prior to the time for 
which the closed meeting is scheduled.
    (5) The Commission has determined that a majority of its meetings 
may be closed to the public pursuant to paragraph (c)(4), (8) or (10) of 
this section or any combination thereof. Therefore, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 
552b(d)(4), Commission meetings shall be closed to the public pursuant 
to paragraph (c)(4), (8) or (10) of this section or any combination 
thereof when three Commissioners

[[Page 358]]

vote by recorded vote at the beginning of such meeting, or portion 
thereof, to close the exempt portion or portions of the meeting, and a 
copy of such vote, reflecting the vote of each Commissioner on the 
question, is made available to the public. The provisions of paragraphs 
(d) (1), (2), (3), and (e) of this section shall not apply to any 
portion of a meeting to which paragraph (d)(5) of this section applies: 
Provided, that the Commission shall, except to the extent that such 
information is exempt from disclosure under the provisions of paragraph 
(c) of this section, provide the public with public announcement of the 
time, place, and subject matter of the meeting and of each portion 
thereof at the earliest practicable time.
    (e) Scheduling and public announcement. (1) In the case of each 
meeting, the Commission shall make public announcement, at least 1 week 
before the meeting, of the time, place, and subject matter of the 
meeting, whether it is to be open or closed to the public, and the name 
and phone number of the official designated by the Commission to respond 
to requests for information about the meeting. Such announcement shall 
be made unless three Commissioners determine by a recorded vote that 
Commission business requires that such meeting be called at an earlier 
date, in which case the Commission shall make public announcement of the 
time, place, and subject matter of such meeting, and whether open or 
closed to the public, at the earliest practicable time.
    (2) The time or place of a meeting may be changed following the 
public announcement required by paragraph (e)(1) of this section only if 
the Commission publicly announces such change at the earliest 
practicable time. The subject matter of a meeting, or the determination 
of the Commission to open or close a meeting, or a portion of a meeting, 
to the public, may be changed following the public announcement required 
by paragraph (e)(1) only if (i) three Commissioners determine by a 
recorded vote that Commission business so requires and that no earlier 
announcement of the change was possible, and (ii) the Commission 
publicly announces such change and the vote of each Commissioner upon 
such change at the earliest practicable time.
    (3) Immediately following each public announcement required by 
paragraph (e) of this section, notice of the time, place, and subject 
matter of a meeting, whether the meeting is open or closed, any change 
in one of the preceding, and the name and phone number of the official 
designated by the Commission to respond to requests for information 
about the meeting, shall also be submitted for publication in the 
Federal Register.
    (4) The public announcement required by this section may consist of 
the Secretary:
    (i) Publicly posting a copy of the document in the Office of Public 
Information of the Commission at 1333 H Street, NW., Suite 300, 
Washington, DC 20268-0001;
    (ii) Mailing a copy to all persons whose names are on a mailing list 
maintained for this purpose;
    (iii) Operating a recorded telephone announcement, giving the 
announcement; and
    (iv) Any other means which the Secretary believes will serve to 
further inform any persons who might be interested.
    (f) Certification of closed meetings; transcripts, electronic 
recordings, and minutes. (1) Before any meeting to be closed pursuant to 
paragraphs (c) (1) through (10) of this section, the General Counsel of 
the Commission, or in the General Counsel's absence, the senior advisory 
Assistant General Counsel available, should publicly certify that, in 
his/her opinion, the meeting may be closed to the public and shall state 
each relevant exemptive provision. A copy of such certification, 
together with a statement from the presiding officer of the meeting 
setting forth the time and place of the meeting, and the persons 
present, shall be retained by the Commission. The Commission shall 
maintain a complete transcript or electronic recording adequate to 
record fully the proceedings of each meeting, or portion of a meeting, 
closed to the public, except that in the case of a meeting, or portion 
of a meeting, closed to the public pursuant to paragraph (c)(8) or (10) 
of this section, the Commission shall maintain either such

[[Page 359]]

a transcript or recording, or a set of minutes. Such minutes shall fully 
and clearly describe all matters discussed and shall provide a full and 
accurate summary of any actions taken, and the reasons therefor, 
including a description of the views expressed on any item and the 
record of any rollcall vote (reflecting the vote of each Commissioner on 
the question). All documents considered in connection with any action 
shall be identified in such minutes.
    (2) The Commission shall make promptly available to the public, in a 
place easily accessible to the public, the transcript, electronic 
recording, or minutes (as required by paragraph (f)(1) of this section) 
of the discussion of any item on the agenda, or of any item of the 
testimony of any witness received at the meeting, except for such item 
or items of such discussion or testimony as the Commission determines by 
a majority vote of all its members (i) contains information which may be 
withheld under paragraph (c) of this section, and (ii) is not required 
by the public interest to be made available. Copies of such transcript, 
or minutes, or a transcription of such recording disclosing the identity 
of each speaker, shall be furnished to any person at the actual cost of 
duplication or transcription. The Commission shall maintain a complete 
verbatim copy of the transcript, a complete copy of the minutes, or a 
complete electronic recording of each meeting, or portion of a meeting, 
closed to the public, for a period of at least 2 years after such 
meeting, or until 1 year after the conclusion of any Commission 
proceeding with respect to which the meeting or portion was held, 
whichever occurs later.
    (g) Requests to open or close Commission meetings. (1)(i) Any person 
may request in writing that the Commission open to public observation 
discussion of a matter which it has earlier decided to close.
    (ii) Such requests shall be captioned ``Request to open ---------- 
(date) Commission meeting on item ---------- (number or description).'' 
The request shall state the reason(s) therefor, the name and address of 
the person making the request and, if desired, a telephone number.
    (iii) Ten copies of such requests must be received by the Office of 
the Secretary no later than three working days after the issuance of the 
Notice of Meeting to which the request pertains. Requests received after 
that time will be returned to the requester with a statement that the 
request was untimely received and that copies of any nonexempt portions 
of the transcript or minutes for the meeting in question will ordinarily 
be available in the Office of Public Information ten working days after 
the meeting.
    (2)(i) Any person whose interests may be directly affected may 
request in writing that the Commission close to public observation 
discussion of a matter which it has earlier decided to open as provided 
for in paragraph (d)(2) of this section.
    (ii) Such requests shall be captioned ``Request to Close ---------- 
(date) Commission meeting on item ---------- (number or description),'' 
shall state the reason(s) therefor, the name and address of the person 
making the request and, if desired, a telephone number.
    (iii) Ten copies of such requests should be filed with the Office of 
the Secretary as soon as possible after the issuance of the Notice of 
Meeting to which the request pertains. A single copy of the request will 
be accepted. Requests to close meetings must be received by the Office 
of the Secretary no later than the time scheduled for the meeting to 
which such request pertains.
    (3) The Secretary shall retain one copy of timely requests and 
forward one copy to each Commissioner, one copy to the interested 
Office, and two copies to the Docket Section, one for entry in the 
appropriate docket file, if any, and one to be posted on the Public 
Notice Board located in that section as an attachment to the Notice of 
Meeting to which it pertains.
    (4) Pleadings replying to requests to open or close shall not be 
accepted.
    (5) Any Commissioner may require that the Commission vote upon the 
request to open or close. If the request is supported by the votes of a 
majority of the agency membership, notice of change in meeting shall be 
issued and the Secretary shall immediately notify

[[Page 360]]

the requester and, before the close of business the next working day, 
have posted such vote and other material required by paragraphs (d) and 
(e) of this section on the Commission's Public Notice Board.
    (6) If no Commissioner requests that a vote be taken on a request to 
open or close a Commission meeting, the Secretary shall by the close of 
the next working day after the meeting to which such request pertains 
certify that no vote was taken. The Secretary shall forward one copy of 
that certification to the requester and two copies of that certification 
to the Docket Section, one to be placed in the appropriate docket file, 
if any, and one to be posted on the Public Notice Board, where it will 
be displayed for one week.

[42 FR 13290, Mar. 10, 1977, as amended at 42 FR 25729, May 19, 1977; 58 
FR 38976, July 21, 1993]


<R04>
  Subpart B--Rules Applicable to Requests for Changes in Rates or Fees


<R05>
Sec. 3001.51   Applicability.

    The rules in this subpart govern the procedure with regard to 
requests of the Postal Service pursuant to section 3622 of the Act that 
the Commission submit a recommended decision on changes in a rate or 
rates of postage or in a fee or fees for postal service if the Postal 
Service determines that such changes would be in the public interest and 
in accordance with the policies of the Act. The Rules of General 
Applicability in subpart A of this part are also applicable to 
proceedings on requests subject to this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.52   Filing of formal requests.

    Whenever the Postal Service determines to request that the 
Commission submit a recommended decision on changes in rates or fees 
subject to this subpart, the Postal Service shall file with the 
Commission a formal request for a recommended decision. Such request 
shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Secs. 3001.9 to 
3001.11 and 3001.54. Within 5 days after the Postal Service has filed a 
formal request for a recommended decision in accordance with this 
subsection, the Secretary shall lodge a notice thereof with the Director 
of the Federal Register for publication in the Federal Register.

[38 FR 4330, Feb. 13, 1973, as amended at 51 FR 8827, Mar. 14, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.53   Filing of prepared direct evidence.

    Simultaneously with the filing of the formal request for a 
recommended decision under this subpart, the Postal Service shall file 
all of the prepared direct evidence upon which it proposes to rely in 
the proceeding on the record before the Commission to establish that the 
proposed changes or adjustments in rates or fees are in the public 
interest and are in accordance with the policies and the applicable 
criteria of the Act. Such prepared direct evidence shall be in the form 
of prepared written testimony and documentary exhibits which shall be 
filed in accordance with Sec. 3001.31.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.54   Contents of formal requests.

    (a) General requirements. (1) Each formal request filed under this 
subpart shall include such information and data and such statements of 
reasons and bases as are necessary and appropriate fully to inform the 
Commission and the parties of the nature, scope, significance, and 
impact of the proposed changes or adjustments in rates or fees and to 
show that the changes or adjustments in rates or fees are in the public 
interest and in accordance with the policies of the Act and the 
applicable criteria of the Act. To the extent information is available 
or can be made available without undue burden, each formal request shall 
include the information specified in paragraphs (b) through (r) of this 
section. The request shall describe any changes that it proposes in the 
attribution procedures applied by the Commission in the most recent 
general rate proceeding in which its recommended rates or fees were 
adopted. If a request proposes to change the cost attribution principles 
applied by the Commission in the most recent general rate proceeding in 
which its recommended rates were adopted, the Postal Service's request 
shall include an alternate cost presentation satisfying paragraph (h) of 
this section

[[Page 361]]

that shows what the effect on its request would be if it did not propose 
changes in attribution principles. If the required information is set 
forth in the Postal Service's prepared direct evidence, it shall be 
deemed to be part of the formal request without restatement.
    (2) If any information required by paragraphs (b) through (r) of 
this section is not available and cannot be made available without undue 
burden, the request shall provide where reference is made to this 
paragraph, in lieu of such information, a statement explaining with 
particularity:
    (i) The information which is not available or cannot be made 
available without undue burden;
    (ii) The reason or reasons that each such item of information is not 
available and cannot be made available without undue burden;
    (iii) The steps or actions which would be needed to make each such 
item of information available, together with an estimate of the time and 
expense required therefor;
    (iv) Whether it is contemplated that each such item of information 
will be supplied in the future and, if so, at what time; and
    (v) Whether reliable estimates are available where such information 
cannot be furnished and, if so, the specifics of such estimates.
    (3) The provisions of paragraph (a)(2) of this section for the 
Postal Service to include in its formal request certain alternative 
information in lieu of that specified by paragraphs (b) through (r) of 
this section are not in derogation of the Commission's and the presiding 
officer's authority, pursuant to Secs. 3001.23 through 3001.28, 
respecting the provision of information at a time following receipt of 
the formal request.
    (4) The Commission may request information in addition to that 
required by paragraphs (b) through (r) of this section.
    (b) Rates and standards information. (1) Every formal request shall 
include schedules of the then effective rate or rates of postage and fee 
or fees for all postal services, and, arranged in legislative format, 
schedules of the rate or rates of postage and fee or fees for all postal 
services proposed by the Postal Service, as they would appear in the 
Domestic Mail Classification Schedule. The schedules shall show the full 
rate and where applicable the phased rate under section 3626 of the Act 
and any proposed adjustment to such phased rates under section 3627 of 
the Act indicated by circumstances known at the time of filing.
    (2) The schedules required by paragraph (b)(1) of this section 
shall, for all classes and subclasses of mail and service, be in summary 
fashion and tariff-like form. (E.g., there shall be a specification of 
those rules, regulations and practices which establish the conditions of 
mailability and the standards of service.) As a part thereof, the 
schedules shall specifically be addressed to such functions as mail 
pickup and delivery, processing and other similar functions.
    (3) Subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this section, the schedules 
required by paragraph (b)(1) of this section shall also contain a 
statement identifying the degree of economic substitutability between 
the various classes and subclasses, e.g., a description of cross-
elasticity of demand as between various classes of mail.
    (4) Subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this section, the schedules 
required by paragraph (b)(1) of this section shall be accompanied by an 
identification of all nonpostal services.
    (c) Mail characteristics. Subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section, every formal request shall include an identification of the 
characteristics of the mailer and recipient, and a description of the 
contents of items mailed within the various classes and subclasses of 
mail and service.
    (d) Physical attributes of mail. Subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section, every formal request shall include an identification of the 
physical attributes of the items mailed by class and subclass, including 
shape, weight, and distance.
    (e) Special service arrangements. Subject to paragraph (a)(2) of 
this section, every formal request shall contain, to the extent the 
following information is not expressly included under paragraph (b)(2) 
of this section, a summary statement describing special service 
arrangements provided to, or requested

[[Page 362]]

or required of, mailers by the Postal Service which bear upon the cost 
of service or the value of the mail service to both the sender and the 
recipient, e.g., services relating to mailer preparations in excess of 
requirements specified by the Postal Service Manual, pick-up and 
delivery, expedited or deferred processing, and other similar activities 
performed.
    (f) Total functionalized accrued costs. (1) Subject to paragraph 
(a)(2) of this section, every formal request shall set forth the total 
actual accrued costs during the most recent fiscal year for which they 
are reasonably available. In the event final total actual accrued costs 
are not yet available for the fiscal year immediately preceding the 
fiscal year in which the filing is made, a preliminary or pro forma 
statement of such actual accrued costs shall be furnished. Any 
preliminary statement shall use, as appropriate, quarterly or accounting 
period reports for the preceding fiscal year. A final complete statement 
shall be substituted for any preliminary statement when the former 
becomes available.
    (2) Subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this section, every formal 
request shall also set forth (i) the estimated total accrued costs of 
the Postal Service for the fiscal year in which the filing is made and 
(ii) the estimated total accrued costs of the Postal Service as 
specified in section 3621 of the Act which form the basis for proposed 
change in rates or fees. Estimated accrued costs referred to in 
paragraph (f)(2)(ii) of this section shall be for a fiscal year 
beginning not more than 24 months subsequent to the filing date of the 
formal request. These two estimates of accrued costs shall be calculated 
on two bases: First, assuming the prefiling rates and fees and, second, 
assuming the suggested rates and fees. Estimated accrued costs shall be 
accompanied by an explanation of the methods and procedures used for 
cost projections. The analyses of estimated costs shall include, but 
need not be limited to:
    (a) An explanation of the projection of total volumes;
    (b) An explanation of the effect of the projected volume levels on 
estimated total costs;
    (c) The specification of the cost savings which will be realized 
from gains and improvements in total productivity, indicating such 
factors as operational and technological advances and innovations; and
    (d) The identification of abnormal costs which are expected to be 
incurred in the forecasted test period.
    (3) Each cost presentation required by paragraphs (f)(1) and (2) of 
this section shall, subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this section:
    (i) Show operating costs in sufficient detail as to the accounting 
and functional classifications and with such reasonable explanation so 
that the actual or estimated amount for each item of expense may be 
readily understood;
    (ii) State and fully explain the amounts included for:
    (a) Depreciation on capital facilities and equipment;
    (b) Debt service;
    (c) Contingencies; and
    (d) Extraordinary or nonrecurring expenses;
    (iii) Assign and distribute costs to each of the functions 
comprising the mail process. Such presentations shall include:
    (a) An itemization of costs by the major accounts as reflected by 
the Service's books of accounts for all cost segments, such as 
postmasters, supervisors, etc.;
    (b) An itemization of costs by functions such as collection, 
acceptance, general overheads, etc.;
    (c) An assignment and distribution of the costs by account, 
exemplified in paragraph (f)(3)(iii) (a) of this section, together with 
related mail volumes, to the functions exemplified in paragraph 
(f)(3)(iii) (b) of this section;
    (d) An assignment and distribution of the costs by account, together 
with related mail volumes, to such subfunctions within each category for 
which information is available or can be developed; and
    (e) An explanation of the method by which the costs by accounts are 
assigned and distributed to functions.
    (g) Costs of prior fiscal years. Subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section, every formal request shall present the total actual accrued 
costs for each fiscal year since the last filing pursuant

[[Page 363]]

to this section. Such submission should be in a form as nearly 
consistent as possible with the filing under paragraph (f) of this 
section, together with explanations of any departures from such form and 
the effect of such departures.
    (h) Separation, attribution, and assignment of certain costs. (1) 
Every formal  request  shall  separate  the Service's actual and 
estimated total costs, for the fiscal years specified in paragraph (f) 
of this section, as between postal services (including international 
mail) and nonpostal services. The presentation shall show the 
methodology for separating postal costs as between postal services and 
nonpostal services, and shall be in sufficient detail to allow a 
determination that no nonpostal costs have been assigned or allocated to 
postal services.
    (2) Subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this section, the costs for 
postal services, as set forth by functions pursuant to paragraph (f), 
shall be separated as between:
    (i) Those direct costs which can be attributed to each class of mail 
or type of mail service;
    (ii) Those indirect costs which can be attributed to each class of 
mail or type of mail service;
    (iii) Any other costs of the Service which can be reasonably 
assigned to each class of mail or type of mail serv- ice; and
    (iv) Any costs which cannot be attributed or reasonably 
assigned.<SUP>a
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    a</SUP> In his initial decision in Docket R71-1 the presiding 
officer noted two possible interpretations of 39 U.S.C. 3622(b)(3)--
first, that all costs are either ``attributable'' or ``reasonably 
assignable'' and, second, that there are some ``remaining costs which 
cannot be attributed or reasonably assigned to classes of mail''. See 
Docket R71-1, Vol. I, 1-9. If the first interpretation is deemed to be 
correct, no costs would be reported in the category denominated by 
Sec. 3001.54(h)(2)(iv). The Commission was cognizant in writing the 
rules of the presiding officer's belief that it was not necessary to 
adopt either reading as exclusive.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (3) The methodology used to derive the costs requested in paragraphs 
(h)(2) (i) through (iv) of this section shall be set forth in detail.
    (4) The attributable and other costs reasonably assignable as 
provided in paragraphs (h)(2) (i) through (iii) of this section shall 
separately be attributed to mail classes, subclasses, special services, 
and, to the extent practical, rate categories of mail service. The 
submission shall identify the methodology used to attribute or assign 
each type of such costs and, subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section, shall also include an analysis of the effect on costs of:
    (i) Volume;
    (ii) Peaking patterns;
    (iii) Priority of handling;
    (iv) Mailer preparations;
    (v) Quality of service;
    (vi) The physical nature of the item mailed;
    (vii) Expected gains in total productivity, indicating such factors 
as operational and technological advances and innovations; and
    (viii) Any other factor affecting costs.
    (5) The cost forecasting or ``roll-forward'' model shall be 
provided. It shall include the following items:
    (i) For each cost segment component, a listing of all forecasting 
factors used in the cost level, mail volume, nonvolume workload, 
additional workday, productivity and other programs effects.
    (ii) For each ``ripple-affected'' cost segment component, a listing 
of those segments and components that determine its level of attribution 
or its distribution to mail class, subclass, rate category and service.
    (iii) For each longer-run cost segment component:
    (a) A listing of all factors used in determining its overall level 
of attribution, and
    (b) A listing of the specific cost segment components used in 
determining its level of attribution, and its distribution to mail 
class, subclass, rate category and service.
    (iv) Workpapers showing the application of the forecasting factors 
and procedures to each cost segment component for each time period used 
in the forecasting process. Such workpapers shall include the 
quantification, and distribution to mail class, subclass, rate category, 
and service, of each cost segment component, separating the short-run 
from the longer-run portions.

[[Page 364]]

Such workpapers shall conform to the requirements of paragraph (o) of 
this section. Compliance with the citation requirements of paragraph 
(o)(4) of this section shall be achieved by providing citations in 
``roll-forward'' workpapers in the following cases:
    (a) Workpapers showing the application of the forecasting factors 
and computational procedures (i.e., computer subroutines described in 
paragraph (h)(5)(iv)(b) of this section) to representative short-run 
cost segment components and to representative longer run cost segment 
components for representative time periods used in the forecasting 
process.
    (b) Workpapers showing the application of a computational procedure 
to a cost segment component, if the application of a forecasting factor 
or computational procedure to a particular cost segment component 
deviates from the application of that forecasting factor or 
computational procedure as presented in the workpapers required by 
paragraph (h)(5)(iv)(a) of this section.
    (v) If the ``roll forward'' model is submitted in the form of a 
computer-generated model, it shall include:
    (a) An annotated glossary of input data files, to include, for each 
time period:
    (1) The name of each input data file,
    (2) A general description of each file in relation to the ``roll 
forward'' process,
    (3) The format for each kind of data record in the file,
    (4) For each distinct format type used in the file, a brief 
description of each data item included in the format.
    (b) A hard-copy description, in the form of a mathematical equation, 
of each subroutine in the program.
    (c) A copy of the Base Year attibutable cost matrix on a 5-inch 
floppy diskette in MS-DOS format.
    (6) Attributable cost final adjustments by mail class, subclass, 
rate category and service, details of the development of those 
adjustments, and an explanation of each adjustment shall be provided.
    (7) ``Other services'' adjustments by mail class, subclass, rate 
category and service, details of the development of those adjustments, 
and an explanation of each adjustment shall be provided.
    (8) An overall summary cost table shall be provided. It shall show 
by mail class, subclass, rate category and service, short-run 
attributable costs, longer-run attributable costs, assignable costs by 
category, and all adjustments made to each of the foregoing.
    (9) For each cost segment, base-year amounts for each included 
account and subaccount shall be provided.
    (10) The minimum level of disaggregation required for presenting 
evidence on a cost segment or component is that employed by the 
Commission in its most recently completed section 3624 proceeding 
establishing a methodological precedent for that segment or component. 
This requirement shall not apply:
    (i) To presentations that propose to define, attribute, assign, or 
distribute to mail classes segment or component costs by a method not 
employed or recommended by the Commission in such proceeding, and the 
Postal Service has demonstrated that the proposed methodological 
departure makes the level of disaggregation most recently employed or 
recommended by the Commission inappropriate.
    (ii) Where the Postal Service has demonstrated that changes in mail 
operations make the level of disaggregation most recently employed or 
recommended by the Commission inappropriate.
    (11) Any nonattributed or unassigned costs specified in paragraph 
(h)(2)(iv) of this section shall be clearly and separately identified. 
An explanation shall be furnished as to why such costs cannot be 
attributed or assigned. To the extent possible, the presentation shall 
identify all such costs which benefit more than one class of mail or 
type of service (but not all classes or types), together with the mail 
classes or types of services so benefited.
    (12) The Service shall furnish the data relevant to its analysis of 
the effect on costs of the factors specified in paragraphs (h)(4) (i) 
through (viii) of this section.
    (i) Criteria for rate schedule. There shall be included in every 
formal request a statement of the criteria employed in constructing the 
proposed rate schedule. The submission shall include:

[[Page 365]]

    (1) The identification of the relationship between the revenues 
derived from the rates and fees for a particular class and subclass of 
mail or service and the costs attributed or assigned to that class and 
subclass or service;
    (2) The identification of the procedures and methods used to 
apportion (to postal services) that part of the total revenue 
requirement, if any, which is in excess of costs attributed or 
assigned.<SUP>b
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    b</SUP> See footnote a, supra.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (3) Such other studies, information and data relevant to the 
criteria established by section 3622 of the Act with appropriate 
explanations as will assist the Commission in determining whether or not 
the proposed rates or fees are in accordance with such criteria.
    (j) Revenues and volumes. (1) Subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section, every formal request shall set forth the actual and estimated 
revenues of the Postal Service from the then effective postal rates and 
fees for the fiscal years selected for the presentation of cost 
information submitted pursuant to paragraphs (f) and (g) of this 
section.
    (2) Subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this section, every formal 
request shall set forth the estimated revenues based on the suggested 
rates and fees for the fiscal years selected for the presentation of 
cost information submitted pursuant to paragraph (f)(2) of this section.
    (3) Subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this section, the actual and 
estimated revenues referred to in paragraphs (j) (1) and (2) of this 
section shall be shown in total and separately for each class and 
subclass of mail and postal service and for all other sources of 
revenue. Revenues derived from classes and subclasses of mail shall be 
disaggregated to each unique rate element.
    (4) Each revenue presentation required by paragraphs (j)(1), (j)(2), 
and (j)(3) of this section shall, subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section, be documented in sufficient detail to allow independent 
replication. Revenue estimates shall be supported by exhibits or 
workpapers that reference the source of all data used, including volume 
levels, billing determinants, and adjustment factors. References may be 
to published documents, library references, or companion testimony, and 
shall include document identity, page, and line, as appropriate. All 
assumptions used to estimate revenue for new or redesigned rate elements 
shall be identified and explained.
    (5) Subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this section, there shall be 
furnished in every formal request, for each class and subclass of mail 
and postal service, the following:
    (i) An econometric demand study relating postal volumes to their 
economic and noneconomic determinants including postal rates, discounts 
and fees, personal income, business conditions, competitive and 
complementary postal services, competitive and complementary nonpostal 
activities, population, trend, seasonal patterns and other factors.
    (ii) The actual or estimated volume of mail at the prefiled rates 
for each postal quarter beginning with the first quarter of the most 
recent complete fiscal year and ending one year beyond the last quarter 
of the future fiscal year.
    (iii) The estimated volume of mail assuming the effectiveness of the 
suggested rates for each postal quarter beginning with the quarter in 
which the rates are assumed to become effective and ending one year 
beyond the last quarter of the future fiscal year.
    (6) The estimated volumes and revenues referred to in paragraphs 
(j)(2), (j)(3), and (j)(5) of this section shall be derived from the 
econometric demand study referred to in paragraph (j)(5)(i) of this 
section. Supporting rationale shall be provided for any departure from 
the assumptions and specifications in the demand study made in 
estimating volumes of any class, subclass, or rate category of mail. 
Supporting rationale shall be provided for using billing determinants to 
estimate revenues for any class, subclass, or rate category of mail that 
differ from the billing determinants implicit in the estimate of volumes 
for that class, subclass, or rate category.
    (i) Subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this section, there shall be 
furnished in every formal request a detailed explanation of the 
methodology employed to forecast volumes for each class and subclass of 
mail and postal service.

[[Page 366]]

Representative derivations of these forecasts from the econometric 
demand study shall be presented in detail for two major mail classes, 
showing each intermediate value or factor employed. For remaining 
classes and subclasses of mail, such derivations may be summarized, 
except where their derivations depart from the representative methods 
presented.
    (ii) Subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this section, there shall be 
furnished in every formal request a detailed explanation of the 
methodology employed to forecast changes in revenues for each class and 
subclass of mail and postal service resulting from changes in rates and 
fees.
    (iii) Subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this section, there shall be 
furnished in every formal request a computer implementation of the 
methodology employed to forecast volumes and revenues for each class and 
subclass of mail and postal service.
    (iv) The computer implementation described in paragraph (j)(6)(iii) 
of this section shall be able to compute forecasts of volumes and 
revenues compatible with those referred to in paragraphs (j)(2), (j)(3), 
and (j)(5) of this section for:
    (a) Any set of rates and fees within a reasonable range of the 
prefiled and suggested rates,
    (b) any date of implementation within the range spanned by the 
assumed date and the start of the future fiscal year,
    (c) alternative forecasts of the economic determinants of postal 
volumes other than postal rates and fees, and
    (d) alternative values of any parameters with assigned values that 
are based upon unverifiable judgments.
    (v) The computer implementation described in paragraph (j)(6)(iii) 
of this section shall comply with Sec. 3001.31(k)(3).
    (7) Subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this section, there shall be made 
available at the offices of the Commission with every formal request, in 
a form that can be read directly by a standard digital computer, the 
following:
    (i) All of the input files and programs needed to replicate the 
econometric demand study referred to in paragraph (j)(5)(i) of this 
section;
    (ii) Any input files and programs employed to derive a price index 
for any class or subclass of mail or postal service from postal rates, 
discounts and fees;
    (iii) Any input files and programs used to prepare data for use in 
the econometric demand study referred to in paragraph (j)(5)(i) of this 
section.
    (k) Financial statements and related information. (1) Subject to 
paragraph (k)(3) of this section, every formal request shall include, 
for the 2 fiscal years immediately preceding the fiscal year in which 
the date of formal filing occurs, the Balance Sheet, the Statement of 
Income and Expense, basic statistical information and the Statement of 
Income and Expense by budget categories of the Postal Service. This 
information shall include data with respect to:
    (i) Balance Sheet and a supporting schedule for each item appearing 
thereon;
    (ii) Statement of Income and Expense and a supporting schedule for 
each item appearing thereon;
    (iii) As appropriate, statistical data with respect to revenue, 
pieces (by physical attributes, showing separately amounts of mail 
identified as stamped, metered, and imprinted, or other), weight, 
distance, postal employees (number, total payroll, productivity, etc.), 
postal space, post offices (number, classes, etc.), and any other 
pertinent factors which have been utilized in the development of the 
suggested rate schedule;
    (iv) Statement of Income and Expense by cost segment.
    (2) A reconciliation of the budgetary information with actual 
accrued costs shall be provided for the most recent fiscal year.
    (3) If the fiscal information for the immediately preceding fiscal 
year is not fully available on the date of filing, a preliminary or pro 
forma submittal shall be made and upon final completion an updated 
report shall be filed in substitution therefor.
    (l)(1) Billing determinants. A statement, which can be in workpaper 
form, indicating for each class and subclass of mail and postal service 
the relevant billing determinants (e.g., the volume of mail related to 
each rate element in

[[Page 367]]

determining revenues) separately for the current rates and the proposed 
rates. Proposed changes in rate design and the related adjustments of 
billing determinants should be explained in detail.
    (2) For third-class bulk mail, subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section, every formal request shall set forth separately for regular and 
preferred, by presort level, the base year volume by ounce increment for 
each shape (letter-size, flat, irregular parcels, parcels).
    (m) Continuing and phasing appropriations. A statement, which can be 
in workpaper form, presenting detailed calculations of continuing 
appropriations according to 39 U.S.C. 2401(c) and phasing appropriations 
under 39 U.S.C. 3626 and any proposed adjustment to such phased rates 
under 39 U.S.C. 3627 indicated by circumstances known at the time of the 
filing. Calculation of all the phased rates for the entire applicable 
phasing period should be explained in detail.
    (n) Performance goals. (1) Every formal request shall identify any 
performance goals which have been established for the classes and 
subclasses of mail.
    (2) Subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this section, the request shall 
identify the achieved levels of service for those classes and subclasses 
of mail and mail services for which performance goals have been set. 
This information may be provided by reference to published documents or 
otherwise.
    (o) Workpapers. (1) Whenever the Service files a formal request it 
shall accompany the request with seven sets of workpapers, five for use 
by the Commission staff and two which shall be available for use by the 
public at the Commission's offices.
    (2) Workpapers shall contain:
    (i) Detailed information underlying the data and submissions for 
paragraphs (b) through (n) of this section in such fashion and content 
so as to permit independent analysis of each cost component and an 
independent attribution or assignment of costs to classes and subclasses 
and the assignment of nonattributed or unassigned costs to classes and 
subclasses;
    (ii) A description of the methods used in collecting, summarizing 
and expanding the data used in the various submissions;
    (iii) Summaries of sample data, allocation factors and other data 
used for the various submissions;
    (iv) The expansion ratios used (where applicable); and
    (v) The results of any special studies used to modify, expand, 
project, or audit routinely collected data.
    (3) Workpapers shall be neat and legible and shall indicate how they 
relate to the data and submissions supplied in response to paragraphs 
(b) through (n) of this section.
    (4) Workpapers shall include citations sufficient to enable a 
reviewer to trace any number used but not derived in the associated 
testimony back to published documents or, if not obtained from published 
documents, to primary data sources. Citations shall be sufficiently 
detailed to enable a reviewer to identify and locate the specific data 
used, e.g., by reference to document, page, line, column, etc. With the 
exception of workpapers that follow a standardized and repetitive 
format, the required citations themselves, or a cross-reference to a 
specific page, line, and column of a table of citations, shall appear on 
each page of each workpaper. Workpapers that follow a standardized and 
repetitive format shall include the citations described in this 
paragraph for a sufficient number of representative examples to enable a 
reviewer to trace numbers directly or by analogy.
    (p) Certification by officials. (1) Every formal request shall 
include one or more certifications stating that the cost statements and 
supporting data submitted as a part of the formal request, as well as 
the accompanying workpapers, which purport to reflect the books of the 
Postal Service, accurately set forth the results shown by such books.
    (2) The certificates required by paragraph (p)(1) of this section 
shall be signed by one or more representatives of the Postal Service 
authorized to make such certification. The signature of the official 
signing the document constitutes a representation that the official has 
read the document and that, to the best of his/her knowledge,

[[Page 368]]

information and belief, every statement contained in the instrument is 
proper.
    (q) Opinion of independent public accountant. Every formal request 
shall include an opinion from an independent public accountant to the 
extent and as required by 39 U.S.C. 2008(e).
    (r) Special waiver provision for minor rate cases. The Commission 
may, upon the filing of a proper motion by the Postal Service, together 
with a showing of good cause therefor, waive certain of the filing 
requirements of paragraphs (b) through (q) of this section if in the 
Commission's judgment it has been demonstrated that the proposed change 
in a rate or rates of postage and a fee or fees for postal service does 
not significantly change the then effective rates and fees or alter the 
cost-revenue relationships of the various classes and types of postal 
services.
    (s) Rejection of requests. The Commission may reject any request 
under this subpart that patently fails to substantially comply with any 
requirements of this subpart.

[38 FR 7532, Mar. 22, 1973, as amended at 42 FR 8143, Feb. 9, 1977; 42 
FR 18076, Apr. 5, 1977; 44 FR 26075, May 4, 1979; 45 FR 65575 and 65580, 
Oct. 3, 1980; 48 FR 3733, Jan. 27, 1983; 48 FR 50717, Nov. 3, 1983; 50 
FR 43392, Oct. 25, 1985; 51 FR 8827, Mar. 14, 1986; 51 FR 14993, Apr. 
22, 1986; 54 FR 35495, Aug. 28, 1989; 58 FR 38976, 38977, July 21, 1993; 
59 FR 8542, Feb. 23, 1994; 62 FR 30250, June 3, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.55   Service by the Postal Service.

    Immediately after the issuance of an order or orders by the 
Commission designating an officer of the Commission to represent the 
interests of the general public in a proceeding before the Commission 
under this subpart, the Postal Service shall serve copies of its formal 
request for a recommended decision and its prepared direct evidence upon 
such officer and the intervenors as provided in Sec. 3001.12. Service 
shall also be made on persons who are limited participators.

[38 FR 3511, Feb. 7, 1973; 51 FR 8827, Mar. 14, 1986, as amended at 58 
FR 38977, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.56   Failure to comply.

    If the Postal Service fails to provide any information specified by 
this subpart, or otherwise required by the presiding officer or the 
Commission, the Commission, upon its own motion, or upon motion of any 
participant to the proceeding, may stay the proceeding until 
satisfactory compliance is achieved. The Commission will stay 
proceedings only if it finds that failure to supply adequate information 
interferes with the Commission's ability promptly to consider the 
request and to conduct its proceedings with expedition in accordance 
with the Act.

[38 FR 7535, Mar. 22, 1973; 51 FR 8827, Mar. 14, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.57  Market response rate requests for express mail service--purpose and duration of rules.

    (a) This section and Secs. 3001.57a through 3001.57c only apply in 
cases in which the Postal Service requests an expedited recommended 
decision pursuant to section 3622 of the Postal Reorganization Act on 
changes in rates and fees for Express Mail service, where the proposed 
changes are intended to respond to a change in the market for expedited 
delivery services for the purpose of minimizing the loss of Express Mail 
contribution to institutional costs recommended in the most recent 
omnibus rate case. These rules set forth the requirements for filing 
data in support of such rate proposals and for providing notice of such 
requests, and establish an expedited procedural schedule for evaluating 
Market Response Rate Requests. These rules may not be used when the 
Postal Service is requesting changes in Express Mail rates as part of an 
omnibus rate case. Further explanation concerning these rules can be 
found at 54 FR 11394-11413 (March 20, 1989), 54 FR 25132-42 (June 13, 
1989) and PRC Order No. 836.
    (b) This section and Secs. 3001.57a through 57c are to be effective 
for the limited period of five years from the date of their adoption by 
the Commission. During that period the Commission will continue to 
analyze the need for these rules to enable the Postal Service to respond 
to changes in the market for expedited delivery services, and the impact 
of these procedures on Postal Service proposals. These rules will cease 
to be effective at the end of this period unless they have been reissued 
by the Commission following a

[[Page 369]]

Notice of Proposed Rulemaking published in the Federal Register which 
provides an appropriate opportunity for public comments.

[60 FR 12119, Mar. 6, 1995]

    Effective Date Note: At 60 FR 12119, Mar. 6, 1995, Sec. 3001.57 was 
added, effective through March 6, 2000.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.57a  Market response rate requests--data filing requirements.

    (a) Each formal request made under the provisions of Secs. 3001.57 
through 3001.57c shall be accompanied by such information and data as 
are necessary to inform the Commission and the parties of the nature and 
expected impact of the change in rates proposed. Except for good cause 
shown, the information specified in paragraphs (c) through (i) of this 
section shall also be provided with each request.
    (b) Except as otherwise expressly provided in this section, the 
information required by Sec. 3001.54 (b) through (r) must be filed only 
for those subclasses and services for which the Postal Service requests 
a change in rates or fees. Test period volume, cost, and revenue 
estimates presented in satisfaction of rule 57a shall be for four postal 
quarters beginning after the filing date of the request. The cost roll-
forward may be developed by extending the cost forecasting model used in 
the last omnibus rate case (utilizing available actual data). Volume and 
revenue estimates required by these rules shall utilize, to the extend 
practicable, the factors identified in rule 54(j)(6), and must be fully 
explained, with all available supporting documentation supplied, but 
they need not be econometrically derived.
    (c) Every formal request made under the provisions of Secs. 3001.57 
through 3001.57c shall contain an explanation of why the change proposed 
by the Postal Service is a reasonable response to the change in the 
market for expedited delivery services to which it is intended to 
respond.
    (d) Every formal request made under the provisions of Secs. 3001.57 
through 3001.57c shall be accompanied by the then effective Domestic 
Mail Classification Schedule sections which would have to be altered in 
order to implement the changes proposed by the Postal Service, and, 
arranged in a legislative format, the text of the replacement Domestic 
Mail Classification Schedule sections the Postal Service proposes.
    (e) In addition to the required test period cost estimates, every 
formal request made under the provisions of Secs. 3001.57 through 
3001.57c shall be accompanied by a statement of the attributable costs 
by segment and component for Express Mail service determined in 
accordance with the attributable cost methodology adopted by the 
Commission in the most recent omnibus rate case, for the base year used 
in that case, and for each fiscal year thereafter for which cost data is 
available. If the Postal Service believes that an adjustment to that 
methodology is warranted it may also provide costs using alternative 
methodologies as long as a full rationale for the proposed changes is 
provided.
    (f) Each formal request made under the provisions of Secs. 3001.57 
through 3001.57c shall include a description of all operational changes, 
occurring since the most recent omnibus rate case, having an important 
impact on the attributable cost of Express Mail. The Postal Service 
shall include an analysis and estimate of the cost impact of each such 
operational change.
    (g) Every formal request made under the provisions of Secs. 3001.57 
through 3001.57c shall be accompanied by a statement of the actual 
Express Mail revenues of the Postal Service from the then effective 
Express Mail rates and fees for the most recent four quarters for which 
information is available.
    (h) Each formal request made under the provisions of Secs. 3001.57 
through 3001.57c shall be accompanied by a complete description of the 
change in the market for expedited delivery services to which the Postal 
Service proposal is in response, a statement of when that change took 
place, the Postal Service's analysis of the anticipated impact of that 
change on the market, and a description of characteristics and needs of 
customers and market segments affected by this change which the proposed 
Express Mail rates are designed to satisfy.
    (i) Each formal request made under the provisions of Secs. 3001.57 
through

[[Page 370]]

3001.57c shall include estimates, on a quarterly basis, of test period 
volumes, revenues, and attributable costs determined in accordance with 
the attributable cost methodology adopted by the Commission in the most 
recent omnibus rate case for each Express Mail service for which rate 
changes are proposed assuming:
    (1) rates remain at their existing levels, and
    (2) rates are changed after 90 days to the levels suggested in the 
request.
    (j)(1) Each formal request made under the provisions of 
Secs. 3001.57 through 3001.57c shall be accompanied by the following 
information, for each quarter following the base year in the most recent 
omnibus rate case:
    (i) Estimated volume by rate cell, for each Express Mail service;
    (ii) Total postage pounds of Express Mail rated at:
    (A) up to \1/2\ pound,
    (B) \1/2\ pound up to 2 pounds,
    (C) 2 pounds up to 5 pounds; and
    (iii) Total pounds of Express Mail and of each other subclass of 
mail carried on hub contracts.
    (2) In each instance when rates change based on a proceeding under 
the provisions of Secs. 3001.57 through 3001.57c the Postal Service 
shall provide, one year after the conclusion of the test period, the 
data described in Sec. 3001.57a(j)(1)(i)-(iii), for each of the four 
quarters of the test period.
    (k) Each formal request made under the provisions of Secs. 3001.57 
through 3001.57c shall include analyses to demonstrate:
    (1) that the proposed rates are consistent with the factors listed 
in 39 U.S.C. 3622(b),
    (2) that the proposed rate changes are in the public interest and in 
accordance with the policies and applicable criteria of the Act, and
    (3) that the proposed rates will preserve, or minimize erosion of, 
the Express Mail contribution to institutional costs recommended in the 
most recent omnibus rate case.
    (l) Each formal request made under the provisions of Secs. 3001.57 
through 3001.57c shall be accompanied by a certificate that service of 
the filing in accordance with Sec. 3001.57b(c) has been made.

[60 FR 12119, Mar. 6, 1995]

    Effective Date Note: At 60 FR 12119, Mar. 6, 1995, Sec. 3001.57a was 
added, effective through March 6, 2000.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.57b  Market response rate requests--expedition of public notice and procedural schedule.

    (a) The purpose of this section is to provide a schedule for 
expediting proceedings when a trial-type hearing is required in a 
proceeding in which the Postal Service proposes to adjust rates for 
Express Mail service in order to respond to a change in the market for 
expedited delivery services.
    (b) The Postal Service shall not propose for consideration under the 
provisions of Secs. 3001.57 through 3001.57c rates lower than:
    (1) the average per piece attributable cost for Express Mail service 
determined in the most recent omnibus rate case, or
    (2) the average per piece attributable cost for Express Mail service 
as determined by the Postal Service in accordance with Sec. 3001.57a(e) 
for the most recent fiscal year for which information is available, 
whichever is higher. Neither shall the Postal Service propose a rate for 
any rate cell which is lower than the estimated test period attributable 
cost of providing that rate cell with service.
    (c)(1) Persons who are interested in participating in Express Mail 
Market Response Rate Request cases may register at any time with the 
Secretary of the Postal Rate Commission, who shall maintain a publicly 
available list of the names and business addresses of all such Express 
Mail Market Response Registrants. Persons whose names appear on this 
list will automatically become parties to each Express Mail Market 
Response rate proceeding. Other interested persons may intervene 
pursuant to Sec. 3001.20 within 28 days of the filing of a formal 
request made under the provisions of Secs. 3001.57 through 3001.57c. 
Parties may withdraw from the register or a case by filing a notice with 
the Commission.
    (2) When the Postal Service files a request under the provisions of 
Secs. 3001.57 through 3001.57c it shall on that same

[[Page 371]]

day effect service by hand delivery of the complete filing to each 
Express Mail Market Response Registrant who maintains an address for 
service within the Washington metropolitan area and serve the complete 
filing by Express Mail service on all other Registrants. Each Registrant 
is responsible for insuring that his or her address remains current.
    (3) When the Postal Service files a request under the provisions of 
Secs. 3001.57 through 3001.57c, it shall on that same day send by 
Express Mail service to all participants in the most recent omnibus rate 
case a notice which briefly describes its proposal. Such notice shall 
indicate on its first page that it is a notice of an Express Mail Market 
Response Rate Request to be considered under Secs. 3001.57 through 
3001.57c, and identify the last day for filing a notice of intervention 
with the Commission.
    (d) In the absence of a compelling showing of good cause, the Postal 
Service and parties shall calculate Express Mail costs in accordance 
with the methodologies used by the Commission in the most recent omnibus 
rate case. In the analysis of customers' reactions to the change in the 
market for expedited delivery services which prompts the request, the 
Postal Service and parties may estimate the demand for segments of the 
expedited delivery market and for types of customers which were not 
separately considered when estimating volumes in the most recent omnibus 
rate case.
    (e) (1) In the event that a party wishes to dispute as an issue of 
fact whether the Postal Service properly has calculated Express Mail 
costs or volumes (either before or after its proposed changes), or 
wishes to dispute whether the change in the market for expedited 
delivery services cited by the Postal Service has actually occurred, or 
wishes to dispute whether the rates proposed by the Postal Service are a 
reasonable response to the change in the market for expedited delivery 
services or are consistent with the policies of the Postal 
Reorganization Act, that party shall file with the Commission a request 
for a hearing within 28 days of the date that the Postal Service files 
its request. The request for hearing shall state with specificity the 
fact or facts set forth in the Postal Service's filing that the party 
disputes, and when possible, what the party believes to be the true fact 
or facts and the evidence it intends to provide in support of its 
position.
    (2) The Commission will not hold hearings on a request made pursuant 
to Secs. 3001.57 through 3001.57c unless it determines that there is a 
genuine issue of material fact to be resolved, and that a hearing is 
needed to resolve this issue.
    (3) Whether or not a hearing is held, the Commission may request 
briefs and/or argument on an expedited schedule, but in any circumstance 
it will issue its recommended decision as promptly as is consistent with 
its statutory responsibilities.
    (4) In order to assist in the rapid development of an adequate 
evidentiary record, all participants may file appropriate discovery 
requests on other participants as soon as an Express Mail Market 
Response Rate Request is filed. Answers to such discovery requests will 
be due within 10 days. Objections to such discovery requests must be 
made within 10 days in the form of a Motion to Excuse from Answering, 
with service on the questioning participant made by hand, facsimile, or 
expedited delivery. Responses to Motions to Excuse from Answering must 
be submitted within seven days, and should such a motion be denied, the 
answers to the discovery in question are due within seven days of the 
denial thereof. It is the Commission's intention that parties resolve 
discovery disputes informally between themselves whenever possible. The 
Commission, therefore, encourages the party receiving discovery requests 
considered to be unclear or objectionable to contact counsel for the 
party filing the discovery requests whenever further explanation is 
needed, or a potential discovery dispute might be resolved by means of 
such communication.
    (5) If, either on its own motion, or after having received a request 
for a hearing, the Commission concludes that there exist one or more 
genuine issues of material fact and that a hearing is needed, the 
Commission shall expedite the conduct of such record evidentiary 
hearings to meet both the

[[Page 372]]

need to respond promptly to changed circumstances in the market and the 
standards of 5 U.S.C. 556 and 557. The procedural schedule, subject to 
change as described in paragraph (e)(6) of this section, is as follows: 
Hearings on the Postal Service case will begin 35 days after the filing 
of an Express Mail Market Response Rate Request; parties may file 
evidence either in support of or in opposition to the Postal Service 
proposal 49 days after the filing; hearings on the parties' evidence 
will begin 56 days after the filing; briefs will be due 70 days after 
the filing; and reply briefs will be due 77 days after the filing.
    (6) The Presiding Officer may adjust any of the schedule dates 
prescribed in (e)(5) of this section in the interests of fairness, or to 
assist in the development of an adequate evidentiary record. Requests 
for the opportunity to present evidence to rebut a submission by a 
participant other than the Postal Service should be filed within three 
working days of the receipt of that material into the evidentiary 
record, and should include a description of the evidence to be offered 
and the amount of time needed to prepare and present it. Requests for 
additional time will be reviewed with consideration as to whether the 
requesting participant has exercised due diligence, and whether the 
requesting participant has been unreasonably delayed from fully 
understanding the proposal.

[60 FR 12120, Mar. 6, 1995]

    Effective Date Note: At 60 FR 12119, Mar. 6, 1995, Sec. 3001.57b was 
added, effective through March 6, 2000.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.57c  Express mail market response--rule for decision.

    The Commission will issue a recommended decision in accordance with 
the policies of 39 U.S.C., and which it determines would be a reasonable 
response to the change in the market for expedited delivery services. 
The purpose of Secs. 3001.57 through 3001.57c is to allow for 
consideration of Express Mail Market Response Rate Requests within 90 
days, consistent with the procedural due process rights of interested 
persons.

[60 FR 12121, Mar. 6, 1995]

    Effective Date Note: At 60 FR 12119, Mar. 6, 1995, Sec. 3001.57c was 
added, effective through March 6, 2000.


<R04>
Subpart C--Rules Applicable to Requests for Establishing or Changing the 
                      Mail Classification Schedule


<R05>
Sec. 3001.61   Applicability.

    The rules in this subpart govern the procedure with regard to 
requests of the Postal Service pursuant to section 3623 of the Act that 
the Commission submit a recommended decision on establishing or changing 
the mail classification schedule. The Rules of General Applicability in 
subpart A of this part are also applicable to proceedings on requests 
subject to this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.62   Filing of formal requests.

    Whenever the Postal Service determines to request that the 
Commission submit a recommended decision on establishing or changing the 
mail classification schedule, the Postal Service shall file with the 
Commission a formal request for a recommended decision. Such request 
shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Secs. 3001.9 to 
3001.11 and Sec. 3001.64. Within 5 days after the Postal Service has 
filed a formal request for a recommended decision in accordance with 
this subsection, the Secretary shall lodge a notice thereof with the 
Director of the Federal Register for publication in the Federal 
Register.

[38 FR 4330, Feb. 13, 1973, as amended at 51 FR 8827, Mar. 14, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.63   Filing of prepared direct evidence.

    Simultaneously with the filing of the formal request for a 
recommended decision under this subpart, the Postal Service shall file 
all of the prepared direct evidence upon which it proposes to rely in 
the proceeding on the record before the Commission to establish that the 
mail classification schedule or changes therein proposed by the Postal 
Service are in accordance with the policies and the applicable criteria 
of the Act. Such prepared direct evidence shall be in the form of 
prepared written testimony and documentary exhibits

[[Page 373]]

which shall be filed in accordance with Sec. 3001.31.

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 58 FR 38977, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.64   Contents of formal requests.

    (a) General requirements. (1) Each formal request filed under this 
subpart shall include such information and data and such statements of 
reasons and bases as are necessary and appropriate fully to inform the 
Commission and the parties of the nature, scope, significance, and 
impact of the proposed new mail classification schedule or the proposed 
changes therein and to show that the mail classification schedule as 
proposed to be established or changed is in accordance with the policies 
and the applicable criteria of the Act. To the extent the information is 
available or can be made available without undue burden, each formal 
request shall include the information specified in paragraphs (b) 
through (h) of this section. If the required information is set forth in 
the Postal Service's prepared direct evidence, it shall be deemed to be 
part of the formal request without restatement.
    (2) If any information required by paragraphs (b) through (h) of 
this section is not available and cannot be made available without undue 
burden, the request shall provide where reference is made to this 
paragraph, in lieu of such information, a statement explaining with 
particularity:
    (i) The information which is not available or cannot be made 
available without undue burden;
    (ii) The reason or reasons that each such item of information is not 
available and cannot be made available without undue burden;
    (iii) The steps or actions which would be needed to make each such 
item of information available, together with an estimate of the time and 
expense required therefor;
    (iv) Whether it is contemplated that each such item of information 
will be supplied in the future and, if so, at what time; and
    (v) Whether reliable estimates are available where such information 
cannot be furnished and, if so, the specifics of such estimates.
    (3) The provisions of paragraph (a)(2) of this section for the 
Postal Service to include in its formal request certain alternative 
information in lieu of that specified by paragraphs (b) through (h) of 
this section are not in derogation of the Commission's and the presiding 
officer's authority, pursuant to Secs. 3001.23 through 3001.28, 
respecting the provision of information at a time following receipt of 
the formal request.
    (4) The Commission may request information in addition to that 
required by paragraphs (b) through (h) of this section.
    (b) Classification and standards information. (1) Every formal 
request shall include copies of the then effective Domestic Mail 
Classification Schedule and the proposed changes therein, including, in 
legislative format, all proposed changes in the schedules of rate or 
rates of postage and fee or fees for postal services that appear 
therein.
    (2) The schedules required by paragraph (b)(1) of this section 
shall, for all classes and subclasses of mail and service, be in summary 
fashion and tariff-like form. (E.g., there shall be a specification of 
those rules, regulations, and practices which establish the conditions 
of mailability and the standards of service.) As a part thereof, the 
schedules shall specifically be addressed to such functions as mail 
pick-up and delivery, processing, and other similar functions.
    (3) The schedules required by paragraph (b)(1) of this section shall 
also contain a statement identifying the degree of economic 
substitutability between the various classes and subclasses, e.g., a 
description of cross-elasticity of demand as between various classes of 
mail.
    (4) The schedules required by paragraph (b)(1) of this section shall 
be accompanied by an identification of all nonpostal services.
    (c) Mail characteristics. Every formal request shall include such 
studies, information and data on the characteristics of the users of the 
Postal Service, the nature of the items mailed and the nature of the 
methods of mailing, which will assist the Commission in determining 
whether or not the proposed

[[Page 374]]

mail classification schedule or the proposed changes therein are in 
accordance with the policies and the applicable criteria of the Act. 
Included, subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this section, shall be:
    (1) An identification of the characteristics of the mailer and 
recipient, and a description of the contents of items mailed within the 
various classes and subclasses of mail and service;
    (2) An identification of the physical attributes of the items mailed 
by class and subclass, including shape, weight, and distance;
    (3) To the extent the following information is not expressly 
included under paragraph (b)(2) of this section, a summary statement 
describing special service arrangements provided to, or requested or 
required of, mailers by the Postal Service which bear upon the cost of 
service or the value of the mail service to both the sender and the 
recipient, e.g., services relating to mailer preparations in excess of 
requirements specified by the Postal Service Manual, pick-up and 
delivery, expedited or deferred processing, and other similar activities 
performed.
    (d) Effects of proposed changes. (1) Subject to paragraph (a)(2) of 
this section, every formal request shall include a statement showing the 
effects of the proposed changes in the then effective classification 
schedule upon:
    (i) The costs attributed and assigned to each class and subclass of 
mail or service as developed pursuant to Sec. 3001.54(h);
    (ii) The total accrued costs of the Postal Service developed 
pursuant to Sec. 3001.54(f); and
    (iii) The total revenues of the Postal Service and the revenues of 
each class and subclass of mail or service developed pursuant to 
Sec. 3001.54(j).
    (e) Interclass changes. Subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this section, 
whenever it is proposed that a portion of one existing class or subclass 
of mail or service be reassigned to another existing class or subclass 
of mail or service, every formal request shall include a comparison of 
the before and after costs and revenues associated with handling the 
relevant classes or subclasses of mail or service, and the before and 
after costs and revenues of the portion which is to be reassigned.
    (f) Statement of reasons. Every formal request shall include a 
complete statement of the reasons and bases for the Postal Service's 
proposed mail classification schedule or proposed changes therein.
    (g) Workpapers. (1) Whenever the Service files a formal request it 
shall accompany the request with seven sets of workpapers, five for use 
by the Commission staff and two which shall be available for use by the 
public at the Commission's offices.
    (2) Workpapers shall contain:
    (i) Detailed information underlying the data and submissions for 
paragraphs (b) through (f) of this section;
    (ii) A description of the methods used in collecting, summarizing 
and expanding the data used in the various submissions;
    (iii) Summaries of sample data, allocation factors and other data 
used for the various submissions;
    (iv) The expansion ratios used (where applicable); and
    (v) The results of any special studies used to modify, expand, 
project, or audit routinely collected data.
    (3) Workpapers shall be neat and legible and shall indicate how they 
relate to the data and submissions supplied in response to paragraphs 
(b) through (f) of this section.
    (4) Workpapers shall include citations sufficient to enable a 
reviewer to trace any number used but not derived in the associated 
testimony back to published documents or, if not obtained from published 
documents, to primary data sources. Citations shall be sufficiently 
detailed to enable a reviewer to identify and locate the specific data 
used, e.g., by reference to document, page, line, column, etc. With the 
exception of workpapers that follow a standardized and repetitive 
format, the required citations themselves, or a cross-reference to a 
specific page, line, and column of a table of citations, shall appear on 
each page of each workpaper. Workpapers that follow a standardized and 
repetitive format shall include the citations described in this 
paragraph for a sufficient number of representative examples to enable a 
reviewer to trace numbers directly or by analogy.

[[Page 375]]

    (h) Matters affecting rates and fees. (1) This paragraph applies to 
any proposed change in the then effective classification schedule which 
would result:
    (i) In a change in the rates or fees for any existing class or 
subclass of mail and service, or
    (ii) In the establishment of a new class or subclass of mail or 
service for which rates or fees are to be established, or
    (iii) In a change in the relationship of the costs attributed or 
assigned to any class or subclass of mail or service to the revenues of 
that class or subclass of mail or service, or
    (iv) In a change in the relationship of the total costs of the 
Postal Service to the total revenues.
    (2) In the case of any proposed change in the then effective 
classification schedule covered by paragraph (h)(1) of this section, 
every formal request shall include, subject to paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section:
    (i) The information required by paragraphs (b) through (h), (j) 
through (l), and (o) through (p) of Sec. 3001.54, together with the 
statement and opinion required by paragraphs (q) and (r) of 
Sec. 3001.54; and
    (ii) A statement explaining to what extent the Postal Service has 
considered the criteria of section 3622 of the Act as justifying the 
rate consequences of the proposed classifications. The submission shall 
also include the identification of the relationship between the rates 
and fees for a particular class and subclass or service, the 
identification of the procedures and methods used to relate the residual 
costs which have not been attributed to any class and subclass of mail 
or service or groups thereof, and such other studies, information, and 
data relevant to the criteria established by section 3622 of the Act 
with appropriate explanations.
    (3) The Commission may, upon the filing of a proper motion by the 
Postal Service, together with a showing of good cause therefor, waive 
certain of the above requirements if in the Commission's judgment it has 
been demonstrated that the proposed change in the classification 
schedule does not significantly change the rates and fees or the cost-
revenue relationships referred to in paragraphs (h)(1)(i) through (iv) 
of this section.
    (i) Rejection of requests. The Commission may reject any request 
under this subpart that patently fails to substantially comply with the 
requirements of this subpart.

[38 FR 7535, Mar. 22, 1973, as amended at 42 FR 18076, Apr. 5, 1977; 44 
FR 26075, May 4, 1979; 45 FR 65575, Oct. 3, 1980; 50 FR 43393, Oct. 25, 
1985; 51 FR 8827, Mar. 14, 1986; 58 FR 38977, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.65   Service by the Postal Service.

    Immediately after the issuance of an order or orders by the 
Commission designating an officer of the Commission to represent the 
interests of the general public in a proceeding before the Commission 
under this subpart, the Postal Service shall serve copies of its formal 
request for a recommended decision and its prepared direct evidence upon 
such officer and the intervenors as provided in Sec. 3001.12. Service 
shall also be made on persons who are limited participators.

[38 FR 3511, Feb. 7, 1973, as amended at 51 FR 8827, Mar. 14, 1986; 58 
FR 38977, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.66   Failure to comply.

    If the Postal Service fails to provide any information specified by 
this subpart, or otherwise required by the presiding officer or the 
Commission, the Commission, upon its own motion, or upon motion of any 
participant to the proceeding, may stay the proceeding until 
satisfactory compliance is achieved. The Commission will stay 
proceedings only if it finds that failure to supply adequate information 
interferes with the Commission's ability promptly to consider the 
request and to conduct its proceedings with expedition in accordance 
with the Act.

[38 FR 7536, Mar. 22, 1973, as amended at 51 FR 8827, Mar. 14, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.67  Requests involving experimental changes.

    (a) This section and Secs. 3001.67a through 3001.67d apply in cases 
where the Postal Service requests a recommended decision pursuant to 
section 3623 of the Postal Reorganization Act and denominates the new 
service or

[[Page 376]]

change in an existing service as experimental in character. These 
sections do not apply to the situation in which a request not 
denominated as experimental by the Postal Service, either at the time of 
its filing or subsequently, is found to be justified by the Commission 
only on an experimental basis, following analysis of the record made in 
the proceedings on such a request.
    (b) This section and Secs. 3001.67a through 3001.67d are not 
intended to substitute for the rules generally governing requests for 
changes in the Domestic Mail Classification Schedule in cases where the 
treatment of the proposed changes as experimental is not justified by 
the character of those changes. The Commission reserves the right, in 
appropriate cases, to require that the normal procedures prescribed for 
nonexperimental cases under section 3623 be used. In determining whether 
the procedures for experimental cases may be used in a particular case, 
the Commission will consider:
    (1) The novelty of the proposed change;
    (2) The magnitude of the proposed change, including its effect on 
postal costs, postal revenues, mailing costs and practices of users of 
the mails, and persons or firms offering services competitive with or 
alternative to the service offerings of the Postal Service;
    (3) The ease or difficulty of generating or gathering data with 
respect to the proposed change; and
    (4) The desired duration of the experiment as indicated by the 
Postal Service in its request and, specifically, in its proposed 
Domestic Mail Classification Schedule language.
    (c) In the case of a proposal denominated as an experiment by the 
Postal Service, the Commission will entertain representations by parties 
to the case that the proposal should not be considered as an experiment 
and should follow the normal mail classification change procedures. The 
Commission does not contemplate entertaining representations by parties 
to a case filed under the normal procedures that the matter should be 
treated as an experiment under this section and Secs. 3001.67a through 
3001.67d.

[45 FR 83226, Dec. 18, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.67a  Requests involving experimental changes--procedures for limitation of issues.

    (a) The purpose of this section is to provide a mechanism for the 
limiting of issues on which a trial-type hearing is required. It 
recognizes that in a proceeding properly designated as experimental 
under Sec. 3001.67, some issues will be appropriate for determination on 
the basis of a less formal type of presentation and counterpresentation. 
It is the policy of this section to identify these issues at the 
earliest possible time and to employ less formal procedures to resolve 
them where the interests of expedition will be served thereby.
    (b) At the earliest possible time following the filing of a request 
designated as experimental, or following the determination of any 
question as to whether such designation is proper, holding that such 
designation is proper, the parties will be required to file statements 
of the issues they perceive in the case. Each such statement shall 
designate with particularity those issues the party believes to be or 
involve genuine issues of material fact. Any party designating an issue 
as a genuine issue of material fact wholly or in part because of the 
Postal Service's statement that data called for by Sec. 3001.64 are 
unavailable shall comply with the requirements of Sec. 3001.67b. 
Responsive statements will be permitted within 10 days of the filing of 
initial statements.
    (c) Following the exchange of statements of issues called for by 
paragraph (b) of this section, the Commission will determine which 
issues constitute genuine issues of material fact and concomitantly 
order the limitation of trial-type hearing procedures to those issues. 
The order issued for this purpose will also set forth to the greatest 
extent feasible the procedures to be followed in disposing of issues not 
found to be genuine issues of material fact. According to the nature of 
the individual issue, these procedures may include.
    (1) Filing of written comments and reply comments;
    (2) Conference procedures, followed or accompanied by the filing of 
written comments and reply comments; and
    (3) Briefing and argument.


[[Page 377]]


In determining the procedures to be followed with respect to issues not 
requiring a trial-type hearing, the Commission will seek to accommodate 
the needs of expedition and procedural fairness in accordance with 
section 3624(b) of the Act.

[45 FR 83226, Dec. 18, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.67b  Requests involving experimental changes--unavailability of data.

    If the Postal Service believes that data required to be filed under 
Sec. 3001.64 are unavailable, it shall explain their unavailability as 
required by Sec. 3001.64(a)(2)(i), (ii), and (iv). In particular, if the 
experimental character of the request bears on the unavailability of the 
data in question, the Postal Service shall explain in detail the nexus 
between these circumstances. A satisfactory explanation of the 
unavailability of data will be grounds for excluding from the proceeding 
a contention that the absence of the data should form a basis for 
rejection of the request, unless the party desiring to make such 
contention (a) demonstrates that, having regard to all the facts and 
circumstances of the case, it was clearly unreasonable for the Postal 
Service to propose the change in question without having first secured 
the data which are unavailable, or (b) demonstrates other compelling and 
exceptional circumstances requiring that the absence of the data in 
question be treated as bearing on the merits of the proposal.

[45 FR 83227, Dec. 18, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.67c  Requests involving experimental changes--plans for data collection.

    (a) In any instance in which the Postal Service designates as 
unavailable data called for by Sec. 3001.64, it shall, as part of its 
initial filing under that rule, either
    (1) Describe with particularity the means it proposes to employ to 
collect those data, or
    (2) State with particularity the reasons it believes establish that 
such data are unnecessary.

The Commission may by order require data to be collected during the 
course of the experiment which the Postal Service has not planned to 
collect, if it finds that a statement under paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section does not justify the omission to collect the particular data in 
issue.
    (b) In the case of data which are not required to be filed under 
Sec. 3001.64, but which the Postal Service intends to collect during and 
for the purposes of the proposed experimental change, the Postal Service 
shall include in its initial filing a detailed description of the data 
involved, the uses to which they would be put, and the methods to be 
employed in collecting them.

[45 FR 83227, Dec. 18, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.67d  Requests involving experimental changes--time limit.

    The Commission will treat cases falling under Secs. 3001.67 through 
3001.67d as subject to the maximum expedition consistent with procedural 
fairness. The schedule for adoption of a recommended decision will 
therefore be established, in each such case, to allow for issuance of 
such decision not more than 150 days from the determination of any issue 
as to the propriety of experimental treatment under Sec. 3001.67 (b) and 
(c) in a sense favorable to such treatment, or from the date of the 
filing of the request, whichever occurs later. Nothing in this section 
shall be construed to affect the rights of the Postal Service or of 
other parties with respect to the temporary implementation of changes 
pursuant to section 3641 of the Act.

[45 FR 83227, Dec. 18, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.68  Text of the Domestic Mail Classification Schedule.

    The Domestic Mail Classification Schedule established in accordance 
with subchapter II of chapter 36 of title 39 of the United States Code 
appears (with blank rate schedules) as appendix A to this subpart.

[50 FR 28144, July 10, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.69  Expedited minor classification cases--applicability.

    (a) This section and Secs. 3001.69a through 3001.69c apply in cases 
where the Postal Service requests a recommended decision pursuant to 
section

[[Page 378]]

3623 and seeks expedited review on the ground that the requested change 
in mail classification is minor in character. The requirements and 
procedures specified in these sections apply exclusively to the 
Commission's consideration of requested mail classification changes 
which the Postal Service denominates as, and the Commission finds to be, 
minor in character. A requested classification change may be considered 
to be minor in character if it:
    (1) Would not involve a change in any existing rate or fee;
    (2) Would not impose any restriction in addition to pre-existing 
conditions of eligibility for the entry of mail in an existing subclass 
or category of service, or for an existing rate element or work sharing 
discount; and
    (3) Would not significantly increase or decrease the estimated 
institutional cost contribution of the affected subclass or category of 
service.
    (b) This section and Secs. 3001.69a through 69c are effective May 
15, 1996 through May 15, 2001.

[61 FR 24453, May 15, 1996]

    Effective Date Note: At 61 FR 24453, May 15, 1996, Sec. 3001.69 was 
added, effective May 15, 1996 through May 15, 2001.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.69a  Expedited minor classification cases--filing of formal request and prepared direct evidence.

    (a) Whenever the Postal Service determines to request that the 
Commission submit a decision recommending a mail classification change, 
and to seek expedited review on the ground that the requested change is 
minor in character, it shall file a request for a change in mail 
classification pursuant to section 3623 that comports with the 
requirements of this section and of subpart C of this part. Each such 
formal request shall include the following particular information:
     (1) A description of the proposed classification change or changes, 
including proposed changes in the text of the Domestic Mail 
Classification Schedule and any pertinent rate schedules;
    (2) A thorough explanation of the grounds on which the Postal 
Service submits that the requested change in mail classification is 
minor in character; and
    (3) An estimate, prepared in the greatest level of detail 
practicable, of the overall impact of the requested change in mail 
classification on postal costs and revenues, mail users, and competitors 
of the Postal Service.
    (b) If the Postal Service believes that data required to be filed 
under Sec. 3001.64 are unavailable, it shall explain their 
unavailability, as required by Sec. 3001.64(a)(2) (i), (ii), and (iv). 
If the Postal Service believes that any of the data or other information 
required to be filed under Sec. 3001.64 should not be required in light 
of the minor character of the requested change in mail classification, 
it shall move for a waiver of that requirement, stating with 
particularity the reasons why the character of the request and its 
circumstances justify a waiver of the requirement. A satisfactory 
explanation of the unavailability of information required under 
Sec. 3001.64, or of why it should not be required to support a 
particular request, will be grounds for excluding from the proceeding a 
contention that the absence of the information should form a basis for 
rejection of the request, unless the party desiring to make such 
contention:
    (1) Demonstrates that, having regard to all the facts and 
circumstances of the case, it was clearly unreasonable for the Postal 
Service to propose the change in question without having first secured 
the information and submitted it in accordance with Sec. 3001.64; or
    (2) Demonstrates other compelling and exceptional circumstances 
requiring that the absence of the information in question be treated as 
bearing on the merits of the proposal.

[61 FR 24453, May 15, 1996]

    Effective Date Note: At 61 FR 24453, May 15, 1996, Sec. 3001.69a was 
added, effective May 15, 1996 through May 15, 2001.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.69b   Expedited minor classification cases--expedition of procedural schedule.

    (a) The purpose of this section is to provide a schedule for 
expediting proceedings in which the Postal Service requests that the 
Commission recommend a change in mail classification and expedite 
consideration of that request on the ground that the change is minor in 
character.

[[Page 379]]

    (b) Persons who are interested in participating in proceedings to 
consider Postal Service requests for minor changes in mail 
classification may register at any time with the Secretary of the Postal 
Rate Commission, who shall maintain a publicly available list of the 
names and business addresses of all such registrants. Persons whose 
names appear on this list will automatically become parties to each 
proceeding in which the Postal Service requests a minor mail 
classification change pursuant to Secs. 3001.69 through 3001.69c. 
Parties may withdraw from the register or a particular case by filing a 
notice with the Secretary of the Commission.
    (c) When the Postal Service files a request under the provisions of 
Secs. 3001.69 through 3001.69c, it shall on that same day effect service 
by hand delivery of the complete filing to each person registered 
pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section who maintains an address for 
service within the Washington metropolitan area and serve the complete 
filing by Priority Mail service on all other registrants. Each 
registrant is responsible for insuring that his or her address remains 
current.
    (d) When the Postal Service files a request under the provisions of 
Secs. 3001.69 through 3001.69c, it shall on that same day send by First-
Class Mail to all participants in the most recent omnibus rate case a 
notice which briefly describes its proposal. This notice shall indicate 
on its first page that it is a notice of a request for a minor change in 
mail classification to be considered under Secs. 3001.69 through 
3001.69c, and identify the last day for filing a notice of intervention 
with the Commission.
    (e) Within 5 days after receipt of a Postal Service request invoking 
the operation of Secs. 3001.69 through 3001.69c, the Commission shall 
issue a notice of proceeding and provide for intervention by interested 
parties pursuant to Sec. 3001.20. The notice of proceeding shall state 
that the Postal Service has denominated the mail classification change 
it requests a minor change, and has requested expedited consideration 
pursuant to Secs. 3001.69 through 3001.69c. The notice shall further 
state the grounds on which the Postal Service submits that the requested 
change in mail classification is minor in character, and shall afford 
all interested parties 26 days after filing of the Postal Service's 
request within which to intervene, submit responses to the Postal 
Service's request for consideration of its proposed mail classification 
change under the terms of Secs. 3001.69 through 3001.69c, and request a 
hearing.
    (f) Within 28 days after publication of the notice of proceeding 
pursuant to paragraph (e) of this section, the Commission shall decide 
whether to consider the request of the Postal Service as a minor 
classification change request under Secs. 3001.69 through 3001.69c, and 
shall issue an order in the proceeding incorporating that ruling. The 
Commission shall order a request to be considered under Secs. 3001.69 
through 3001.69c if it finds that:
    (1) The requested classification change is minor in character, and
    (2) The effects of the requested change are likely to be 
appropriately limited in scope and overall impact.
    (g) If the Commission determines that the request of the Postal 
Service is not appropriate for consideration as a minor classification 
change request, no further procedures under Secs. 3001.69 through 
3001.69c shall be ordered, and the request will be considered in 
accordance with other appropriate provisions of Subpart C of this part.
    (h) If the Commission determines that the Postal Service request is 
appropriate for consideration under Secs. 3001.69 through 3001.69c, 
those respondents who request a hearing shall be directed to state with 
specificity within 14 days after publication of the notice the issues of 
material fact that require a hearing for resolution. Respondents shall 
also identify the fact or facts set forth in the Postal Service's filing 
that the party disputes, and when possible, what the party believes to 
be the true fact or facts and the evidence it intends to provide in 
support of its position.
    (i) The Commission will hold hearings on a Postal Service request 
which is considered under Secs. 3001.69 through 3001.69c when it 
determines that there are genuine issues of material fact to be 
resolved, and that a hearing is needed to resolve those issues. Hearings 
on

[[Page 380]]

the Postal Service request will commence within 21 days after issuance 
of the Commission order pursuant to paragraph (f) of this section. 
Testimony responsive to the Postal Service request will be due 14 days 
after the conclusion of hearings on the Postal Service request.

[61 FR 24453, May 15, 1996]

    Effective Date Note: At 61 FR 24453, May 15, 1996, Sec. 3001.69b was 
added, effective May 15, 1996 through May 15, 2001.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.69c   Expedited minor classification cases--time limits.

    The Commission will treat cases to which Secs. 3001.69 through 
3001.69c apply as subject to the maximum expedition consistent with 
procedural fairness. The schedule for adoption of a recommended decision 
will therefore be established, in each such case, to allow for issuance 
of such decision not more than 90 days after the filing of the request 
of the Postal Service if no hearing is held, and not more than 120 days 
after the filing of the request if a hearing is scheduled.

[61 FR 24454, May 15, 1996]

    Effective Date Note: At 61 FR 24454, May 15, 1996, Sec. 3001.69c was 
added, effective May 15, 1996 through May 15, 2001.

        Appendix A to Subpart C--Postal Service Rates and Charges

                            Table of Contents

               Classification Schedule 100--Expedited Mail

Sec.
110  Definition
120  Description of Services
121  Same Day Airport Service
122  Custom Designed Service
123  Next Day Service and Second Day Service
130  Physical Limitations
140  Postage and Preparation
150  Deposit and Delivery
151  Deposit
152  Receipt
153  Service
154  Forwarding and Return
160  Ancillary Services
170  Rates and Fees
180  Refunds
181  Procedure
182  Availability

              Classification Schedule 200--First-Class Mail

Sec.
210  Definition
220  Description of Subclasses
221  Letters and Sealed Parcels Subclass
222  Postal and Post Cards Subclass
223  Priority Mail
230  Physical Limitations
231  Size and Weight
232  Nonstandard Size Mail
240  Postage and Preparation
250  Deposit and Delivery
251  Deposit
252  Service
253  Forwarding and Return
260  Ancillary Services
270  Rates and Fees
280  Authorizations and Licenses

               Classification Schedules 300--Standard Mail

Sec.
310  Definition
311  General
312  Printed Matter
313  Written Additions
320  Description of Subclasses
321  Subclasses Limited to Mail Weighing Less Than 16 Ounces
322  Subclasses Limited to Mail Weighing 16 Ounces or More
323  Subclasses with No 16-Ounce Limitation
330  Physical Limitations
331  Size
332  Weight
333  Nonstandard Size Mail
340  Postage and Preparation
341  Postage
342  Preparation
343  Non-Identical Pieces
344  Attachments and Enclosures
350  Deposit and Delivery
351  Deposit
352  Service
353  Forwarding and Return
360  Ancillary Services
361  All Subclasses
362  Single Piece, Parcel Post, Bound Printed Matter, Special, and 
          Library Subclasses
370  Rates and Fees
380  Authorizations and Licenses
381  Regular, Enhanced Carrier Route, and Nonprofit Subclasses
382  Special Subclass
383  Parcel Post Subclass

                Classification Schedule 400--Periodicals

Sec.
410  Definition
411  General Requirements
412  General Publications
413  Requester Publications
414  Publications of Institutions and Societies
415  Publications of State Departments of Agriculture
416  Foreign Publications
420  Description of Subclasses

[[Page 381]]

421  Regular Subclass
422  [Reserved]
423  Preferred Rate Periodicals
430  Physical Limitations
440  Postage and Preparation
441  Postage
442  Presortation
443  Attachments and Enclosures
444  Identification
445  Filing of Information
446  Enclosures and Supplements
450  Deposit and Delivery
451  Deposit
452  Service
453  Forwarding and Return
470  Rates and Fees
480  Authorizations and Licenses
481  Entry Authorizations
482  Preferred Rate Authorization
483  Mailing by Publishers and News Agents
484  Fees

  General Definitions, Terms and Conditions--Sections 1000 through 6030

Classification Schedule SS-1--Address Correction Service
Classification Schedule SS-2--Business Reply Mail
Classification Schedule SS-3--Caller Service
Classification Schedule SS-4--Certificate of Mailing
Classification Schedule SS-5--Certified Mail
Classification Schedule SS-6--Collect on Delivery Service
Classification Schedule SS-8--Domestic Postal Money Orders
Classification Schedule SS-9--Insured Mail
Classification Schedule SS-10--Post Office Box Service
Classification Schedule SS-11--Mailing List Services
Classification Schedule SS-12--On-Site Meter Setting
Classification Schedule SS-13--Parcel Airlift (PAL)
Classification Schedule SS-14--Registered Mail
Classification Schedule SS-15--Restricted Delivery
Classification Schedule SS-16--Return Receipts
Classification Schedule SS-17--[Reserved]
Classification Schedule SS-18--Special Handling
Classification Schedule SS-19--Stamped Envelopes
Classification Schedule SS-20--Merchandise Return

Rate Schedules

                 Expedited Mail Classification Schedule

                             110  DEFINITION

    Expedited Mail is mail matter entered as Express Mail in accordance 
with the provisions of this Schedule. Any matter eligible for mailing 
may, at the option of the mailer, be mailed as Express Mail. Insurance 
is either included in Express Mail postage or is available for an 
additional charge, depending on the value and nature of the item sent by 
Express Mail.

                      120  Description of Services

                      121  Same Day Airport Service

    Same Day Airport service is available between designated airport 
mail facilities.

                      122  Custom Designed Service

    122.1  General. Custom Designed service is available between 
designated postal facilities or other designated locations for mailable 
matter tendered in accordance with a service agreement between the 
Postal Service and the mailer. Service under a service agreement shall 
be offered in a manner consistent with 39 U.S.C. 403(c).
    122.2  Service Agreement. A service agreement shall set forth the 
following:
    a. The scheduled place for each shipment tendered for service to 
each specific destination;
    b. Scheduled place for claim, or delivery, at destination for each 
scheduled shipment;
    c. Scheduled time of day for tender at origin and for claim or 
delivery at destination.
    122.3  Pickup and Delivery. Pickup at the mailer's premises, and/or 
delivery at an address other than the destination postal facility is 
provided under terms and conditions as prescribed by the Postal Service.
    122.4  Commencement of Service Agreement. Service provided pursuant 
to a service agreement shall commence not more than 10 days after the 
signed service agreement is tendered to the Postal Service.
    122.5  Termination of Service Agreement
    122.51  Termination by Postal Service. Express Mail service provided 
pursuant to a service agreement may be terminated by the Postal Service 
upon 10 days prior written notice to the mailer if:

[[Page 382]]

    a. Service cannot be provided for reasons beyond the control of the 
Postal Service or because of changes in Postal Service facilities or 
operations, or
    b. The mailer fails to adhere to the terms of the service agreement 
or this schedule.
    122.52.  Termination by Mailers. The mailer may terminate a service 
agreement, for any reason, by notice to the Postal Service.

              123  Next Day Service and Second Day Service

    123.1  Availability of Services. Next Day and Second Day Services 
are available at designated retail postal facilities to designated 
destination facilities or locations for items tendered by the time or 
times prescribed by the Postal Service. Next Day Service is available 
for overnight delivery. Second Day Service is available for second day 
delivery.
    123.2  Pickup Service. Pickup service is available for Next Day and 
Second Day Services under terms and conditions as prescribed by the 
Postal Service. Service shall be offered in a manner consistent with 39 
U.S.C. 403(c).

                        130  PHYSICAL LIMITATIONS

    Express Mail may not exceed 70 pounds or 108 inches in length and 
girth combined.

                      140  POSTAGE AND PREPARATION

    Except as provided in Rate Schedules 121, 122 and 123, postage on 
Express Mail is charged on each piece. For shipments tendered in Express 
Mail pouches under a service agreement, each pouch is a piece.

                        150  DEPOSIT AND DELIVERY

                              151  Deposit

    Express Mail must be deposited at places designated by the Postal 
Service.

                              152  Receipt

    A receipt showing the time and date of mailing will be provided to 
the mailer upon acceptance of Express Mail by the Postal Service. This 
receipt serves as evidence of mailing.

                              153  Service

    Express Mail service provides a high speed, high reliability 
service. Same Day Airport Express Mail will be dispatched on the next 
available transportation to the destination airport mail facility. 
Custom Designed Express Mail will be available for claim or delivery as 
specified in the service agreement.

                       154  Forwarding and Return

    When Express Mail is returned, or forwarded, as prescribed by the 
Postal Service, there will be no additional charge.

                         160  ANCILLARY SERVICES

    The following services may be obtained in conjunction with mail sent 
under this classification schedule upon payment of applicable fees:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Service                              Schedule         
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a. Address correction......................  SS-1                       
b. Return receipts.........................  SS-16                      
c. COD.....................................  SS-6                       
d. Express Mail Insurance..................  SS-9                       
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           170  RATES AND FEES

    The rates for Express Mail are set forth in the following rate 
schedules:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Schedule
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a. Same Day Airport..........................................        121
b. Custom Designed...........................................        122
c. Next Day Post Office-to-Post Office.......................        123
d. Second Day Post Office-to-Post Office.....................        123
e. Next Day Post Office-to-Addressee.........................        123
f. Second Day Post Office-to-Addressee.......................        123
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                              180  REFUNDS

                             181  Procedure

    Claims for refunds of postage must be filed within the period of 
time and under terms and conditions prescribed by the Postal Service.

                            182  Availability

    182.1  Same Day Airport. The Postal Service will refund the postage 
for Same Day Airport Express Mail not available for claim by the time 
specified, unless the delay is caused by:
    a. Strikes or work stoppage;
    b. Delay or cancellation of flights; or
    c. Governmental action beyond the control of Postal Service or air 
carriers.

[[Page 383]]

    182.2  Custom Designed. Except where a service agreement provides 
for claim, or delivery, of Custom Designed Express Mail more than 24 
hours after scheduled tender at point of origin, the Postal Service will 
refund postage for such mail not available for claim, or not delivered, 
within 24 hours of mailing, unless the item was delayed by strike or 
work stoppage.
    182.3  Next Day. Unless the item was delayed by strike or work 
stoppage, the Postal Service will refund postage for Next Day Express 
Mail not available for claim or not delivered:
    a. By 10:00 a.m., or earlier time(s) prescribed by the Postal 
Service, of the next delivery day in the case of Post Office-to-Post 
Office service;
    b. By 3:00 p.m., or earlier time(s) prescribed by the Postal 
Service, of the next delivery day in the case of Post Office-to-
Addressee service.
    182.4  Second Day. Unless the item was delayed by strike or work 
stoppage, the Postal Service will refund postage for Second Day Express 
Mail not available for claim or not delivered:
    a. By 10:00 a.m., or earlier time(s) prescribed by the Postal 
Service, of the second delivery day in the case of Post Office-to-Post 
Office service;
    b. By 3:00 p.m., or earlier time(s) prescribed by the Postal 
Service, of the second delivery day in the case of Post Office-to-
Addressee service.

                First-Class Mail Claffification Schedule

                             210  DEFINITION

    Any matter eligible for mailing may, at the option of the mailer, be 
mailed as First-Class Mail. The following must be mailed as First-Class 
Mail, unless mailed as Express Mail or exempt under title 39, United 
States Code, or except as authorized under sections 344.12, 344.23 and 
443:
    a. Mail sealed against postal inspection as set forth in section 
5000;
    b. Matter wholly or partially in handwriting or typewriting except 
as specifically permitted by sections 312, 313, 323, 344.22, and 446;
    c. Matter having the character of actual and personal correspondence 
except as specifically permitted by sections 312, 313, 323, 344.22, and 
446; and
    d. Bills and statements of account.

                     220  DESCRIPTION OF SUBCLASSES

                221  Letters and Sealed Parcels Subclass

    221.1  General. The Letters and Sealed Parcels subclass consists of 
First-Class Mail weighing 11 ounces or less that is not mailed under 
section 222 or 223.
    221.2  Regular Rate Categories. The regular rate categories consist 
of Letters and Sealed Parcels subclass mail not mailed under section 
221.3.
    221.21  Single Piece Rate Category. The single piece rate category 
applies to regular rate Letters and Sealed Parcels subclass mail not 
mailed under section 221.22.
    221.22  Presort Rate Category. The Presort rate category applies to 
Letters and Sealed Parcels subclass mail that:
    a. Is prepared in a mailing of at least 500 pieces;
    b. Is presorted, marked, and presented as prescribed by the Postal 
Service; and
    c. Meets the addressing and other preparation requirements 
prescribed by the Postal Service.
    221.23  [Reserved]
    221.24  Nonstandard Size Surcharge. Regular rate category Letters 
and Sealed Parcels subclass mail is subject to a surcharge if it is 
nonstandard size mail, as defined in section 232.
    221.25  Presort Discount for Pieces Weighing More Than Two Ounces. 
Presort rate category Letters and Sealed Parcels subclass mail is 
eligible for an additional presort discount on each piece weighing more 
than two ounces.

          221.3  Automation Rate Categories--Letters and Flats

    221.31  General. The automation rate categories consist of Letters 
and Sealed Parcels subclass mail weighing 11 ounces or less that:
    a. Is prepared in a mailing of at least 500 pieces;
    b. Is presorted, marked, and presented as specified by the Postal 
Service;
    c. Bears a barcode representing not more than 11 digits (not 
including

[[Page 384]]

``correction'' digits) as prescribed by the Postal Service; and
    d. Meets the machinability, addressing, barcoding, and other 
preparation requirements prescribed by the Postal Service.
    221.32  Basic Rate Category. The basic rate category applies to 
letter-size automation rate category mail not mailed under section 
221.33, 221.34, or 221.35.
    221.33  Three-Digit Rate Category. The three-digit rate category 
applies to letter-size automation rate category mail presorted to single 
or multiple three-digit ZIP Code destinations as prescribed by the 
Postal Service.
    221.34  Five-Digit Rate Category. The five-digit rate category 
applies to letter-size automation rate category mail presorted to single 
or multiple five-digit ZIP Code destinations as prescribed by the Postal 
Service.
    221.35  Carrier Route Rate Category. The carrier route rate category 
applies to letter-size automation rate category mail presorted to 
carrier routes. It is available only for those carrier routes prescribed 
by the Postal Service.
    221.36  Basic Flats Rate Category. The basic flats rate category 
applies to flat-size automation rate category mail not mailed under 
section 221.37.
    221.37  Three- and Five-Digit Flats Rate Category. The three- and 
five-digit flats rate category applies to flat-size automation rate 
category mail presorted to single or multiple three- and five-digit ZIP 
Code destinations as specified by the Postal Service.
    221.38  Nonstandard Size Surcharge. Flat-size automation rate 
category pieces are subject to a surcharge if they are nonstandard size 
mail, as defined in section 232.
    221.39  Presort Discount for Pieces Weighing More Than Two Ounces. 
Presorted automation rate category mail is eligible for an additional 
presort discount on each piece weighing more than two ounces.

                221.4  Automation Rate Category--Parcels

    221.41  Prebarcoded Parcel Rate Category. The prebarcoded parcel 
rate category applies to Letters and Sealed Parcels subclass 
nonpresorted mail that:
    a. Is prepared in a mailing of at least 50 pieces;
    b. Bears a barcode as prescribed by the Postal Service;
    c. Is marked and presented as prescribed by the Postal Service; and
    d. Meets the machinability, addressing, barcoding, and other 
preparation requirements prescribed by the Postal Service.
    This provision is applicable only to mailings entered for processing 
at no more than six facilities designated by the Postal Service. This 
provision expires April 28, 1998.

               222  Stamped Cards and Post Cards Subclass

                            222.1  Definition

    222.11  Stamped Card. A Stamped Card is a card with postage 
imprinted or impressed on it and supplied by the Postal Service for the 
transmission of messages.
    222.12  Post Card. A post card is a privately printed mailing card 
for the transmission of messages. To be eligible to be mailed as a 
First-Class post card, a card must be of uniform thickness and must not 
exceed any of the following dimensions:
    a. 6 inches in length;
    b. 4 1/4 inches in width;
    c. 0.016 inch in thickness.
    222.13  Double Cards. Double Stamped Cards or post cards may be 
mailed as Stamped Cards or post cards. A double Stamped Card or post 
card consists of two attached cards, one of which may be detached by the 
receiver and returned by mail as a single postal or post card.
    222.2  Restriction. A mailpiece with any of the following 
characteristics is not mailable as a Stamped Card or post card unless it 
is prepared as prescribed by the Postal Service:
    a. Numbers or letters unrelated to postal purposes appearing in the 
address portion of the card;
    b. Punched holes;
    c. Vertical tearing guide;
    d. An address portion which is smaller than the remainder of the 
card.

                     222.3  Regular Rate Categories

    222.31  Single Piece Rate Category. The single piece rate category 
applies

[[Page 385]]

to regular rate Stamped Cards and Post Cards subclass mail not mailed 
under section 222.32.
    222.32  Presort Rate Category. The presort rate category applies to 
Stamped Cards and Post Cards subclass mail that:
    a. Is prepared in a mailing of at least 500 pieces;
    b. Is presorted, marked, and presented as prescribed by the Postal 
Service; and
    c. Meets the addressing and other preparation requirements 
prescribed by the Postal Service.

                    222.4  Automation Rate Categories

    222.41  General. The automation rate categories consist of Stamped 
Cards and Post Cards subclass mail that:
    a. Is prepared in a mailing of at least 500 pieces;
    b. Is presorted, marked, and presented as specified by the Postal 
Service;
    c. Bears a barcode representing not more than 11 digits (not 
including ``correction'' digits) as prescribed by the Postal Service; 
and
    d. Meets the machinability, addressing, barcoding, and other 
preparation requirements prescribed by the Postal Service.
    222.42  Basic Rate Category. The basic rate category applies to 
automation rate category cards not mailed under section 222.43, 222.44, 
or 222.45.
    222.43  Three-Digit Rate Category. The three-digit rate category 
applies to automation rate category cards presorted to single or 
multiple three-digit ZIP Code destinations as prescribed by the Postal 
Service.
    222.44  Five-Digit Rate Category. The five-digit rate category 
applies to automation rate category cards presorted to single or 
multiple five-digit ZIP Code destinations as prescribed by the Postal 
Service.
    222.45  Carrier Route Rate Category. The carrier route rate category 
applies to automation rate category cards presorted to carrier routes. 
It is available only for those carrier routes prescribed by the Postal 
Service.

                           223  Priority Mail

    223.1  General. The Priority Mail subclass consists of:
    a. First-Class Mail weighing more than 11 ounces; and
    b. Any mailable matter which, at the option of the mailer, is mailed 
for expeditious mailing and transportation.
    223.2  Single Piece Priority Mail Rate Category. The single piece 
priority mail rate category applies to Priority Mail subclass mail not 
mailed under section 223.3.
    223.3  Presorted Priority Mail Rate Category. The presorted priority 
mail rate category applies to Priority Mail subclass mail that:
    a. Is prepared in a mailing of at least 300 pieces;
    b. Is presorted, marked, and presented as prescribed by the Postal 
Service; and
    c. Meets the machinability, addressing, and other preparation 
requirements prescribed by the Postal Service.
    223.4  Prebarcoded Priority Mail Parcel Rate Category. The 
prebarcoded Priority Mail Parcel rate category applies to Priority Mail 
subclass nonpresorted mail that:
    a. Is prepared in a mailing of at least 50 pieces;
    b. Bears a barcode as prescribed by the Postal Service;
    c. Is marked and presented as prescribed by the Postal Service; and
    d. Meets the machinability, addressing, barcoding, and other 
preparation requirements prescribed by the Postal Service.
    This provision is applicable only to mailings entered for processing 
at no more than six facilities designated by the Postal Service. This 
provision expires April 28, 1998.
    223.5  Flat Rate Envelope. Priority Mail subclass mail sent in a 
``flat rate'' envelope provided by the Postal Service is charged the 
two-pound rate.
    223.6  Pickup Service. Pickup service is available for Priority Mail 
subclass mail under terms and conditions prescribed by the Postal 
Service.
    223.7  Bulky Parcels. Priority Mail subclass mail weighing less than 
15 pounds, and measuring over 84 inches in length and girth combined, is 
charged a minimum rate equal to that for a 15-pound parcel for the zone 
to which the piece is addressed.

[[Page 386]]

                        230  PHYSICAL LIMITATIONS

                          231  Size and Weight

    First-Class Mail may not exceed 70 pounds or 108 inches in length 
and girth combined. Additional size and weight limitations apply to 
individual First-Class Mail subclasses.

                       232  Nonstandard Size Mail

    Letters and Sealed Parcels subclass mail weighing one ounce or less 
is nonstandard size if:
    a. Its aspect ratio does not fall between 1 to 1.3 and 1 to 2.5 
inclusive; or
    b. It exceeds any of the following dimensions:
    i. 11.5 inches in length;
    ii. 6.125 inches in width; or
    iii. 0.25 inch in thickness.

                      240  POSTAGE AND PREPARATION

    Postage on First-Class Mail must be paid as set forth in section 
3000. Postage is computed separately on each piece of mail. Pieces not 
within the same postage rate increment may be mailed at other than a 
single piece rate as part of the same mailing only when specific methods 
approved by the Postal Service for ascertaining and verifying postage 
are followed. All mail mailed at other than a single piece rate must 
have postage paid in a manner not requiring cancellation.

                        250  DEPOSIT AND DELIVERY

                              251  Deposit

    First-Class Mail must be deposited at places and times designated by 
the Postal Service.

                              252  Service

    First-Class Mail receives expeditious handling and transportation, 
except that when First-Class Mail is attached to or enclosed with mail 
of another class, the service of that class applies.

                       253  Forwarding and Return

    First-Class Mail that is undeliverable-as-addressed is forwarded or 
returned to the sender without additional charge.

                         260  ANCILLARY SERVICES

    First-Class Mail, except as otherwise noted, will receive the 
following additional services upon payment of the fees prescribed in the 
corresponding schedule:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Service                              Schedule         
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 a. Address correction.....................  SS-1                       
 b. Business reply mail....................  SS-2                       
 c. Certificates of mailing................  SS-4                       
 d. Certified mail.........................  SS-5                       
 e. COD....................................  SS-6                       
 f. Insured mail...........................  SS-9                       
 g. Registered mail........................  SS-14                      
 h. Return receipt (limited to merchandise   SS-16                      
 sent by Priority Mail).                                                
 i. Merchandise return.....................  SS-20                      
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           270  RATES AND FEES

    The rates and fees for First-Class Mail are set forth in the 
following rate schedules:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Schedule
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 a. Letters and Sealed Parcels...............................        221
 b. Stamped Cards and Post Cards.............................        222
 c. Priority Mail............................................        223
 d. Fees.....................................................       1000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                    280  AUTHORIZATIONS AND LICENSES

    The fee set forth in Rate Schedule 1000 must be paid once each year 
at each office of mailing by any person who mails other than single 
piece First-Class Mail or courtesy envelope mail. Payment of the fee 
allows the mailer to mail at any First-Class rate.

                  Standard Mail Classification Schedule

                             310  DEFINITION

                              311  General

    Any mailable matter may be mailed as Standard Mail except:
    a. Matter required to be mailed as First-Class Mail;
    b. Copies of a publication that is entered as Periodicals class 
mail, except copies sent by a printer to a publisher, and except copies 
that would have traveled at the former second-class transient rate. (The 
transient rate applied to individual copies of second-class mail 
forwarded and mailed by the public, as well as to certain sample copies 
mailed by publishers.)

[[Page 387]]

                           312  Printed Matter

    Printed matter, including printed letters which according to 
internal evidence are being sent in identical terms to several persons, 
but which do not have the character of actual or personal 
correspondence, may be mailed as Standard Mail. Printed matter does not 
lose its character as Standard Mail when the date and name of the 
addressee and of the sender are written thereon. For the purposes of the 
Standard Mail Classification Schedule, ``printed'' does not include 
reproduction by handwriting or typewriting.

                         313  Written Additions

    Standard Mail may have the following written additions placed on the 
wrapper, on a tag or label attached to the outside of the parcel, or 
inside the parcel, either loose or attached to the article:
    a. Marks, numbers, name, or letters descriptive of contents;
    b. ``Please Do Not Open Until Christmas,'' or words of similar 
import;
    c. Instructions and directions for the use of an article in the 
package;
    d. Manuscript dedication or inscription not in the nature of 
personal correspondence;
    e. Marks to call attention to any word or passage in text;
    f. Corrections of typographical errors in printed matter;
    g. Manuscripts accompanying related proof sheets, and corrections in 
proof sheets to include: corrections of typographical and other errors, 
alterations of text, insertion of new text, marginal instructions to the 
printer, and rewrites of parts if necessary for correction;
    h. Handstamped imprints, except when the added matter is itself 
personal or converts the original matter to a personal communication;
    i. An invoice.

                     320  DESCRIPTION OF SUBCLASSES

      321  Subclasses Limited to Mail Weighing Less than 16 Ounces

                      321.1  Single Piece Subclass

    321.11  Definition. The Single Piece subclass consists of Standard 
Mail weighing less than 16 ounces that is not mailed under sections 
321.2, 321.3, 321.4, 321.5 or 323.
    321.12  Basic Rate Category. The basic rate category applies to 
Single Piece subclass mail not mailed under section 321.13.
    321.13  Keys and Identification Devices Rate Category. The keys and 
identification devices rate category applies to keys, identification 
cards, identification tags, or similar identification devices mailed 
without cover, and which bear, contain, or have securely attached the 
name and complete address of a person, organization, or concern, with 
instructions to return to such address and a statement guaranteeing the 
payment of postage due on delivery.
    321.14  Nonstandard Size Surcharge. Single Piece subclass mail, 
other than that mailed under section 321.13, is subject to a surcharge 
if it is nonstandard size mail, as defined in section 333.

                         321.2  Regular Subclass

    321.21  General. The Regular subclass consists of Standard Mail 
weighing less than 16 ounces that is not mailed under sections 321.1, 
321.3, 321.4, 321.5 or 323.
    321.22  Presort Rate Categories
    321.221  General. The presort rate categories apply to Regular 
subclass mail that:
    a. Is prepared in a mailing of at least 200 addressed pieces or 50 
pounds of addressed pieces;
    b. Is presorted, marked, and presented as prescribed by the Postal 
Service; and
    c. Meets the machinability, addressing, and other preparation 
requirements prescribed by the Postal Service.
    321.222  Basic Rate Categories. The basic rate categories apply to 
presort rate category mail not mailed under section 321.223.
    321.223  Three- and Five-Digit Rate Categories. The three- and five-
digit rate categories apply to presort rate category mail presorted to 
single or multiple three- and five-digit ZIP Code destinations as 
prescribed by the Postal Service.

                   321.23  Automation Rate Categories

    321.231  General. The automation rate categories apply to Regular 
subclass mail that:

[[Page 388]]

    a. Is prepared in a mailing of at least 200 addressed pieces or 50 
pounds of addressed pieces;
    b. Is presorted, marked, and presented as prescribed by the Postal 
Service;
    c. Bears a barcode representing not more than 11 digits (not 
including ``correction'' digits) as prescribed by the Postal Service;
    d. Meets the machinability, addressing, barcoding, and other 
preparation requirements prescribed by the Postal Service.
    321.232  Basic Barcoded Rate Category. The basic barcoded rate 
category applies to letter-size automation rate category mail not mailed 
under section 321.233 or 321.234.
    321.233  Three- Digit Barcoded Rate Category. The three-digit 
barcoded rate category applies to letter-size automation rate category 
mail presorted to single or multiple three-digit ZIP Code destinations 
as prescribed by the Postal Service.
    321.234  Five-Digit Barcoded Rate Category. The five-digit barcoded 
rate category applies to letter-size automation rate category mail 
presorted to single or multiple five-digit ZIP Code destinations as 
prescribed by the Postal Service.
    321.235  Basic Barcoded Flats Rate Category. The basic barcoded 
flats rate category applies to flat-size automation rate category mail 
not mailed under section 321.236.
    321.236  Three- and Five-Digit Barcoded Flats Rate Category. The 
three- and five-digit barcoded flats rate category applies to flat-size 
automation rate category mail presorted to single or multiple three- and 
five-digit ZIP Code destinations as prescribed by the Postal Service.
    321.24  Destination Entry Discount. The destination entry discounts 
apply to Regular subclass mail prepared as prescribed by the Postal 
Service and addressed for delivery within the service area of the BMC 
(or auxiliary service facility), or sectional center facility (SCF), at 
which it is entered, as defined by the Postal Service.

                 321.3  Enhanced Carrier Route Subclass

    321.31  Definition. The Enhanced Carrier Route subclass consists of 
Standard Mail weighing less than 16 ounces that is not mailed under 
section 321.1, 321.2, 321.4, 321.5 or 323, and that:
    a. Is prepared in a mailing of at least 200 addressed pieces or 50 
pounds of addressed pieces;
    b. Is prepared, marked, and presented as prescribed by the Postal 
Service;
    c. Is presorted to carrier routes as prescribed by the Postal 
Service;
    d. Is sequenced as prescribed by the Postal Service; and
    e. Meets the machinability, addressing, and other preparation 
requirements prescribed by the Postal Service.
    321.32  Basic Rate Category. The basic rate category applies to 
Enhanced Carrier Route subclass mail not mailed under section 321.33, 
321.34 or 321.35.
    321.33  Basic Pre-Barcoded Rate Category. The basic pre-barcoded 
rate category applies to letter-size Enhanced Carrier Route subclass 
mail which bears a barcode representing not more than 11 digits (not 
including ``correction'' digits), as prescribed by the Postal Service, 
and which meets the machinability, addressing, and barcoding 
specifications and other preparation requirements prescribed by the 
Postal Service.
    321.34  High Density Rate Category. The high density rate category 
applies to Enhanced Carrier Route subclass mail presented in walk-
sequence order and meeting the high density requirements prescribed by 
the Postal Service.
    321.35  Saturation Rate Category. The saturation rate category 
applies to Enhanced Carrier Route subclass mail presented in walk-
sequence order and meeting the saturation requirements prescribed by the 
Postal Service.
    321.36  Destination Entry Discounts. Destination entry discounts 
apply to Enhanced Carrier Route subclass mail prepared as prescribed by 
the Postal Service and addressed for delivery within the service area of 
the BMC (or auxiliary service facility), sectional center facility 
(SCF), or destination delivery unit (DDU) at which it is entered, as 
defined by the Postal Service.

[[Page 389]]

                        321.4  Nonprofit Subclass

    321.41  General. The Nonprofit subclass consists of Standard Mail 
weighing less than 16 ounces that is not mailed under section 321.1, 
321.2, 321.3, 321.5 or 323, and that is mailed by authorized nonprofit 
organizations or associations of the following types:
    a. Religious, as defined in section 1009,
    b. Educational, as defined in section 1009,
    c. Scientific, as defined in section 1009,
    d. Philanthropic, as defined in section 1009,
    e. Agricultural, as defined in section 1009,
    f. Labor, as defined in section 1009,
    g. Veterans', as defined in section 1009,
    h. Fraternal, as defined in section 1009,
    i. Qualified political committees,
    j. State or local voting registration officials when making a 
mailing required or authorized by the National Voter Registration Act of 
1993.
    321.411  Qualified Political Committees. The term ``qualified 
political committee'' means a national or State committee of a political 
party, the Republican and Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committees, the 
Democratic National Congressional Committee, and the National Republican 
Congressional Committee:
    a. The term ``national committee'' means the organization which, by 
virtue of the bylaws of a political party, is responsible for the day-
to-day operation of such political party at the national level; and
    b. The term ``State committee'' means the organization which, by 
virtue of the bylaws of a political party, is responsible for the day-
to-day operation of such political party at the State level.
    321.412  Limitation on Authorization. An organization authorized to 
mail at the nonprofit Standard rates for qualified nonprofit 
organizations may mail only its own matter at these rates. An 
organization may not delegate or lend the use of its permit to mail at 
special Standard rates to any other person, organization or association.

                     321.42  Presort Rate Categories

    321.421  General. The presort rate categories apply to Nonprofit 
subclass mail that:
    a. Is prepared in a mailing of at least 200 addressed pieces or 50 
pounds of addressed pieces;
    b. Is presorted, marked, and presented as prescribed by the Postal 
Service; and
    c. Meets the machinability, addressing, and other preparation 
requirements prescribed by the Postal Service.
    321.422  Basic Rate Categories. The basic rate categories apply to 
presort rate category mail not mailed under section 321.423.
    321.423  Three-and Five-Digit Rate Categories. The three-and five-
digit rate categories apply to presort rate category mail presorted to 
single or multiple three-and five-digit ZIP Code destinations as 
prescribed by the Postal Service.
    321.43  Automation Rate Categories
    321.431  General. The automation rate categories apply to Nonprofit 
subclass mail that:
    a. Is prepared in a mailing of at least 200 addressed pieces or 50 
pounds of addressed pieces;
    b. Is presorted, marked, and presented as prescribed by the Postal 
Service;
    c. Bears a barcode representing not more than 11 digits (not 
including ``correction'' digits) as prescribed by the Postal Service;
    d. Meets the machinability, addressing, barcoding, and other 
preparation requirements prescribed by the Postal Service.
    321.432  Basic Barcoded Rate Category. The basic barcoded rate 
category applies to letter-size automation rate category mail not mailed 
under section 321.433 or 321.434.
    321.433  Three-Digit Barcoded Rate Category. The three-digit 
barcoded rate category applies to letter-size automation rate category 
mail presorted to single or multiple three-digit ZIP Code destinations 
as prescribed by the Postal Service.
    321.434  Five-Digit Barcoded Rate Category. The five-digit barcoded 
rate category applies to letter-size automation rate category mail 
presorted to single or multiple five-digit ZIP Code

[[Page 390]]

destinations as prescribed by the Postal Service.
    321.435  Basic Barcoded Flats Rate Category. The basic barcoded 
flats rate category applies to flat-size automation rate category mail 
not mailed under section 321.436.
    321.436  Three- and Five-Digit Barcoded Flats Rate Category. The 
three- and five-digit barcoded flats rate category applies to flat-size 
automation rate category mail presorted to single or multiple three-and 
five-digit ZIP Code destinations as prescribed by the Postal Service.
    321.44  Destination Entry Discounts. Destination entry discounts 
apply to Nonprofit subclass mail prepared as prescribed by the Postal 
Service and addressed for delivery within the service area of the BMC 
(or auxiliary service facility) or sectional center facility (SCF) at 
which it is entered, as defined by the Postal Service.

            321.5  Nonprofit Enhanced Carrier Route Subclass

    321.51  Definition. The Nonprofit Enhanced Carrier Route subclass 
consists of Standard Mail weighing less than 16 ounces that is not 
mailed under section 321.1, 321.2, 321.3, 321.4 or 323, that is mailed 
by authorized nonprofit organizations or associations (as defined in 
section 321.41) under the terms and limitations stated in section 
321.412, and that:
    a. Is prepared in a mailing of at least 200 addressed pieces or 50 
pounds of addressed pieces;
    b. Is prepared, marked, and presented as prescribed by the Postal 
Service;
    c. Is presorted to carrier routes as prescribed by the Postal 
Service;
    d. Is sequenced as prescribed by the Postal Service; and
    e. Meets the machinability, addressing, and other preparation 
requirements prescribed by the Postal Service.
    321.52  Basic Rate Category. The basic rate category applies to 
Nonprofit Enhanced Carrier Route subclass mail not mailed under section 
321.53, 321.54 or 321.55.
    321.53  Basic Pre-Barcoded Rate Category. The basic pre-barcoded 
rate category applies to letter-size Nonprofit Enhanced Carrier Route 
subclass mail which bears a barcode representing not more than 11 digits 
(not including ``correction'' digits), as prescribed by the Postal 
Service, and which meets the machinability, addressing, and barcoding 
specifications and other preparation requirements prescribed by the 
Postal Service.
    321.54  High Density Rate Category. The high density rate category 
applies to Nonprofit Enhanced Carrier Route subclass mail presented in 
walk-sequence order and meeting the high density requirements prescribed 
by the Postal Service.
    321.55  Saturation Rate Category. The saturation rate category 
applies to Nonprofit Enhanced Carrier Route subclass mail presented in 
walk-sequence order and meeting the saturation requirements prescribed 
by the Postal Service.
    321.56  Destination Entry Discounts. Destination entry discounts 
apply to Nonprofit Enhanced Carrier Route subclass mail prepared as 
prescribed by the Postal Service and addressed for delivery within the 
service area of the BMC (or auxiliary service facility), sectional 
center facility (SCF), or destination delivery unit (DDU) at which it is 
entered, as defined by the Postal Service.

       322  Subclasses Limited to Mail Weighing 16 Ounces or More

    322.1  Parcel Post Subclass
    322.11  Definition. The Parcel Post subclass consists of Standard 
Mail weighing 16 ounces or more that is not mailed under sections 322.3, 
323.1, or 323.2.
    322.12  Basic Rate Category. The basic rate category applies to all 
Parcel Post subclass mail not mailed under sections 322.13 or 322.14.

                          322.13  [Reserved] **

    **Revised language describing the bulk parcel post rate category was 
not accepted in Docket No. MC95-1. The following description, last 
amended in Docket No. R84-1, remains in effect.

                             400.0202  Bulk

    Bulk parcel post mail is fourth-class parcel post mail consisting of 
properly prepared and separated single mailings of at least 300 pieces 
or 2000 pounds. Pieces weighing less than 15 pounds

[[Page 391]]

and measuring over 84 inches in length and girth combined are not 
mailable as bulk parcel post. Provision for mailing nonidentical pieces 
is set forth in section 400.046.
    322.14  Destination BMC Rate Category. Parcel Post subclass mail is 
eligible for destination BMC rates if it is included in a mailing of at 
least 50 pieces deposited at the destination BMC, auxiliary service 
facility, or other equivalent facility, as prescribed by the Postal 
Service.
    322.15  Intra-BMC Discount. Basic rate category Parcel Post subclass 
mail is eligible for the intra-BMC discount if it originates and 
destinates within the same BMC or auxiliary service facility service 
area, Alaska, Hawaii or Puerto Rico.
    322.16  Nonmachinable Surcharge. Basic rate category Parcel Post 
subclass mail that does not meet machinability criteria prescribed by 
the Postal Service is subject to a nonmachinable surcharge.
    322.17  Pickup Service. Pickup service is available for Parcel Post 
subclass mail under terms and conditions prescribed by the Postal 
Service.

                            322.2  [Reserved]

                  322.3  Bound Printed Matter Subclass

    322.31  Definition. The Bound Printed Matter subclass consists of 
Standard Mail weighing at least 16 ounces, but not more than 10 pounds, 
which:
    a. Consists of advertising, promotional, directory, or editorial 
material, or any combination thereof;
    b. Is securely bound by permanent fastenings including, but not 
limited to, staples, spiral bindings, glue, and stitching; loose leaf 
binders and similar fastenings are not considered permanent;
    c. Consists of sheets of which at least 90 percent are imprinted 
with letters, characters, figures or images or any combination of these, 
by any process other than handwriting or typewriting;
    d. Does not have the nature of personal correspondence;
    e. Is not stationery, such as pads of blank printed forms.
    322.32  Single Piece Rate Category. The single piece rate category 
applies to Bound Printed Matter subclass mail which is not mailed under 
section 322.33 or 322.34.
    322.33  Bulk Rate Category. The bulk rate category applies to Bound 
Printed Matter subclass mail prepared in a mailing of at least 300 
pieces, prepared and presorted as prescribed by the Postal Service.
    322.34  Carrier Route Presort Rate Category. The carrier route rate 
category applies to Bound Printed Matter subclass mail prepared in a 
mailing of at least 300 pieces of carrier route presorted mail, prepared 
and presorted as prescribed by the Postal Service.

               323  Subclasses With No 16-Ounce Limitation

                         323.1  Special Subclass

    323.11  Definition. The Special subclass consists of Standard Mail 
of the following types:
    a. Books, including books issued to supplement other books, of at 
least eight printed pages, consisting wholly of reading matter or 
scholarly bibliography or reading matter with incidental blank spaces 
for notations, and containing no advertising matter other than 
incidental announcements of books. Not more than three of the 
announcements may contain as part of their format a single order form, 
which may also serve as a post card. The order forms permitted in this 
subsection are in addition to and not in lieu of order forms which may 
be enclosed by virtue of any other provision;
    b. 16 millimeter or narrower width films which must be positive 
prints in final form for viewing, and catalogs of such films, of 24 
pages or more, at least 22 of which are printed, except when sent to or 
from commercial theaters;
    c. Printed music, whether in bound form or in sheet form;
    d. Printed objective test materials and accessories thereto used by 
or in behalf of educational institutions in the testing of ability, 
aptitude, achievement, interests and other mental and personal qualities 
with or without answers, test scores or identifying information recorded 
thereon in writing or by mark;
    e. Sound recordings, including incidental announcements of 
recordings and guides or scripts prepared solely

[[Page 392]]

for use with such recordings. Not more than three of the announcements 
permitted in this subsection may contain as part of their format a 
single order form, which may also serve as a post card. The order forms 
permitted in this subsection are in addition to and not in lieu of order 
forms which may be enclosed by virtue of any other provision;
    f. Playscripts and manuscripts for books, periodicals and music;
    g. Printed educational reference charts, permanently processed for 
preservation;
    h. Printed educational reference charts, including but not limited 
to;
    i. Mathematical tables;
    ii. Botanical tables;
    iii. Zoological tables; and
    iv. Maps produced primarily for educational reference purposes;
    i. Looseleaf pages and binders therefor, consisting of medical 
information for distribution to doctors, hospitals, medical schools, and 
medical students; and
    j. Computer-readable media containing prerecorded information and 
guides or scripts prepared solely for use with such media.
    323.12  Single Piece Rate Category. The single piece rate category 
applies to Special subclass mail not mailed under section 323.13 or 
323.14.
    323.13  Level A Presort Rate Category. The Level A presort rate 
category applies to mailings of at least 500 pieces of Special subclass 
mail, prepared and presorted to five-digit destination ZIP Codes as 
prescribed by the Postal Service.
    323.14  Level B Presort Rate Category. The Level B presort rate 
category applies to mailing of at least 500 pieces of Special subclass 
mail, prepared and presorted to destination Bulk Mail Centers as 
prescribed by the Postal Service.

                         323.2  Library Subclass

                           323.21  Definition

    323.211  General. The Library subclass consists of Standard Mail of 
the following types, separated or presorted as prescribed by the Postal 
Service:
    a. Matter designated in subsection 323.213, loaned or exchanged 
(including cooperative processing by libraries) between:
    i. Schools or colleges, or universities;
    ii. Public libraries, museums and herbaria, nonprofit religious, 
educational, scientific, philanthropic, agricultural, labor, veterans' 
or fraternal organizations or associations, or between such 
organizations and their members, readers or borrowers.
    b. Matter designated in subsection 323.214, mailed to or from 
schools, colleges, universities, public libraries, museums and herbaria 
and to or from nonprofit religious, educational, scientific, 
philanthropic, agricultural, labor, veterans' or fraternal organizations 
or associations; or
    c. Matter designated in subsection 323.215, mailed from a publisher 
or a distributor to a school, college, university or public library.
    323.212  Definition of Nonprofit Organizations and Associations. 
Nonprofit organizations or associations are defined in section 1009.
    323.213  Library subclass mail under section 323.211a. Matter 
eligible for mailing as Library subclass mail under section 323.211a 
consists of:
    a. Books consisting wholly of reading matter or scholarly 
bibliography or reading matter with incidental blank spaces for 
notations and containing no advertising other than incidental 
announcements of books;
    b. Printed music, whether in bound form or in sheet form;
    c. Bound volumes of academic theses in typewritten or other 
duplicated form;
    d. Periodicals, whether bound or unbound;
    e. Sound recordings;
    f. Other library materials in printed, duplicated or photographic 
form or in the form of unpublished manuscripts; and
    g. Museum materials, specimens, collections, teaching aids, printed 
matter and interpretative materials intended to inform and to further 
the educational work and interest of museums and herbaria.
    323.214  Library subclass mail under section 323.211b. Matter 
eligible for mailing as Library subclass mail under section 323.211b 
consists of:

[[Page 393]]

    a. 16-millimeter or narrower width films; filmstrips; 
transparencies; slides; microfilms; all of which must be positive prints 
in final form for viewing;
    b. Sound recordings;
    c. Museum materials, specimens, collections, teaching aids, printed 
matter, and interpretative materials intended to inform and to further 
the educational work and interests of museums and herbaria;
    d. Scientific or mathematical kits, instruments or other devices;
    e. Catalogs of the materials in section 323.214 a through d and 
guides or scripts prepared solely for use with such materials.
    323.215  Library subclass mail under section 323.211c. Matter 
eligible for mailing as Library subclass mail under section 323.211c 
consists of books, including books to supplement other books, consisting 
wholly of reading matter or scholarly bibliography or reading matter 
with incidental blank spaces for notations, and containing no 
advertising matter other than incidental announcements of books.
    323.22  Basic Rate Category. The basic rate category applies to all 
Library subclass mail.

                        330  PHYSICAL LIMITATIONS

                                331  Size

    Standard Mail may not exceed 108 inches in length and girth 
combined. Additional size limitations apply to individual Standard Mail 
subclasses. The maximum size for mail presorted to carrier route in the 
Enhanced Carrier Route and Nonprofit Enhanced Carrier Route subclasses 
is 14 inches in length, 11.75 inches in width, and 0.75 inch in 
thickness. For merchandise samples mailed with detached address cards, 
the carrier route maximum dimensions apply to the detached address cards 
and not to the samples.

                               332  Weight

    Standard Mail may not weigh more than 70 pounds. Additional weight 
limitations apply to individual Standard Mail subclasses.

                       333  Nonstandard Size Mail

    Single Piece subclass mail weighing one ounce or less is nonstandard 
size if:
    a. Its aspect ratio does not fall between 1 to 1.3 and 1 to 2.5 
inclusive; or
    b. It exceeds any of the following dimensions:
    i. 11.5 inches in length;
    i. 6.125 inches in width; or
    iii. 0.25 inch in thickness.

                      340  POSTAGE AND PREPARATION

                              341  Postage

    Postage must be paid as set forth in section 3000. When the postage 
computed at a Single Piece, Regular, Enhanced Carrier Route, Nonprofit 
or Nonprofit Enhanced Carrier Route Standard rate is higher than the 
rate prescribed in any of the Standard subclasses listed in 322 or 323 
for which the piece also qualifies (or would qualify, except for 
weight), the piece is eligible for the applicable lower rate. All mail 
mailed at a bulk or presort rate must have postage paid in a manner not 
requiring cancellation.

                            342  Preparation

    All pieces in a Standard mailing must be separately addressed. All 
pieces in a Standard mailing must be identified as prescribed by the 
Postal Service, and must contain the ZIP Code of the addressee when 
prescribed by the Postal Service. All Standard mailings must be prepared 
and presented as prescribed by the Postal Service. Two or more Standard 
mailings may be commingled and mailed only when specific methods 
approved by the Postal Service for ascertaining and verifying postage 
are followed.

                        343  Non-Identical Pieces

    Pieces not identical in size and weight may be mailed at a bulk or 
presort rate as part of the same mailing only when specific methods 
approved by the Postal Service for ascertaining and verifying postage 
are followed.

[[Page 394]]

                     344  Attachments and Enclosures

  344.1  Single Piece, Regular, Enhanced Carrier Route, Nonprofit and 
        Nonprofit Enhanced Carrier Route Subclasses (section 321)

    344.11  General. First-Class Mail may be attached to or enclosed in 
Standard books, catalogs, and merchandise entered under section 321. The 
piece must be marked as prescribed by the Postal Service. Except as 
provided in section 344.12, additional postage must be paid for the 
attachment or enclosure as if it had been mailed separately. Otherwise, 
the entire combined piece is subject to the First-Class rate for which 
it qualifies.
    344.12  Incidental First-Class Attachments and Enclosures. First-
Class Mail, as defined in section 210 b through d, may be attached to or 
enclosed with Standard merchandise entered under section 321, including 
books but excluding merchandise samples, with postage paid on the 
combined piece at the applicable Standard rate, if the attachment or 
enclosure is incidental to the piece to which it is attached or with 
which it is enclosed.

     344.2  Parcel Post, Bound Printed Matter, Special, and Library 
                    Subclasses (sections 322 and 323)

    344.21  General. First-Class Mail or Standard Mail from any of the 
subclasses listed in section 321 (Single Piece, Regular, Enhanced 
Carrier Route, Nonprofit or Nonprofit Enhanced Carrier Route) may be 
attached to or enclosed in Standard Mail mailed under sections 322 and 
323. The piece must be marked as prescribed by the Postal Service. 
Except as provided in sections 344.22 and 344.23, additional postage 
must be paid for the attachment or enclosure as if it had been mailed 
separately. Otherwise, the entire combined piece is subject to the 
First-Class or section 321 Standard rate for which it qualifies (unless 
the rate applicable to the host piece is higher), or, if a combined 
piece with a section 321 Standard Mail attachment or enclosure weighs 16 
ounces or more, the piece is subject to the Parcel Post rate for which 
it qualifies.
    344.22  Specifically Authorized Attachments and Enclosures. Standard 
Mail mailed under sections 322 and 323 may contain enclosures and 
attachments as prescribed by the Postal Service and as described in 
section 323.11 a and e, with postage paid on the combined piece at the 
Standard rate applicable to the host piece.
    344.23  Incidental First-Class Attachments and Enclosures. First-
Class Mail that meets one or more of the definitions in section 210 b 
through d, may be attached to or enclosed with Standard Mail mailed 
under section 322 or 323, with postage paid on the combined piece at the 
Standard rate applicable to the host piece, if the attachment or 
enclosure is incidental to the piece to which it is attached or with 
which it is enclosed.

                        350  DEPOSIT AND DELIVERY

                              351  Deposit

    Standard Mail must be deposited at places and times designated by 
the Postal Service.

                              352  Service

    Standard Mail may receive deferred service.

                       353  Forwarding and Return

  353.1  Single Piece, Regular, Enhanced Carrier Route, Nonprofit and 
        Nonprofit Enhanced Carrier Route Subclasses (section 321)

    Undeliverable-as-addressed Standard Mail mailed under section 321 
will be returned on request of the mailer, or forwarded and returned on 
request of the mailer. Undeliverable-as-addressed combined First-Class 
and Standard pieces will be returned as prescribed by the Postal 
Service. The Single Piece Standard rate is charged for each piece 
receiving return only service. Charges for forwarding-and-return service 
are assessed only on those pieces which cannot be forwarded and are 
returned. The charge for those returned pieces is the appropriate Single 
Piece Standard rate for the piece plus that rate multiplied by a factor 
equal to the number of section 321 Standard pieces nationwide that are 
successfully forwarded for every one piece that cannot be forwarded and 
must be returned.

[[Page 395]]

     353.2  Parcel Post, Bound Printed Matter, Special, and Library 
                    Subclasses (sections 322 and 323)

    Undeliverable-as-addressed Standard Mail mailed under sections 322 
and 323 will be forwarded on request of the addressee, returned on 
request of the mailer, or forwarded and returned on request of the 
mailer. Pieces which combine Standard Mail from one of the subclasses 
described in 322 and 323 with First-Class Mail or Standard Mail from one 
of the subclasses described in 321 will be forwarded if undeliverable-
as-addressed, and returned if undeliverable, as prescribed by the Postal 
Service. When Standard Mail mailed under sections 322 and 323 is 
forwarded or returned from one post office to another, additional 
charges will be based on the appropriate Single Piece Standard rate.

                         360  ANCILLARY SERVICES

                           361  All Subclasses

    All Standard Mail will receive the following services upon payment 
of the appropriate fees:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                   Service                             Schedule         
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a. Address correction.......................  SS-1                      
b. Certificates of mailing indicating that a  SS-4                      
 specified number of pieces have been mailed.                           
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Certificates of mailing are not available for Regular, Enhanced 
Carrier Route, Nonprofit and Nonprofit Enhanced Carrier Route subclass 
mail when postage is paid by permit imprint.

   362  Single Piece, Parcel Post, Bound Printed Matter, Special, and 
                           Library Subclasses

    Single Piece, Parcel Post, Bound Printed Matter, Special, and 
Library subclass mail will receive the following additional services 
upon payment of the appropriate fees:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                   Service                             Schedule         
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a. Certificates of mailing..................  SS-4                      
b. COD......................................  SS-6                      
c. Insured mail.............................  SS-9                      
d. Special handling.........................  SS-18                     
e. Return receipt (merchandise only)........  SS-16                     
f. Merchandise return.......................  SS-20                     
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Insurance, special handling, and COD services may not be used 
selectively for individual pieces in a multi-piece Parcel Post subclass 
mailing unless specific methods approved by the Postal Service for 
ascertaining and verifying postage are followed.

                           370  RATES AND FEES

    The rates and fees for Standard Mail are set forth as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       Schedule         
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a. Single Piece subclass....................  321.1                     
b. Regular subclass.........................  321.2                     
c. Enhanced Carrier Route subclass..........  321.3                     
d. Nonprofit subclass.......................  321.4                     
e. Nonprofit Enhanced Carrier Route subclass  321.5                     
f. Parcel Post subclass:                                                
  Basic.....................................  322.1A                    
  Destination BMC...........................  322.1B                    
g. Bound Printed Matter subclass:                                       
  Single Piece..............................  322.3A                    
  Bulk and Carrier Route....................  322.3B                    
h Special subclass..........................  323.1                     
i. Library subclass.........................  323.2                     
j. Fees.....................................  1000                      
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                    380  AUTHORIZATIONS AND LICENSES

 381  Regular, Enhanced Carrier Route, Nonprofit and Nonprofit Enhanced 
                        Carrier Route Subclasses

    A mailing fee as set forth in Rate Schedule 1000 must be paid once 
each year by mailers of Regular, Enhanced Carrier Route, Nonprofit and 
Nonprofit Enhanced Carrier Route subclass mail.

                          382  Special Subclass

    A presort mailing fee as set forth in Rate Schedule 1000 must be 
paid once each year at each office of mailing by or for any person who 
mails presorted Special subclass mail. Any person who engages a business 
concern or other individuals to mail presorted Special subclass mail 
must pay the fee.

                        383  Parcel Post Subclass

    A mailing fee as set forth in Rate Schedule 1000 must be paid once 
each year by mailers of Destination BMC rate category mail in the Parcel 
Post subclass.

[[Page 396]]

                   Periodicals Classification Schedule

                             410  DEFINITION

                        411  General Requirements

    411.1  Definition. A publication may qualify for mailing under the 
Periodicals Classification Schedule if it meets all of the requirements 
in sections 411.2 through 411.5 and the requirements for one of the 
qualification categories in sections 412 through 415. Eligibility for 
specific Periodicals rates is prescribed in section 420.
    411.2  Periodicals. Periodicals class mail is mailable matter 
consisting of newspapers and other periodical publications. The term 
``periodical publications'' includes, but is not limited to:
    a. Any catalog or other course listing including mail announcements 
of legal texts which are part of post-bar admission education issued by 
any institution of higher education or by a nonprofit organization 
engaged in continuing legal education.
    b. Any looseleaf page or report (including any index, instruction 
for filing, table, or sectional identifier which is an integral part of 
such report) which is designed as part of a looseleaf reporting service 
concerning developments in the law or public policy.

                             411.3  Issuance

    411.31  Regular Issuance. Periodicals class mail must be regularly 
issued at stated intervals at least four times a year, bear a date of 
issue, and be numbered consecutively.
    411.32  Separate Publication. For purposes of determining 
Periodicals rate eligibility, an ``issue'' of a newspaper or other 
periodical shall be deemed to be a separate publication when the 
following conditions exist:
    a. The issue is published at a regular frequency more often than 
once a month either on (1) the same day as another regular issue of the 
same publication; or (2) on a day different from regular issues of the 
same publication, and
    b. More than 10 percent of the total number of copies of the issue 
is distributed on a regular basis to recipients who do not subscribe to 
it or request it, and
    c. The number of copies of the issue distributed to nonsubscribers 
or nonrequesters is more than twice the number of copies of any other 
issue distributed to nonsubscribers or nonrequesters on that same day, 
or, if no other issue that day, any other issue distributed during the 
same period. ``During the same period'' shall be defined as the periods 
of time ensuing between the distribution of each of the issues whose 
eligibility is being examined. Such separate publications must 
independently meet the qualifications for Periodicals eligibility.
    411.4  Office of Publication. Periodicals class mail must have a 
known office of publication. A known office of publication is a public 
office where business of the publication is transacted during the usual 
business hours. The office must be maintained where the publication is 
authorized original entry.
    411.5  Printed Sheets. Periodicals class mail must be formed of 
printed sheets. It may not be reproduced by stencil, mimeograph, or 
hectograph processes, or reproduced in imitation of typewriting. 
Reproduction by any other printing process is permissible. Any style of 
type may be used.

                        412  General Publications

    412.1  Definition. To qualify as a General Publication, Periodicals 
class mail must meet the requirements in section 411 and in sections 
412.2 through 412.4.
    412.2  Dissemination of Information. A General Publication must be 
originated and published for the purpose of disseminating information of 
a public character, or devoted to literature, the sciences, art, or some 
special industry.

                         412.3  Paid Circulation

    412.31  Total Distribution. A General Publication must be designed 
primarily for paid circulation. At least 50 percent or more of the 
copies of the publication must be distributed to persons who have paid 
above a nominal rate.
    412.32  List of Subscribers. A General Publication must be 
distributed to a legitimate list of persons who have subscribed by 
paying or promising to pay at a rate above nominal for copies to be 
received during a stated time. Copies

[[Page 397]]

mailed to persons who are not on a legitimate list of subscribers are 
nonsubscriber copies.
    412.33  Nominal Rates. As used in section 412.31, nominal rate 
means:
    a. A token subscription price that is so low that it cannot be 
considered a material consideration;
    b. A reduction to the subscriber, under a premium offer or any other 
arrangements, of more than 50 percent of the amount charged at the basic 
annual rate for a subscriber to receive one copy of each issue published 
during the subscription period. The value of a premium is considered to 
be its actual cost to the publishers, the recognized retail value, or 
the represented value, whichever is highest.

                      412.34  Nonsubscriber Copies

    412.341  Up to Ten Percent. Nonsubscriber copies, including sample 
and complimentary copies, mailed at any time during the calendar year up 
to and including 10 percent of the total number of copies mailed to 
subscribers during the calendar year are mailable at the rates that 
apply to subscriber copies provided that the nonsubscriber copies would 
have been eligible for those rates if mailed to subscribers.
    412.342  Over Ten Percent. Nonsubscriber copies, including sample 
and complimentary copies, mailed at any time during the calendar year, 
in excess of 10 percent of the total number of copies mailed to 
subscribers during the calendar year which are presorted and commingled 
with subscriber copies are charged the applicable rates for Regular 
Periodicals. The 10 percent limitation for a publication is based on the 
total number of all copies of that publication mailed to subscribers 
during the calendar year.
    412.35  Advertiser's Proof Copies. One complete copy of each issue 
of a General Publication may be mailed to each advertiser in that issue 
as an advertiser's proof copy at the rates that apply to subscriber 
copies, whether the advertiser's proof copy is mailed to the advertiser 
directly or, instead, to an advertising representative or agent of the 
publication. These copies count as subscriber copies.
    412.36  Expired Subscriptions. For six months after a subscription 
has expired, copies of a General Publication may be mailed to a former 
subscriber at the rates that apply to copies mailed to subscribers, if 
the publisher has attempted during that six months to obtain payment, or 
a promise to pay, for renewal. These copies do not count as subscriber 
copies.

                       412.4  Advertising Purposes

    A General Publication may not be designed primarily for advertising 
purposes. A publication is ``designed primarily for advertising 
purposes'' if it:
    a. Has advertising in excess of 75 percent in more than one-half of 
its issues during any 12-month period;
    b. Is owned or controlled by individuals or business concerns and 
conducted as an auxiliary to and essentially for the advancement of the 
main business or calling of those who own or control it;
    c. Consists principally of advertising and editorial write-ups of 
the advertisers;
    d. Consists principally of advertising and has only a token list of 
subscribers, the circulation being mainly free;
    e. Has only a token list of subscribers and prints advertisements 
free for advertisers who pay for copies to be sent to a list of persons 
furnished by the advertisers; or
    f. Is published under a license from individuals or institutions and 
features other businesses of the licensor.

                       413  Requester Publications

    413.1  Definition. A publication which is circulated free or mainly 
free may qualify for Periodicals class as a Requester Publication if it 
meets the requirements in sections 411, and 413.2 through 413.4.
    413.2  Minimum Pages. It must contain at least 24 pages.

                       413.3  Advertising Purposes

    413.31  Advertising Percentage. It must devote at least 25 percent 
of its pages to nonadvertising and not more than 75 percent to 
advertisements.
    413.32  Ownership and Control. It must not be owned or controlled by 
one or more individuals or business concerns and conducted as an 
auxiliary to and essentially for the advancement of

[[Page 398]]

the main business or calling of those who own or control it.

                     413.4  Circulated to Requesters

    413.41  List of Requesters. It must have a legitimate list of 
persons who request the publication, and 50 percent or more of the 
copies of the publication must be distributed to persons making such 
requests. Subscription copies paid for or promised to be paid for, 
including those at or below a nominal rate may be included in the 
determination of whether the 50 percent request requirement is met. 
Persons will not be deemed to have requested the publication if their 
request is induced by a premium offer or by receipt of material 
consideration, provided that mere receipt of the publication is not 
material consideration.

                       413.42  Nonrequester Copies

    413.421 Up to Ten Percent. Nonrequester copies, including sample and 
complimentary copies, mailed at any time during the calendar year up to 
and including 10 percent of the total number of copies mailed to 
requesters during the calendar year are mailable at the rates that apply 
to requester copies provided that the nonrequester copies would have 
been eligible for those rates if mailed to requesters.
    413.422  Over Ten Percent. Nonrequester copies, including sample and 
complimentary copies, mailed at any time during the calendar year, in 
excess of 10 percent of the total number of copies mailed to requesters 
during the calendar year which are presorted and commingled with 
requester copies are charged the applicable rates for Regular 
Periodicals. The 10 percent limitation for a publication is based on the 
total number of all copies of that publication mailed to requesters 
during the calendar year.
    413.43  Advertiser's Proof Copies. One complete copy of each issue 
of a Requester Publication may be mailed to each advertiser in that 
issue as an advertiser's proof copy at the rates that apply to requester 
copies, whether the advertiser's proof copy is mailed to the advertiser 
directly or, instead, to an advertising representative or agent of the 
publication. These copies count as requester copies.

             414  Publications of Institutions and Societies

    414.1  Publisher's Own Advertising. Except as provided in section 
414.2, a publication which meets the requirements of sections 411 and 
412.4, and which contains no advertising other than that of the 
publisher, qualifies for Periodicals class as a publication of an 
institution or society if it is:
    a. Published by a regularly incorporated institution of learning;
    b. Published by a regularly established state institution of 
learning supported in whole or in part by public taxation;
    c. A bulletin issued by a state board of health or a state 
industrial development agency;
    d. A bulletin issued by a state conservation or fish and game agency 
or department;
    e. A bulletin issued by a state board or department of public 
charities and corrections;
    f. Published by a public or nonprofit private elementary or 
secondary institution of learning or its administrative or governing 
body;
    g. Program announcements or guides published by an educational radio 
or television agency of a state or political subdivision thereof, or by 
a nonprofit educational radio or television station;
    h. Published by or under the auspices of a benevolent or fraternal 
society or order organized under the lodge system and having a bona fide 
membership of not less than 1,000 persons;
    i. Published by or under the auspices of a trade(s) union;
    j. Published by a strictly professional, literary, historical, or 
scientific society; or,
    k. Published by a church or church organization.
    414.2  General Advertising. A publication published by an 
institution or society identified in sections 414.1 h through k, may 
contain advertising of other persons, institutions, or concerns, if the 
following additional conditions are met:
    a. The publication is originated and published to further the 
objectives and purposes of the society;
    b. Circulation is limited to:

[[Page 399]]

    i. Copies mailed to members who pay either as a part of their dues 
or assessment or otherwise, not less than 50 percent of the regular 
subscription price;
    ii. Other actual subscribers; and
    iii. Exchange copies.
    c. The circulation of nonsubscriber copies, including sample and 
complimentary copies, does not exceed 10 percent of the total number of 
copies referred to in 414.2b.

          415  Publications of State Departments of Agriculture

    A publication which is issued by a state department of agriculture 
and which meets the requirements of sections 411 qualifies for 
Periodicals class as a publication of a state department of agriculture 
if it contains no advertising and is published for the purpose of 
furthering the objects of the department.

                        416  Foreign Publications

    Foreign newspapers and other periodicals of the same general 
character as domestic publications entered as Periodicals class mail may 
be accepted on application of the publishers thereof or their agents, 
for transmission through the mail at the same rates as if published in 
the United States. This section does not authorize the transmission 
through the mail of a publication which violates a copyright granted by 
the United States.

                     420  DESCRIPTION OF SUBCLASSES

                          421  Regular Subclass

    421.1  Definition. The Regular subclass consists of Periodicals 
class mail that is not mailed under section 423 and that:
    a. Is presorted, marked, and presented as prescribed by the Postal 
Service; and
    b. Meets machinability, addressing, and other preparation 
requirements prescribed by the Postal Service.

                       421.2  Regular Pound Rates

    An unzoned pound rate applies to the nonadvertising portion of 
Regular subclass mail. A zoned pound rate applies to the advertising 
portion and may be reduced by applicable destination entry discounts. 
The pound rate postage is the sum of the nonadvertising portion charge 
and the advertising portion charge.

                       421.3  Regular Piece Rates

    421.31  Basic Rate Category. The basic rate category applies to all 
Regular subclass mail not mailed under section 421.32 or 421.33.
    421.32  Three-Digit City and Five-Digit Rate Category. The rates for 
this category apply to Regular subclass mail presorted to three-digit 
cities and five-digit ZIP Code destinations as prescribed by the Postal 
Service.
    421.33  Carrier Route Rate Category. The carrier route rate category 
applies to Regular subclass mail presorted to carrier routes as 
prescribed by the Postal Service.

                    421.4  Regular Subclass Discounts

    421.41  Barcoded Letter Discounts. Barcoded letter discounts apply 
to letter size Regular subclass mail mailed under sections 421.31 and 
421.32 which bears a barcode representing not more than 11 digits (not 
including ``correction'' digits) as prescribed by the Postal Service, 
and which meets the machinability, addressing, and barcoding 
specifications and other preparation requirements prescribed by the 
Postal Service.
    421.42  Barcoded Flats Discounts. Barcoded flats discounts apply to 
flat size Regular subclass mail mailed under sections 421.31 and 421.32 
which bear a barcode representing not more than 11 digits (not including 
``correction'' digits) as prescribed by the Postal Service, and meet the 
flats machinability, addressing, and barcoding specifications and other 
preparation requirements prescribed by the Postal Service.
    421.43  High Density Discount. The high density discount applies to 
Regular subclass mail mailed under section 421.33, presented in walk 
sequence order, and meeting the high density and preparation 
requirements prescribed by the Postal Service.
    421.44  Saturation Discount. The saturation discount applies to 
Regular subclass mail mailed under section 421.33, presented in walk-
sequence order, and meeting the saturation and

[[Page 400]]

preparation requirements prescribed by the Postal Service.
    421.45  Destination Entry Discounts. Destination entry discounts 
apply to Regular subclass mail which is destined for delivery within the 
service area of the destination sectional center facility (SCF) or the 
destination delivery unit (DDU) in which it is entered, as defined by 
the Postal Service. The DDU discount only applies to Carrier Route rate 
category mail.
    421.46  Nonadvertising Discount. The nonadvertising discount applies 
to all Regular subclass mail and is determined by multiplying the 
proportion of nonadvertising content by the discount factor set forth in 
Rate Schedule 421 and subtracting that amount from the applicable piece 
rate.

                             422  [Reserved]

                     423  Preferred Rate Periodicals

    423.1  Definition. Periodicals class mail, other than publications 
qualifying as Requester Publications, may qualify for Preferred Rate 
Periodicals rates if it meets the applicable requirements for those 
rates in sections 423.2 through 423.5.

                      423.2  Within County Subclass

    423.21  Definition. Within County mail consists of Preferred Rate 
Periodicals class mail mailed in, and addressed for delivery within the 
county where published and originally entered, from either the office of 
original entry or additional entry. In addition, a Within County 
publication must meet one of the following conditions:
    a. The total paid circulation of the issue is less than 10,000 
copies; or
    b. The number of paid copies of the issue distributed within the 
county of publication is at least one more than one-half of the total 
paid circulation of such issue.
    423.22  Entry in an Incorporated City. For the purpose of 
determining eligibility for Within County mail, when a publication has 
original entry at an independent incorporated city which is situated 
entirely within a county or which is contiguous to one or more counties 
in the same state, such incorporated city shall be considered to be 
within the county with which it is principally contiguous. Where more 
than one county is involved, the publisher will select the principal 
county.

                        423.3  Nonprofit Subclass

    Nonprofit mail is Preferred Rate Periodicals class mail entered by 
authorized nonprofit organizations or associations of the following 
types:
    a. Religious, as defined in section 1009,
    b. Educational, as defined in section 1009,
    c. Scientific, as defined in section 1009,
    d. Philanthropic, as defined in section 1009,
    e. Agricultural, as defined in section 1009,
    f. Labor, as defined in section 1009,
    g. Veterans', as defined in section 1009,
    h. Fraternal, as defined in section 1009, and
    i. Associations of rural electric cooperatives,
    j. One publication, which contains no advertising (except 
advertising of the publisher) published by the official highway or 
development agency of a state,
    k. Program announcements or guides published by an educational radio 
or television agency of a state or political subdivision thereof or by a 
nonprofit educational radio or television station.
    l. One conservation publication published by an agency of a state 
which is responsible for management and conservation of the fish or 
wildlife resources of such state.

                        423.4  Classroom Subclass

    Classroom mail is Preferred Rate Periodicals class mail which 
consists of religious, educational, or scientific publications designed 
specifically for use in school classrooms or religious instruction 
classes.

                      423.5  Science of Agriculture

    Science of Agriculture mail consists of Preferred Rate Periodicals 
class mail devoted to the science of agriculture if the total number of 
copies of the publication furnished during any 12-month period to 
subscribers residing

[[Page 401]]

in rural areas amounts to at least 70 percent of the total number of 
copies distributed by any means for any purpose.

                    423.6  Preferred Rate Pound Rates

    For Preferred Rate Periodicals entered under sections 423.3, 423.4 
and 423.5, and unzoned pound rate applies to the nonadvertising portion. 
A zoned pound rate applies to the advertising portion and may be reduced 
by applicable destination entry discounts. The pound rate postage is the 
sum of the nonadvertising portion charge and the advertising portion 
charge. For Preferred Rate Periodicals entered under section 423.2, one 
pound rate applies to the pieces presorted to carrier route to be 
delivered within the delivery area of the originating post office, and 
another pound rate applies to all other pieces.

                    423.7  Preferred Rate Piece Rates

    423.71  Basic Rate Category. The basic rate category applies to all 
Preferred Rate Periodicals not mailed under section 423.72 or 423.73.
    423.72  Three-digit City and Five-Digit Rate Category. The rates for 
this category apply to Preferred Rate Periodicals entered under sections 
423.3, 423,4, or 423.5 that are presorted to three-digit cities and 
five-digit ZIP code destinations as prescribed by the Postal Service.
    423.73  Carrier Route Rate Category. The carrier route rate category 
applies to Preferred Rate Periodicals presorted to carrier routes as 
prescribed by the Postal Service.

                     423.8  Preferred Rate Discounts

    423.81  Barcoded Letter Discounts. Barcoded letter discounts apply 
to letter size Preferred Rate Periodicals mailed under sections 423.71 
and 423.72 which bear a barcode representing not more than 11 digits 
(not including ``correction'' digits) as prescribed by the Postal 
Service, and which meet the machinability, addressing, and barcoding 
specifications and other preparation requirements prescribed by the 
Postal Service.
    423.82  Barcoded Flats Discounts. Barcoded flats discounts apply to 
flat size Preferred Rate Periodicals mailed under sections 423.71 and 
423.72 which bear a barcode representing not more than 11 digits (not 
including ``correction'' digits) as prescribed by the Postal Service, 
and meet the flats machinability, addressing, and barcoding 
specifications and other preparation requirements prescribed by the 
Postal Service.
    423.83  High Density Discount. The high density discount applies to 
Preferred Rate Periodicals mailed under section 423.73, presented in 
walk sequence order, and meeting the high density and preparation 
requirements prescribed by the Postal Service.
    423.84  Saturation Discount. The saturation discount applies to 
Preferred Rate Periodicals mailed under section 423.73, presented in 
walk sequence order, and meeting the saturation and preparation 
requirements prescribed by the Postal Service.
    423.85  Destination Entry Discounts. Destination entry discounts 
apply to Preferred Rate Periodicals which are destined for delivery 
within the service area of the destination sectional center facility 
(SCF) or the destination delivery unit (DDU) in which they are entered, 
as defined by the Postal Service. The DDU discount only applies to 
Carrier Route rate category mail; the SCF discount is not available for 
mail entered under section 423.2.
    423.86  Nonadvertising Discount. The nonadvertising discount applies 
to Preferred Rate Periodicals entered under sections 423.3, 423.4, 423.5 
and is determined by multiplying the proportion of nonadvertising 
content by the discount factor set forth in Rate Schedules 421. 423.3 or 
423.4 and subtracting that amount from the applicable piece rate.

                        430  PHYSICAL LIMITATIONS

    There are no maximum size or weight limits for Periodicals class 
mail.

                      440  POSTAGE AND PREPARATION

    441  Postage. Postage must be paid on Periodicals class mail as set 
forth in section 3000

[[Page 402]]

     442  Presortation. Periodicals class mail must be presorted in 
      accordance with regulations prescribed by the Postal Service

                     443  Attachments and Enclosures

    443.1  General. First-Class Mail or Standard Mail from any of the 
subclasses listed in section 321 (Single Piece, Regular, Enhanced 
Carrier Route or Nonprofit) may be attached to or enclosed with 
Periodicals class mail. The piece must be marked as prescribed by the 
Postal Service. Except as provided in section 443.2, additional postage 
must be paid for the attachment or enclosure as if it had been mailed 
separately. Otherwise, the entire combined piece is subject to the 
appropriate First-Class or section 321 Standard Mail rate for which it 
qualifies (unless the rate applicable to the host piece is higher), or, 
if a combined piece with a section 321 Standard Mail attachment or 
enclosure weighs 16 ounces or more, the piece is subject to the Parcel 
Post rate for which it qualifies.
    443.2  Incidental First-Class Mail Attachments and Enclosures. 
First-Class Mail that meets one or more of the definitions in sections 
210 b through d may be attached to or enclosed with Periodicals class 
mail, with postage paid on the combined piece at the applicable 
Periodicals rate, if the attachment or enclosure is incidental to the 
piece to which it is attached or with which it is enclosed.

                           444  Identification

    Periodicals class mail must be identified as required by the Postal 
Service. Nonsubscriber and nonrequester copies, including sample and 
complimentary copies, must be identified as required by the Postal 
Service.

                       445  Filing of Information

    Information relating to Periodicals class mail must be filed with 
the Postal Service in accordance with 39 U.S.C. 3685.

                     446  Enclosures and Supplements

    Periodicals class mail may contain enclosures and supplements as 
prescribed by the Postal Service. An enclosure or supplement may not 
contain writing, printing or sign thereof or therein, in addition to the 
original print, except as authorized by the Postal Service, or as 
authorized under section 443.2.

                        450  DEPOSIT AND DELIVERY

                              451  Deposit

    Periodicals class mail must be deposited at places and times 
designated by the Postal Service.

                              452  Service

    Periodicals class mail is given expeditious handling insofar as is 
practicable.

                       453  Forwarding and Return

    Undeliverable-as-addressed Periodicals class mail will be forwarded 
or returned to the mailer, as prescribed by the Postal Service. 
Undeliverable-as-addressed combined First-Class and Periodicals class 
mail pieces will be forwarded or returned, as prescribed by the Postal 
Service. Additional charges when Periodicals class mail is returned will 
be based on the applicable Standard Mail rate.

                           470  RATES AND FEES

    The rates and fees for Periodicals class mail are set forth as 
follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Schedule  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a. Regular................................................         421  
b. Within County..........................................         423.2
c. Nonprofit..............................................         423.3
d. Classroom..............................................         423.4
e. Science of Agriculture.................................         421  
f. Fees...................................................        1000  
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                    480  AUTHORIZATIONS AND LICENSES

                        481  Entry Authorizations

    Prior to mailing at Periodicals rates, a publication must be 
authorized for entry as Periodicals class mail by the Postal Service. 
Each authorized publication will be granted one original entry 
authorization at the post office where the office of publication is 
maintained. An authorization for the establishment of an account to 
enter a publication at an additional entry office may be granted by the 
Postal Service upon application by the publisher. An application for re-
entry must be made

[[Page 403]]

whenever the publisher proposes to change the publication's title, 
frequency of issue or office of original entry.

                    482  Preferred Rate Authorization

    Prior to mailing at Nonprofit, Classroom, and Science of Agriculture 
rates, a publication must obtain an additional Postal Service entry 
authorization to mail at those rates.

               483  Mailing by Publishers and News Agents

    Periodicals class mail may be mailed only by publishers or 
registered news agents. A news agent is a person or concern engaged in 
selling two or more Periodicals publications published by more than one 
publisher. News agents must register at all post offices at which they 
mail Periodicals class mail.

                                484  Fees

    Fees for original entry, additional entry, re-entry, and 
registration of a news agent are set forth in Rate Schedule 1000.

                General Definitions, Terms and Conditions

                        1000  General Definitions

    As used in this Domestic Mail Classification Schedule, the following 
terms have the meanings set forth below.

                            1001  Advertising

    Advertising includes all material for the publication of which a 
valuable consideration is paid, accepted, or promised, that calls 
attention to something for the purpose of getting people to buy it, sell 
it, seek it, or support it. If an advertising rate is charged for the 
publication of reading matter or other material, such material shall be 
deemed to be advertising. Articles, items, and notices in the form of 
reading matter inserted in accordance with a custom or understanding 
that textual matter is to be inserted for the advertiser or his products 
in the publication in which a display advertisement appears are deemed 
to be advertising. If a publisher advertises his own services or 
publications, or any other business of the publisher, whether in the 
form of display advertising or editorial or reading matter, this is 
deemed to be advertising.

                           1002  Aspect Ratio

    Aspect ratio is the ratio of width to length.

                  1003  Bills and Statements of Account

    1003.1  A bill is a request for payment of a definite sum of money 
claimed to be owing by the addressee either to the sender or to a third 
party. The mere assertion of an indebtedness in a definite sum combined 
with a demand for payment is sufficient to make the message a bill.
    1003.2  A statement of account is the assertion of the existence of 
a debt in a definite amount but which does not necessarily contain a 
request or a demand for payment. The amount may be immediately due or 
may become due after a certain time or upon demand or billing at a later 
date.
    1003.3  A bill or statement of account must present the particulars 
of an indebtedness with sufficient definiteness to inform the debtor of 
the amount he is required to pay to acquit himself of the debt. However, 
neither a bill nor a statement of account need state the precise amount 
if it contains sufficient information to enable the debtor to determine 
the exact amount of the claim asserted.
    1003.4  A bill or statement of account is not the less a bill or 
statement of account merely because the amount claimed is not in fact 
owing or may not be legally collectible.

                               1004  Girth

    Girth is the measurement around a piece of mail at its thickest 
part.

                              1005  Invoice

    An invoice is a writing showing the nature, quantity, and cost or 
price of items shipped or sent to a purchaser or consignor.

                          1006  Permit Imprints

    Permit imprints are printed indicia indicating postage has been paid 
by the sender under the permit number shown.

[[Page 404]]

                          1007  Preferred Rates

    Preferred rates are the reduced rates established pursuant to 39 
U.S.C. 3626.

                             1008  ZIP Code

    The ZIP Code is a numeric code that facilitates the sortation, 
routing, and delivery of mail.

             1009  Nonprofit Organizations and Associations

    Nonprofit organizations or associations are organizations or 
associations not organized for profit, none of the net income of which 
benefits any private stockholder or individual, and which meet the 
qualifications set forth below for each type of organization or 
association. The standard of primary purpose applies to each type of 
organization or association, except veterans' and fraternal. The 
standard of primary purpose requires that each type of organization or 
association be both organized and operated for the primary purpose. The 
following are the types of organizations or associations which may 
qualify as authorized nonprofit organizations or associations.
    a. Religious. A nonprofit organization whose primary purpose is one 
of the following:
    i. To conduct religious worship;
    ii. To support the religious activities of nonprofit organizations 
whose primary purpose is to conduct religious worship;
    iii. To perform instruction in, to disseminate information about, or 
otherwise to further the teaching of particular religious faiths or 
tenets.
    b. Educational. A nonprofit organization whose primary purpose is 
one of the following:
    i. The instruction or training of the individual for the purpose of 
improving or developing his capabilities;
    ii. The instruction of the public on subjects beneficial to the 
community.
    An organization may be educational even though it advocates a 
particular position or viewpoint so long as it presents a sufficiently 
full and fair exposition of the pertinent facts to permit an individual 
or the public to form an independent opinion or conclusion. On the other 
hand, an organization is not educational if its principal function is 
the mere presentation of unsupported opinion.
    c. Scientific. A nonprofit organization whose primary purpose is one 
of the following:
    i. To conduct research in the applied, pure or natural sciences;
    ii. To disseminate systematized technical information dealing with 
applied, pure or natural sciences.
    d. Philanthropic. A nonprofit organization primarily organized and 
operated for purposes beneficial to the public. Philanthropic 
organizations include, but are not limited to, organizations which are 
organized for:
    i. Relief of the poor and distressed or of the underprivileged;
    ii. Advancement of religion;
    iii. Advancement of education or science;
    iv. Erection or maintenance of public buildings, monuments, or 
works;
    v. Lessening of the burdens of government;
    vi. Promotion of social welfare by organizations designed to 
accomplish any of the above purposes or:
    (A) To lessen neighborhood tensions;
    (B) To eliminate prejudice and discrimination;
    (C) To defend human and civil rights secured by law; or
    (D) To combat community deterioration and juvenile delinquency.
    e. Agricultural. A nonprofit organization whose primary purpose is 
the betterment of the conditions of those engaged in agriculture 
pursuits, the improvement of the grade of their products, and the 
development of a higher degree of efficiency in agriculture. The 
organization may advance agricultural interests through educational 
activities; the holding of agricultural fairs; the collection and 
dissemination of information concerning cultivation of the soil and its 
fruits or the harvesting of marine resources; the rearing, feeding, and 
management of livestock, poultry, and bees, or other activities relating 
to agricultural interests. The term agricultural nonprofit organization 
also includes any nonprofit organization whose primary purpose is the 
collection and dissemination of information or materials relating to 
agricultural pursuits.

[[Page 405]]

    f. Labor. A nonprofit organization whose primary purpose is the 
betterment of the conditions of workers. Labor organizations include, 
but are not limited to, organizations in which employees or workmen 
participate, whose primary purpose is to deal with employers concerning 
grievances, labor disputes, wages, hours of employment and working 
conditions.
    g. Veterans'. A nonprofit organization of veterans of the armed 
services of the United States, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a 
trust or foundation for, any such post or organization.
    h. Fraternal. A nonprofit organization which meets all of the 
following criteria:
    i. Has as its primary purpose the fostering of brotherhood and 
mutual benefits among its members;
    ii. Is organized under a lodge or chapter system with a 
representative form of government;
    iii. Follows a ritualistic format; and
    iv. Is comprised of members who are elected to membership by vote of 
the members.

                         2000  Delivery of Mail

                         2010  Delivery Services

    The Postal Service provides the following modes of delivery:
    a. Caller service. The fees for caller service are set forth in Rate 
Schedule SS-10.
    b. Carrier delivery service.
    c. General delivery.
    d. Post office box service. The fees for post office box service are 
set forth in Rate Schedule SS-10.

                      2020  Conditions of Delivery

    2021  General. Except as provided in section 2022, mail will be 
delivered as addressed unless the Postal Service is instructed otherwise 
by the addressee in writing.
    2022  Refusal of Delivery. The addressee may control delivery of his 
mail. The addressee may refuse to accept a piece of mail that does not 
require a delivery receipt at the time it is offered for delivery or 
after delivery by returning it unopened to the Postal Service. For mail 
that requires a delivery receipt, the addressee or his representative 
may read and copy the name of the sender of registered, insured, 
certified, COD, return receipt, and Express Mail prior to accepting 
delivery. Upon signing the delivery receipt the piece may not be 
returned to the Postal Service without the applicable postage and fees 
affixed.
    2023  Receipt. If a signed receipt is required, mail will be 
delivered to the addressee (or competent member of his family), to 
persons who customarily receive his mail or to one authorized in writing 
to receive the addressee's mail.
    2024  Jointly Addressed Mail. Mail addressed to several persons may 
be delivered to any one of them. When two or more persons make 
conflicting orders for delivery for the same mail, the mail shall be 
delivered as determined by the Postal Service.
    2025  Commercial Mail Receiving Agents. Mail may be delivered to a 
commercial mail receiving agency on behalf of another person. In 
consideration of delivery of mail to the commercial agent, the addressee 
and the agent are considered to agree that:
    a. No change of address order will be filed with the post office 
when the agency relationship is terminated;
    b. When remailed by the commercial agency, the mail is subject to 
payment of new postage.
    2026  Mail Addressed To Organizations. Mail addressed to 
governmental units, private organizations, corporations, unincorporated 
firms or partnerships, persons at institutions (including but not 
limited to hospitals and prisons), or persons in the military is 
delivered as addressed or to an authorized agent.
    2027  Held Mail. Mail will be held for a specified period of time at 
the office of address upon request of the addressee, unless the mail:
    a. Has contrary retention instructions;
    b. Is perishable; or
    c. Is registered, COD, insured, return receipt, certified, or 
Express Mail for which the normal retention period expires before the 
end of the specified holding period.

                       2030  Forwarding and Return

    2031  Forwarding. Forwarding is the transfer of undeliverable-as-
addressed mail to an address other than the one

[[Page 406]]

originally placed on the mail piece. All post offices will honor change 
of address orders for a period of time specified by the Postal Service.
    2032  Return. Return is the delivery of undeliverable-as-addressed 
mail to the sender.
    2033  Applicable Provisions. The provisions of sections 150, 250, 
350 and 450 apply to forwarding and return.
    2034  Forwarding for Postal Service Adjustments. When mail is 
forwarded due to Postal Service adjustments (such as, but not limited 
to, the discontinuance of the post office of original address, 
establishment of rural carrier service, conversion to city delivery 
service from rural, readjustment of delivery districts, or renumbering 
of houses and renaming of streets), it is forwarded without charge for a 
period of time specified by the Postal Service.

                      3000  Postage and Preparation

                             3010  Packaging

    Mail must be packaged so that:
    a. The contents will be protected against deterioration or 
degradation;
    b. The contents will not be likely to damage other mail, Postal 
Service employees or property, or to become loose in transit;
    c. The package surface must be able to retain postage indicia and 
address markings;
    d. It is marked by the mailer with a material which is not readily 
water soluble nor which can be easily rubbed off or smeared, and the 
marking will be sharp and clear.

                             3020  Envelopes

    Paper used in the preparation of envelopes may not be of a brilliant 
color. Envelopes must be prepared with paper strong enough to withstand 
normal handling.

                    3030  Payment of Postage and Fees

    Postage must be fully prepaid on all mail at the time of mailing, 
except as authorized by law or this Schedule. Except as authorized by 
law or this Schedule, mail deposited without prepayment of sufficient 
postage shall be delivered to the addressee subject to payment of 
deficient postage, returned to the sender, or otherwise disposed of as 
prescribed by the Postal Service. Mail deposited without any postage 
affixed will be returned to the sender without any attempt at delivery.

                3040  Methods for Paying Postage and Fees

    Postage for all mail may be prepaid by postage meter, adhesive 
stamps, or permit imprint, unless otherwise limited or prescribed by the 
Postal Service. The following methods of paying postage and fees require 
prior authorization from the Postal Service:
    a. Permit imprint,
    b. Postage meter,
    c. Precanceled stamps, precanceled envelopes, and mailer's 
precanceled postmarks.

                        3050  Authorization Fees

    Fees for authorization to use a permit imprint are set forth in Rate 
Schedule 1000. No fee is charged for authorization to use a postage 
meter. Fees for setting postage meters are set forth in Rate Schedule 
SS-12. No fee is charged for authorization to use precanceled stamps, 
precanceled envelopes or mailer's precanceled postmark.

                       3060  Special Service Fees

    Fees for special services may be prepaid in any manner appropriate 
for the class of mail indicated or as otherwise prescribed by the Postal 
Service.

                      3070  Marking of Unpaid Mail

    Matter authorized for mailing without prepayment of postage must 
bear markings identifying the class of mail service. Matter so marked 
will be billed at the applicable rate of postage set forth in this 
Schedule. Matter not so marked will be billed at the applicable First-
Class rate of postage.

                         3080  Refund of Postage

    When postage and special service fees have been paid on mail for 
which no service is rendered for the postage or fees paid, or collected 
in excess of the lawful rate, a refund may be made. There shall be no 
refund for registered, COD, general insurance, and Express Mail 
Insurance fees when the article is

[[Page 407]]

later withdrawn by the mailer. In cases involving returned articles 
improperly accepted because of excess size or weight, a refund may be 
made.

                      3090  Calculation of Postage

    When a rate schedule contains per piece and per pound rates, the 
postage shall be the sum of the charges produced by those rates. When a 
rate schedule contains a minimum-per-piece rate and a pound rate, the 
postage shall be the greater of the two. When the computation of postage 
yields a fraction of a cent in the charge, the next higher whole cent 
must be paid.

                           4000  Postal Zones

                     4010  Geographic Units of Area

    In the determination of postal zones, the earth is considered to be 
divided into units of area thirty minutes square, identical with a 
quarter of the area formed by the intersecting parallels of latitude and 
meridians of longitude. The distance between these units of area is the 
basis of the postal zones.

                   4020  Measurement of Zone Distances

    The distance upon which zones are based shall be measured from the 
center of the unit of area containing the dispatching sectional center 
facility or multi-ZIP coded post office not serviced by a sectional 
center facility. A post office of mailing and a post office of delivery 
shall have the same zone relationship as their respective sectional 
center facilities or multi-ZIP coded post offices, but this shall not 
cause two post offices to be regarded as within the same local zone.

                        4030  Definition of Zones

    4031  Local Zone. The local zone applies to mail mailed at any post 
office for delivery at that office; at any city letter carrier office or 
at any point within its delivery limits for delivery by carriers from 
that office; at any office from which a rural route starts for delivery 
on the same route; and on a rural route for delivery at the office from 
which the route starts or on any rural route starting from that office.
    4032  First Zone. The first zone includes all territory within the 
quadrangle of entry in conjunction with every contiguous quadrangle, 
representing an area having a mean radial distance of approximately 50 
miles from the center of a given unit of area. The first zone also 
applies to mail between two post offices in the same sectional center.
    4033  Second Zone. The second zone includes all units of area 
outside the first zone lying in whole or in part within a radius of 
approximately 150 miles from the center of a given unit of area.
    4034  Third Zone. The third zone includes all units of area outside 
the second zone lying in whole or in part within a radius of 
approximately 300 miles from the center of a given unit of area.
    4035  Fourth Zone. The fourth zone includes all units of area 
outside the third zone lying in whole or in part within a radius 
approximately 600 miles from the center of a given unit of area.
    4036  Fifth Zone. The fifth zone includes all units of area outside 
the fourth zone lying in whole or in part within a radius of 
approximately 1,000 miles from the center of a given unit of area.
    4037  Sixth Zone. The sixth zone includes all units of area outside 
the fifth zone lying in whole or in part within a radius of 
approximately 1,400 miles from the center of a given unit of area.
    4038  Seventh Zone. The seventh zone includes all units of area 
outside the sixth zone lying in whole or in part within a radius of 
approximately 1,800 miles from the center of a given unit of area.
    4039  Eighth Zone. The eighth zone includes all units of area 
outside the seventh zone.

                            4040  Zoned Rates

    Except as provided in section 4050, rates according to zone apply 
for zone-rated mail sent between Postal Service facilities including 
armed forces post offices, wherever located.

                           4050  APO/FPO Mail

    4051  General. Except as provided in section 4052, the rates of 
postage for zone-rated mail transported between

[[Page 408]]

the United States, or the possessions or territories of the United 
States, on the one hand, and Army, Air Force and Fleet Post Offices on 
the other, or among the latter, shall be the applicable zone rates for 
mail between the place of mailing or delivery and the city of the 
postmaster serving the Army, Air Force or Fleet Post Office concerned.
    4052  Transit Mail. The rates of postage for zone-rated mail which 
is mailed at or addressed to an armed forces post office and which is 
transported directly to or from armed forces post offices at the expense 
of the Department of Defense, without transiting any of the 48 
contiguous states (including the District of Columbia), shall be the 
applicable local zone rate; provided, however, that if the distance from 
the place of mailing to the embarkation point or the distance from the 
point of debarkation to the place of delivery is greater than the local 
zone for such mail, postage shall be assessed on the basis of the 
distance from the place of mailing to the embarkation point or the 
distance from the point of debarkation to the place of delivery of such 
mail, as the case may be. The word ``transiting'' does not include 
enroute transfers at coastal gateway cities which are necessary to 
transport military mail directly between military post offices.

                          5000  Privacy of Mail

                   5010  First-Class and Express Mail

    Matter mailed as First-Class Mail or Express Mail shall be treated 
as mail which is sealed against postal inspection and shall not be 
opened except as authorized by law.

                          5020  All Other Mail

    Matter not paid at First-Class Mail or Express Mail rates must be 
wrapped or secured in the manner prescribed by the Postal Service so 
that the contents may be examined. Mailing of sealed items as other than 
First-Class Mail or Express Mail is considered consent by the sender to 
the postal inspection of the contents.

                          6000  MAILABLE MATTER

                              6010  General

    Mailable matter is any matter which:
    a. Is not mailed in contravention of 39 U.S.C. Chapter 30, or of 17 
U.S.C. 109;
    b. While in the custody of the Postal Service is not likely to 
become damaged itself, to damage other pieces of mail, to cause injury 
to Postal Service employees or to damage Postal Service property; and
    c. Is not mailed contrary to any special conditions or limitations 
placed on transportation or movement of certain articles, when imposed 
under law by the U.S. Department of the Treasury; U.S. Department of 
Agriculture; U.S. Department of Commerce; U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services, U.S. Department of Transportation; and any other Federal 
department or agency having legal jurisdiction.

                      6020  Minimum Size Standards

    The following minimum size standards apply to all mailable matter:
    a. All items must be at least 0.007 inches thick, and
    b. all items, other than keys and identification devices, which are 
0.25 inch thick or less must be
    i. rectangular in shape,
    ii. at least 3.5 inches in width, and
    iii. at least 5 inches in length.

                 6030  Maximum Size and Weight Standards

    Where applicable, the maximum size and weight standards for each 
class of mail are set forth in sections 130, 230, 330 and 430. 
Additional limitations may be applicable to specific subclasses, and 
rate and discount categories as provided in the eligibility provisions 
for each subclass or category.

        Classification Schedule SS-1--Address Correction Service

                            1.01  Definition

    1.010  Address correction service is a service which provides the 
mailer with a method of obtaining the correct address, if available to 
the Postal Service, of the addressee or the reason for nondelivery.

[[Page 409]]

                      1.02  Description of Service

    1.020  Address correction service is available to mailers of postage 
prepaid mail of all classes. Periodicals class mail will receive address 
correction service.
    1.021  Address correction service is not available for items 
addressed for delivery by military personnel at any military 
installation.
    1.022  Address correction provides the following service to the 
mailer:
    a. If the correct address is known to the Postal Service, the mailer 
is notified of both the old and the correct address.
    b. If the item mailed cannot be delivered, the mailer will be 
notified of the reason for nondelivery.

                    1.03  Requirements of the Mailer

    1.030  Mail, other than Periodicals class mail, sent under this 
classification schedule must bear a request for address correction 
service.

                               1.04  Fees

    1.040  There is no charge for address correction service when the 
correction is provided incidental to the return of the mail piece to the 
sender.
    1.041  A fee, as set forth in Rate Schedule SS-1, is charged for all 
other forms of address correction service.

            CLASSIFICATION SCHEDULE SS-2--BUSINESS REPLY MAIL

                            2.01  Definitions

    2.010  Business reply mail is a service whereby business reply 
cards, envelopes, cartons and labels may be distributed by or for a 
business reply distributor for use by mailers for sending First-Class 
Mail without prepayment of postage to an address chosen by the 
distributor. A distributor is the holder of a business reply license.
    2.011  A business reply mail piece is nonletter-size for purposes of 
Classification Schedule SS-2 if it meets addressing and other 
preparation requirements, but does not meet the machinability 
requirements prescribed by the Postal Service for mechanized or 
automated letter sortation.
    This provision expires June 8, 1999.

                      2.02  Description of Service

    2.020  The distributor guarantees payment on delivery of postage and 
fees for all returned business reply mail. Any distributor of business 
reply cards, envelopes, cartons and labels under any one license for 
return to several addresses guarantees to pay postage and fees on any 
returns refused by any such addressee.

                    2.03  Requirements of the Mailer

    2.030  Business reply cards, envelopes, cartons and labels must be 
readdressed and bear business reply markings.
    2.031  Handwriting, typewriting or handstamping are not acceptable 
methods of preaddressing or marking business reply cards, envelopes, 
cartons, or labels.

                               2.04  Fees

    2.040  The fees for business reply mail are set forth in Rate 
Schedule SS-2.
    2.041  To qualify as an active business reply mail advance deposit 
trust account, the account must be used solely for business reply mail 
and contain sufficient postage and fees due for returned business reply 
mail.
    2.042  An accounting fee as set forth in Rate Schedule SS-2 must be 
paid each year for each advance deposit business reply account at each 
facility where the mail is to be returned.

                2.043  Experimental Reverse Manifest Fees

    2.0431  A set-up/qualification fee as set forth in Rate Schedule SS-
2 must be paid by each business reply mail advance deposit trust account 
holder at each destination postal facility at which it applies to 
receive nonletter-size business reply mail for which the postage and 
fees will be accounted for through a reverse manifest method approved by 
the Postal Service for ascertaining and verifying postage.
    A distributor must pay this fee for each business reply mail advance 
deposit trust account for which participation in the nonletter-size 
business reply mail experiment is requested.
    This provision expires June 8, 1999.

[[Page 410]]

    2.0432  A nonletter-size reverse manifest monthly fee as set forth 
in Rate Schedule SS-2 must be paid each month during which the 
distributor's reverse manifest account is active.
    This fee applies to the (no more than) 10 advance deposit account 
holders which are selected by the Postal Service to participate in the 
reverse manifest nonletter-size business reply mail experiment and which 
utilize reverse manifest accounting methods approved by the Postal 
Service for ascertaining and verifying postage and fees.
    This provision expires June 8, 1999.

                2.044  Experimental Weight Averaging Fees

    2.0441  A set-up/qualification fee as set forth in Rate Schedule SS-
2 must be paid by each business reply mail advance deposit trust account 
holder at each destination postal facility at which it applies to 
receive nonletter-size business reply mail for which the postage and 
fees will be accounted for through a weight averaging method approved by 
the Postal Service for ascertaining and verifying postage.
    A distributor must pay this fee for each business reply mail advance 
deposit trust account for which participation in the nonletter-size 
business reply mail experiment is requested.
    This provision expires June 8, 1999.
    2.0442  A nonletter-size weight averaging monthly fee as set forth 
in Rate Schedule SS-2 must be paid each month during which the 
distributor's weight averaging account is active.
    This fee applies to the (no more than) 10 advance deposit account 
holders which are selected by the Postal Service to participate in the 
weight averaging nonletter-size business reply mail experiment.
    This provision expires June 8, 1999.

                    2.05  Authorizations and Licenses

    2.050  In order to distribute business reply cards, envelopes, 
cartons or labels, the distributor must obtain a license or licenses 
from the Postal Service and pay the appropriate fee as set forth in Rate 
Schedule SS-2.
    2.0501  Except as provided in section 2.0502, the license to 
distribute business reply cards, envelopes, cartons, or labels must be 
obtained at each office from which the mail is offered for delivery.
    2.0502  If the business reply mail is to be distributed from a 
central office to be returned to branches or dealers in other cities, 
one license obtained from the post office where the central office is 
located may be used to cover all business reply mail.
    2.051  The license to mail business reply mail may be canceled for 
failure to pay business reply postage and fees when due, and for 
distributing business reply cards or envelopes which do not conform to 
prescribed form, style or size.
    2.052  Authorization to pay experimental nonletter-size business 
reply mail fees as set forth in Rate Schedule SS-2 may be canceled for 
failure of a business reply mail advance deposit trust account holder to 
meet the standards prescribed by the Postal Service for the applicable 
reverse manifest or weight averaging accounting method.
    This provision expires June 8, 1999.

              Classification Schedule SS-3--Caller Service

                            3.01  Definitions

    3.010  Caller service is a service which permits a customer to 
obtain mail addressed to the customer's box number through a call window 
or loading dock.

                      3.02  Description of Service

    3.020  Caller service uses post office box numbers as the address 
medium but does not actually use a post office box.
    3.021  Caller service is not available at certain postal facilities.
    3.022  Caller service is provided to customers on the basis of mail 
volume received and number of post office boxes used at any one 
facility.
    3.023  A customer may reserve a caller number.
    3.024  Caller service cannot be used when the sole purpose is, by 
subsequently filing change of address orders, to have mail forwarded or 
transferred to another address by the Postal Service free of charge.

[[Page 411]]

                               3.03  Fees

    3.030  Fees for caller service are set forth in Rate Schedule SS-10.

          Classification Schedule SS-4--Certificate of Mailing

                            4.01  Definition

    4.010  Certificate of mailing service is a service which furnishes 
evidence of mailing.

                      4.02  Description of Service

    4.020  Certificate of mailing service is available to mailers of 
matter sent under the classification schedule to any class of mail.
    4.021  A receipt is not obtained upon delivery of the mail to the 
addressee. No record of mailing is maintained at the post office.
    4.022  Additional copies of certificates of mailing may be obtained 
by the mailer.

                          4.03  Other Services

    4.030  The following services, if applicable to the class of mail, 
may be obtained in conjunction with mail sent under this classification 
schedule upon payment of the applicable fees:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               Classification schedule  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a. Parcel airlift.........................  SS-13                       
b. Special handling.......................  SS-18                       
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               4.04  Fees

    4.040  The fees for certificate of mailing service are set forth in 
Rate Schedule SS-4.

              Classification Schedule SS-5--Certified Mail

                            5.01  Definition

    5.010  Certified mail service is a service that provides a mailing 
receipt to the sender and a record of delivery at the office of address.

                      5.02  Description of Service

    5.020  Certified mail service is provided for matter mailed as 
First-Class Mail.
    5.021  If requested by the mailer, the time of acceptances by the 
Postal Service will be indicated on the receipt.
    5.022  A record of delivery is retained at the office of delivery 
for a specified period of time.
    5.023  If the initial attempt to delivery mail is not successful, a 
notice of arrival is left at the mailing address.
    5.024  A receipt of mailing may be obtained only if the article is 
mailed at a post office, branch or station, or given to a rural carrier.
    5.025  Additional copies of the original mailing receipt may be 
obtained by the mailer.

                          5.03  Deposit of Mail

    5.030  Certified mail must be deposited in a manner specified by the 
Postal Service.

                          5.04  Other Services

    5.040  The following services may be obtained in conjunction with 
mail sent under this classification schedule upon payment of the 
applicable fees:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               Classification schedule  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a. Restricted delivery....................  SS-15                       
b. Return receipt.........................  SS-16                       
c. Special delivery.......................  SS-17                       
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               5.05  Fees

    5.050  The fees for certified mail service are set forth in Rate 
Schedule SS-5.

        Classification Schedule SS-6--Collect on Delivery Service

                            6.01  Definition

    6.010  Collect on Delivery (COD) service is a service which allows a 
mailer to mail an article for which he has not been paid and have the 
price, the cost of postage and fees, and anticipated or past due charges 
collected by the Postal Service from the addressee when the article is 
delivered.

                      6.02  Description of Service

    6.020  COD service is available for collection of $600 or less upon 
the delivery of postage prepaid mail sent under the following 
classification schedules:
    a. Express Mail

[[Page 412]]

    b. First-Class Mail
    c. Single Piece, Parcel Post, Bound Printed Matter, Special, and 
Library Standard Mail
    6.0201  Service under this schedule is not available for:
    a. Collection agency purposes;
    b. Return of merchandise about which some dissatisfaction has 
arisen, unless the new addressee has consented in advance to such 
return;
    c. Sending only bills or statements of indebtedness, even though the 
sender may establish that the addressee has agreed to collection in this 
manner; however, when the legitimate COD shipment consisting of 
merchandise or bill of lading, is being mailed, the balance due on a 
past or anticipated transaction may be included in the charges on a COD 
article, provided the addressee has consented in advance to such action;
    d. Parcels containing moving-picture films mailed by exhibitors to 
moving-picture manufacturers, distributors, or exchanges;
    e. Goods which have not been ordered by the addressee.
    6.021  COD service provides the mailer with insurance against loss, 
rifling and damage to the article as well as failure to receive the 
amount collected from the addressee. This provision insures only the 
receipt of the instrument issued to the mailer after payment of COD 
charges, and is not to be construed to make the Postal Service liable 
upon any such instrument other than a Postal Service money order.
    6.022  A receipt is issued to the mailer for each piece of COD mail. 
Additional copies of the original mailing receipt may be obtained by the 
mailer.
    6.023  Delivery of COD mail will be made in a manner specified by 
the Postal Service. If a delivery to the mailing address is not 
attempted or if a delivery attempt is unsuccessful, a notice of arrival 
will be left at the mailing address.
    6.024  The mailer may receive a notice of nondelivery if the piece 
mailed is endorsed appropriately.
    6.025  The mailer may designate a new addressee or alter the COD 
charges by submitting the appropriate form and by paying the appropriate 
fee as set forth in Rate Schedule SS-6.
    6.026  A claim for complete loss may be filed by the mailer only. A 
claim for damage or for partial loss may be filed by either the mailer 
or addressee.
    6.027  COD indemnity claims must be filed within a specified period 
of time from the date the article was mailed.

                    6.03  Requirements of the Mailer

    6.030  COD mail must be identified as COD mail.

                          6.04  Deposit of Mail

    6.040  COD mail must be deposited in a manner specified by the 
Postal Service.

                       6.05  Forwarding and Return

    6.050  A mailer of COD mail guarantees to pay any return postage, 
unless otherwise specified on the piece mailed.
    6.051  For COD mail sent as Standard Mail, postage at the applicable 
rate will be charged to the addressee:
    a. When an addressee, entitled to delivery to the mailing address 
under Postal Service regulations, requests delivery of COD mail which 
was refused when first offered for delivery;
    b. For each delivery attempt, to an addressee entitled to delivery 
to the mailing address under Postal Service regulations, after the 
second such attempt.

                          6.06  Other Services

    6.060  The following services, if applicable to the class of mail, 
may be obtained in conjunction with mail sent under this classification 
schedule upon payment of the applicable fee:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               Classification schedule  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a. Registered mail, if sent as First-Class  SS-14                       
b. Restricted delivery....................  SS-15                       
c. Special handling.......................  SS-18                       
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               6.07  Fees

    6.070  Fees for COD service are set forth in Rate Schedule SS-6.

[[Page 413]]

       Classification Schedule SS-8--Domestic Postal Money Orders

                            8.01  Definition

    8.010  Money order service is a service that provides the customer 
with an instrument for payment of a specified sum of money.

                      8.02  Description of Service

    8.020  The maximum value for which a domestic postal money order may 
be purchased is $700. Other restrictions on the number or dollar value 
of postal money order sales, or both, may be imposed in accordance with 
regulations prescribed by the Postal Service.
    8.021  A receipt of purchase is provided at no additional cost.
    8.022  The Postal Service will replace money orders that are spoiled 
or incorrectly prepared, regardless of who caused the error, without 
charge if replaced on the date originally issued.
    8.0221  If a replacement money order is issued after the date of 
original issue because the original was spoiled or incorrectly prepared, 
the applicable money order fee may be collected from the customer.
    8.023  Inquiries and/or claims may be filed by the purchaser, payee, 
or endorsee.

                               8.03  Fees

    8.030  The fees for domestic postal money orders are set forth in 
Rate Schedule SS-8.

               CLASSIFICATION SCHEDULE SS-9--INSURED MAIL

                     Part a--Express Mail Insurance

                            9a.01  Definition

    9a.010  Express Mail Insurance is a service that provides the mailer 
with indemnity for loss of, rifling of, or damage to items sent by 
Express Mail.

                      9a.02  Description of Service

    9a.020  Express Mail Insurance is available only for Express Mail.
    9a.021  Insurance coverage is provided, for no additional charge, up 
to $500 per piece for document reconstruction, up to $5,000 per 
occurrence regardless of the number of claimants. Insurance coverage is 
also provided, for no additional charge, up to $500 per piece for 
merchandise. Insurance coverage for merchandise valued at more than $500 
is available for an additional fee, as set forth in Rate Schedule SS-9. 
The maximum liability for merchandise is $5,000 per piece. For 
negotiable items, currency, or bullion, the maximum liability is $15.
    9a.022  Indemnity claims for Express Mail must be filed within a 
specified period of time from the date the article was mailed.
    9a.023  Indemnity will be paid under terms and conditions prescribed 
by the Postal Service.
    9a.024  Among other limitations prescribed by the Postal Service, 
indemnity will not be paid by the Postal Service for loss, damage or 
rifling:
    a. Of nonmailable matter;
    b. Due to improper packaging;
    c. Due to seizure by any agency of government; or,
    d. Due to war, insurrection or civil disturbances.

                               9a.03  Fees

    9a.030  The fees for Express Mail Insurance service are set forth in 
Rate Schedule SS-9.

                        Part b--General Insurance

                            9b.01  Definition

    9b.010  General Insurance is a service that provides the mailer with 
indemnity for loss of, rifling of, or damage to mailed items.

                      9b.02  Description of Service

    9b.020  The maximum liability of the Postal Service under this part 
is $5000.
    9b.021  General Insurance is available for mail sent under the 
following classification schedules:

a. First-Class Mail, if containing matter which may be mailed as 
    Standard Mail
b. Single Piece, Parcel Post, Bound Printed Matter, Special, and Library 
    Standard Mail

    9b.022  This service is not available for matter offered for sale, 
addressed to prospective purchasers who have not ordered or authorized 
their sending. If such matter is received in the mail,

[[Page 414]]

payment will not be made for loss, rifling, or damage.
    9b.023  The mailer is issued a receipt for each item mailed. For 
items insured for more than $50, a receipt of delivery is obtained by 
the Postal Service.
    9b.024  For items insured for more than $50, a notice of arrival is 
left at the mailing address when the first attempt at delivery is 
unsuccessful.
    9b.025  A claim for complete loss may be filed by the mailer only. A 
claim for damage or for partial loss may be filed by either the mailer 
or addressee.
    9b.026  A claim for damage or loss on a parcel sent merchandise 
return (SS-20) may only be filed by the purchaser of the insurance.
    9b.027  Indemnity claims must be filed within a specified period of 
time from the date the article was mailed.
    9b.028  Additional copies of the original mailing receipt may be 
obtained by the mailer, upon payment of the applicable fee set forth in 
Rate Schedule SS-9.

                         9b.03  Deposit of Mail

    9b.030  Mail insured under this part must be deposited in a manner 
specified by the Postal Service.

                      9b.04  Forwarding and Return

    9b.040  By insuring an item, the mailer guarantees forwarding and 
return postage unless instructions on the piece mailed indicate that it 
not be forwarded or returned.
    9b.041  Mail undeliverable as addressed sent under this part will be 
returned to the sender as specified by the sender or by the Postal 
Service.

                          9b.05  Other Services

    9b.050  The following services, if applicable to the class of mail, 
may be obtained in conjunction with mail sent under this part upon 
payment of the applicable fees:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Classification                          Schedule         
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a. Parcel Airlift..........................  SS-13                      
b. Restricted delivery (for items insured    SS-15                      
 for more than $50).                                                    
c. Return receipt (for items insured for     SS-16                      
 more than $50).                                                        
d. Special handling........................  SS-18                      
e. Merchandise return (shippers only)......  SS-20                      
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               9b.06  Fees

    9b.060  The fees for General Insurance are set forth in Rate 
Schedule SS-9.

         Classification Schedule SS-10--Post Office Box Service

                            10.01  Definition

    10.010  Post office box service is a service which provides the 
customer with a private, locked receptacle for the receipt of mail 
during the hours when the lobby of a postal facility is open.

                      10.02  Description of Service

    10.020  The Postal Service may limit the number of post office boxes 
occupied by any one customer.
    10.021  A post office box holder may ask the Postal Service to 
deliver to the post office box all mail properly addressed to the 
holder. If the post office box is located at the post office indicated 
on the piece, it will be transferred without additional charge, in 
accordance with existing regulations.
    10.022  Post office box service cannot be used when the sole purpose 
is, by subsequently filing change of address orders, to have mail 
forwarded or transferred to another address by the Postal Service free 
of charge.

                               10.03  Fees

    10.030  Fees for post office box service are set forth in Rate 
Schedule SS-10.
    10.031  In postal facilities primarily serving academic institutions 
or the students of such institutions, fees for post office boxes are 
administered as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Period for box use                           Fee            
------------------------------------------------------------------------
95 days or less...........................  \1/2\ semi-annual fee.      
96 to 140 days............................  \3/4\ semi-annual fee.      
141 to 190 days...........................  Full semi-annual fee.       
191 to 230 days...........................  1\1/4\ semi-annual fee.     
231 to 270 days...........................  1\1/2\ semi-annual fee.     
271 days to full year.....................  Full annual fee.            
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    10.032  No refunds will be made for post office box fees paid under 
section

[[Page 415]]

10.031. For purposes of this classification schedule SS-10, the full 
annual fee is twice the amount of the semi-annual fee.

          Classification Schedule SS-11--Mailing List Services

                            11.01  Definition

    11.010  Mailing list services include:
    a. Correction of mailing lists;
    b. Change of address information for election boards and 
registration commissions;
    c. ZIP coding of mailing lists; and
    d. Arrangement of address cards in the sequence of delivery.
    11.0101  Correction of mailing list service provides current 
information concerning name and address mailing lists or correct 
information concerning occupant mailing lists.
    11.0102  ZIP coding of mailing lists service is a service 
identifying ZIP code addresses in areas served by multi-ZIP coded postal 
facilities.

                      11.02  Description of Service

    11.020  Correction of mailing list service is available only to the 
following owners of name and address or occupant mailing lists:
    a. Members of Congress
    b. Federal agencies
    c. State government departments
    d. Municipalities
    e. Religious organizations
    f. Fraternal organizations
    g. Recognized charitable organizations
    h. Concerns or persons who solicit business by mail
    11.0201  The following corrections will be made to name and address 
lists:
    a. Names to which mail cannot be delivered or forwarded will be 
deleted;
    b. Incorrect house, rural, or post office box numbers will be 
corrected;
    c. When permanent forwarding orders are on file for customers who 
have moved, new addresses including ZIP codes will be furnished;
    d. New names will not be added to the list.
    11.0202  The following corrections will be made to occupant lists:
    a. Numbers representing incorrect or non-existent street addresses 
will be deleted;
    b. Business or rural route addresses will be distinguished if known;
    c. Corrected cards or sheets will be grouped by route;
    d. Street address numbers will not be added or changed.
    11.0203  Corrected lists will be returned to customers at no 
additional charge.
    11.021  Residential change-of-address information is available only 
to election boards or registration commissions for obtaining, if known 
to the Postal Service, the current address of an addressee.
    11.022  ZIP coding or mailing list service provides that addresses 
will be sorted to the finest possible ZIP code sortation.
    11.0221  Gummed labels, wrappers, envelopes or Stamped Cards or post 
cards indicative of one-time use will not be accepted as mailing lists.
    11.023  Sequencing of address cards service provides for the removal 
of incorrect addresses, notation of missing addresses and addition of 
missing addresses.

                     11.03  Requirements of Customer

    11.030  A customer desiring correction of a mailing list or 
arrangement of address cards in sequence of carrier delivery must submit 
the list or cards as prescribed by regulation.

                               11.04  Fees

    11.040  The fees for mailing list services are set forth in Rate 
Schedules SS-11a, SS-11b, SS-11c and SS-11d.

          Classification Schedule SS-12--On-Site Meter Setting

                            12.01  Definition

    12.010  On-site meter setting or examination service is a service 
whereby the Postal Service will service a postage meter at the mailer's 
or meter manufacturer's premises.

                      12.02  Description of Service

    12.020  On-site meter setting or examination service is available on 
a scheduled basis, and meter setting may be done on an emergency basis 
for

[[Page 416]]

those customers enrolled in the scheduled on-site meter setting or 
examination program.

                               12.03  Fees

    12.030  The fees for on-site meter setting or examination service 
are set forth in Rate Schedule SS-12.

           Classification Schedule SS-13--Parcel Airlift (PAL)

                            13.01  Definition

    13.010  Parcel airlift service is a service that provides for air 
transportation of parcels on a space available basis to or from military 
post offices outside the contiguous 48 states.

                      13.02  Description of Service

    13.020  Parcel airlift service is available for mail sent under the 
following classification schedule:

                              Standard Mail

                       13.03  Physical Limitations

    13.030  The minimum physical limitations established for the mail 
sent under the classification schedule for which postage is paid apply 
to parcel airlift mail. In no instance may the parcel exceed 30 pounds 
in weight, or 60 inches in length and girth combined.

                    13.04  Requirements of the Mailer

    13.040  Mail sent under this schedule must be endorsed as prescribed 
by regulation.

                         13.05  Deposit of Mail

    13.050  PAL mail must be deposited in a manner specified by the 
Postal Service.

                      13.06  Forwarding and Return

    13.060  PAL mail sent for delivery outside the contiguous 48 states 
is forwarded as set forth in section 2030 of the General Definitions, 
Terms and Conditions. PAL mail sent for delivery within the contiguous 
48 states is forwarded or returned as set forth in section 353 as 
appropriate.

                          13.07  Other Services

    13.070  The following services, if applicable to the class of mail, 
may be obtained in conjunction with mail sent under this classification 
schedule upon payment of the applicable fees:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               Classification schedule  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a. Certificate of mailing.................  SS-4                        
b. Insured mail...........................  SS-9                        
c. Restricted delivery (if insured for      SS-15                       
 more than $50).                                                        
d. Return receipt (if insured for more      SS-16                       
 than $50).                                                             
e. Special handling.......................  SS-18                       
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               13.08  Fees

    13.080  The fees for parcel airlift service are set forth in Rate 
Schedule SS-13.

             Classification Schedule SS-14--Registered Mail

                            14.01  Definition

    14.010  Registered mail is a service which provides added protection 
to mail sent under this Domestic Mail Classification Schedule and 
optional indemnity in case of loss or damage.

                      14.02  Description of Service

    14.020  Registered mail service is available to mailers of prepaid 
mail sent as First-Class Mail except that registered mail must meet the 
minimum requirements for length and width regardless of thickness.
    14.021  Registered mail service provides insurance up to a maximum 
of $25,000, depending upon the actual value at the time of mailing, 
except that insurance is optional for articles valued $100 or less.
    14.022  There is no limit on the value of articles sent under this 
classification schedule.
    14.023  Registered mail service is not available for:
    a. All delivery points because of the high security required for 
registered mail; in addition, not all delivery points will be available 
for registry and liability is limited in some geographic areas.
    b. Mail of any class sent in combination with First-Class Mail;

[[Page 417]]

    c. Two or more articles tied or fastened together, unless the 
envelopes are enclosed in the same envelope or container.
    14.024  The following services are provided as part of registered 
mail service at no additional cost to the mailer:
    a. A receipt;
    b. A record of delivery, retained by the Postal Service for a 
specified period of time;
    c. A notice of arrival will be left at the mailing address if the 
initial delivery attempt is unsuccessful;
    d. When registered mail is undeliverable-as-addressed and cannot be 
forwarded, a notice of nondelivery is provided.
    14.025  A claim for complete loss of insured articles may be filed 
by the mailer only. A claim for damage or for partial loss of insured 
articles may be filed by either the mailer or addressee.
    14.026   Indemnity claims for registered mail on which insurance is 
provided, or for articles valued $100 or less on which optional 
insurance has been elected, must be filed within a specified period of 
time from the date the article was mailed.
    14.027   No indemnity is paid on any matter registered free.

                         14.03  Deposit of Mail

    14.030   Registered mail must be deposited in a manner specified by 
the Postal Service.

                             14.04  Service

    14.040   Registered mail is provided maximum security.

                      14.05  Forwarding and Return

    14.050   Registered mail is forwarded and returned without 
additional registry charge.

                          14.06  Other Services

    14.060   The following services may be obtained in conjunction with 
mail sent under this classification schedule upon payment of applicable 
fees:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               Classification schedule  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a. Collect on delivery....................  SS-6                        
b. Restricted delivery....................  SS-15                       
c. Return receipt.........................  SS-16                       
d. Merchandise return (shippers only).....  SS-20                       
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               14.07  Fees

    14.070  The fees for registered mail are set forth in Rate Schedule 
SS-14.

           Classification Schedule SS-15--Restricted Delivery

                            15.01  Definition

    15.010  Restricted delivery service is a service that provides a 
means by which a mailer may direct that delivery will be made only to 
the addressee or to someone authorized by the addressee to receive such 
mail.

                      15.02  Description of Service

    15.020  This service is available for mail sent under the following 
classification schedules:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               Classification schedule  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a. Certified Mail.........................  SS-5                        
b. COD Mail...............................  SS-6                        
c. Insured Mail (if insured for more than   SS-9                        
 $50).                                                                  
d. Registered Mail........................  SS-14                       
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    15.021  Restricted delivery is available to the mailer at the time 
of mailing or after mailing.
    15.022  Restricted delivery service is available only to natural 
persons specified by name.
    15.023  A record of delivery will be retained by the Postal Service 
for a specified period of time.
    15.024  Failure to provide restricted delivery service when 
requested after mailing, due to prior delivery, is not grounds for 
refund of the fee or communications charges.

                               15.03  Fees

    15.030  The fees for restricted delivery service are set forth in 
Rate Schedule SS-15.

             Classification Schedule SS-16--Return Receipts

                            16.01  Definition

    16.010  Return receipt service is a service which provides evidence 
to the mailer that an article has been received at the delivery address.

[[Page 418]]

                      16.02  Description of Service

    16.020  Return receipt service is available for mail sent under the 
following classification schedules:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               Classification schedule  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a. Certified mail.........................  SS-5                        
b. COD mail...............................  SS-6                        
c. Insured mail (if insured for more than   SS-9                        
 $50).                                                                  
d. Registered mail........................  SS-14                       
e. Express Mail...........................                              
f. Priority Mail (merchandise only).......                              
g. Standard Mail (limited to merchandise                                
 sent by Single Piece, Postal Post, Bound                               
 Printed Matter, Special, and Library                                   
 Subclasses).                                                           
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    16.021  Return receipt service is available at the time of mailing 
or, when purchased in conjuction with certified, COD, insured (if for 
more than $50), registered, or Express Mail, after mailing.
    16.0211  Mailers requesting return receipt service at the time of 
mailing will be provided, as appropriate, the signature of the addressee 
or addressee's agent, the date delivered, and the address of delivery, 
if different from the address on the mailpiece.
    16.0212  Mailers requesting return receipt service after mailing 
will be provided the date of delivery and the name of the person who 
signed for the article.
    16.022  If the mailer does not receive a return receipt within a 
specified period of time from the date of mailing, the mailer may 
request a duplicate return receipt. No fee is charged for a duplicate 
return receipt.

                               16.03  Fees

    16.030  The fees for return receipt service are set forth in Rate 
Schedule SS-16.

                Classification Schedule SS-17--[Reserved]

             Classification Schedule SS-18--Special Handling

                            18.01  Definition

    18.010  Special handling service is a service that provides 
preferential handling to the extent practicable during dispatch and 
transportation.

                      18.02  Description of Service

    18.020  Special handling service is available for mail sent under 
the following classification schedules:
    a. First-Class Mail
    b. Single Piece, Parcel Post, Bound Printed Matter, Special, and 
Library Standard Mail
    18.021  Special handling service is mandatory for matter which 
requires special attention in handling, transportation and delivery.

                    18.03  Requirements of the Mailer

    18.030  Mail sent under this schedule must be identified as 
prescribed by regulation.

                         18.04  Deposit of Mail

    18.040  Mail sent under this schedule must be deposited in a manner 
prescribed by the Postal Service.

                      18.05  Forwarding and Return

    18.050  If undeliverable as addressed, special handling mail that is 
forwarded to the addressee is given special handling without requiring 
payment of an additional handling fee. However, additional postage at 
the applicable Standard Mail rate is collected on delivery.

                          18.06  Other Services

    18.060  The following services may be obtained in conjunction with 
mail sent under this classification schedule upon payment of the 
applicable fees:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               Classification schedule  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a. COD mail...............................  SS-6                        
b. Insured mail...........................  SS-9                        
c. Parcel airlift.........................  SS-13                       
d. Merchandise return (shippers only).....  SS-20                       
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               18.07  Fees

    18.070  The fees for special handling service are set forth in Rate 
Schedule SS-18.

[[Page 419]]

            Classification Schedule SS-19--Stamped Envelopes

                            19.01  Definition

    19.010  Plain stamped envelopes and printed stamped envelopes are 
envelopes with postage thereon offered for sale by the Postal Service.

                      19.02  Description of Service

    19.020  Stamped envelopes are available for:
    a. First-Class Mail within the first rate increment.
    b. Standard Mail mailed at a minimum per-piece rate as prescribed by 
the Postal Service.
    19.021  Printed stamped envelopes may be obtained by special 
request.

                               19.03  Fees

    19.030  The fees for stamped envelopes are set forth in Rate 
Schedule SS-19.

            Classification Schedule SS-19A--Stamped Envelopes

                           19A.01  Definition

    19A.010  Stamped Cards. Stamped Cards are cards with postage 
imprinted or impressed on them and supplied by the Postal Service for 
the transmission of messages.
    19A.011  Double Stamped Cards. Double Stamped Cards consist of two 
attached cards, one of which may be detached by the receiver and 
returned by mail as a single Stamped Card.
    19A.020  Description of Service. Stamped Cards are available for 
First-Class Mail.
    19A.030  Fees. The fees for Stamped Cards are set forth in Rate 
Schedule SS-19A.

            Classification Schedule SS-20--Merchandise Return

                            20.01  Definition

    20.010  Merchandise return service provides a method whereby a 
shipper may authorize its customers to return a parcel with the postage 
paid by the shipper. A shipper is the holder of a merchandise return 
permit.

                      20.02  Description of Service

    20.020  Merchandise return service is available to all shippers who 
obtain the necessary permit and who guarantee payment of postage and 
fees for all returned parcels.
    20.021  Merchandise return service is available for the return of 
any parcel under the following classification schedules.
    a. First-Class Mail
    b. Standard Mail

                    20.03  Requirements of the Mailer

    20.030  Merchandise return labels must be prepared at the shipper's 
expense to specifications set forth by the Postal Service.
    20.031  The shipper must furnish its customer with an appropriate 
merchandise return label.

                          20.04  Other Services

    20.040  The following services may be purchased in conjunction with 
Merchandise Return Service:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               Classification schedule  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
a. Certificate of mailing.................  SS-4                        
b. Insured mail...........................  SS-9                        
c. Registered mail........................  SS-14                       
d. Special handling.......................  SS-18                       
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    20.041  Only the shipper may purchase insurance service for the 
merchandise return parcel by indicating the amount of insurance on the 
merchandise return label before providing it to the customer. The 
customer who returns a parcel to the shipper under merchandise return 
service may not purchase insurance.

                               20.05  Fees

    20.050  The fee for the merchandise return service is set forth in 
Rate Schedule SS-20. This fee is paid by the shipper.

                   20.06  Authorizations and Licenses

    20.060  A permit fee as set forth in Rate Schedule 1000 must be paid 
once each calendar year by shippers utilizing merchandise return 
service.
    20.061  The merchandise return permit may be canceled for failure to

[[Page 420]]

maintain sufficient funds in a trust account to cover postage and fees 
on returned parcels or for distributing merchandise return labels that 
do not conform to Postal Service specifications.

                             Rate Schedules

                         Calculation of Postage

    When a rate schedule contains per-piece and per pound rates, the 
postage shall be the sum of the charges produced by those rates.
    When a rate schedule contains a minimum-per-piece rate and a pound 
rate, the postage shall be the greater of the two.
    When the computation of postage yields a fraction of a cent in the 
charge, the next higher whole cent must be paid.

             Express Mail Rate Schedules 121,122, and 123 *             
                                [Dollars]                               
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                            Schedule 123
  Weight not     Schedule 121   Schedule 122  Schedule 123  next day and
   exceeding       same day        custom     next day and   second day 
   (pounds)        airport        designed     second day       PO to   
                   service                      PO to PO      addressee 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1/2\.........                                                          
1.............                                                          
2.............                                                          
3.............                                                          
4.............                                                          
5.............                                                          
6.............                                                          
7.............                                                          
8.............                                                          
9.............                                                          
10............                                                          
11............                                                          
12............                                                          
13............                                                          
14............                                                          
15............                                                          
16............                                                          
17............                                                          
18............                                                          
19............                                                          
20............                                                          
21............                                                          
22............                                                          
23............                                                          
24............                                                          
25............                                                          
26............                                                          
27............                                                          
28............                                                          
29............                                                          
30............                                                          
31............                                                          
32............                                                          
33............                                                          
34............                                                          
35............                                                          
36............                                                          
37............                                                          
38............                                                          
39............                                                          
40............                                                          
41............                                                          
42............                                                          
43............                                                          
44............                                                          
45............                                                          
46............                                                          
47............                                                          
48............                                                          
49............                                                          
50............                                                          
51............                                                          
52............                                                          
53............                                                          

[[Page 421]]

                                                                        
54............                                                          
55............                                                          
56............                                                          
57............                                                          
58............                                                          
59............                                                          
60............                                                          
61............                                                          
62............                                                          
63............                                                          
64............                                                          
65............                                                          
66............                                                          
67............                                                          
68............                                                          
69............                                                          
70............                                                          
------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Notes:                                                                
1. The applicable 2-pound rate is charged for matter sent in a `flat    
  rate' envelope provided by the Postal Service.                        
2. Add      $  for each pickup stop.                                    
3. Add      $  for each Custom Designed delivery stop.                  


     First-Class Mail Rate Schedule 221, Letters and Sealed Parcels     
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  Rate  
                       Postage rate unit                         (cents)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                   Letters & Sealed Parcels                             
Regular                                                                 
                      Single First ounce                                
Piece:                                                                  
  Presort \1\                                                           
  Pre-barcoded parcels (experimental) \11\                              
  Additional Ounce \2\                                                  
  Nonstandard Surcharge                                                 
    Single Piece                                                        
    Presort                                                             
Automation--Presort \1\                                                 
                                                                        
  Letters \3\                                                           
    Basic Presort \4\                                                   
    3-Digit Presort \5\                                                 
    5-Digit Presort \6\                                                 
    Carrier Route Presort \7\                                           
  Flats \8\                                                             
    Basic Presort \9\                                                   
    \3/5\-Digit Presort \10\                                            
  Additional Ounce \2\                                                  
  Nonstandard Surcharge                                                 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Schedule 221 Notes:                                                     
\1\ A mailing fee of $     must be paid once each year at each office of
  mailing by any person who mails other than Single Piece First-Class   
  Mail. Payment of the fee allows the mailer to mail at any First-Class 
  rate. For presorted mailing weighing more than 2 ounces, subtract     
  cents per piece.                                                      
\2\ Rate applies through 11 ounces. Heavier pieces are subject to       
  Priority Mail rates.                                                  
\3\ Rates apply to bulk-entered mailings of at least 500 letter-size    
  pieces, which must be delivery point barcoded and meet other          
  preparation requirements prescribed by the Postal Service.            
\4\ Rate applies to letter-size Automation-Presort category mail not    
  mailed at 3-Digit, or Carrier Route rates.                            
\5\ Rate applies to letter-size Automation-Presort category mail        
  presorted to single or multiple three-digit ZIP Code designations as  
  prescribed by the Postal Service.                                     
\6\ Rate applies to letter-size Automation-Presort category mail        
  presorted to single or multiple five-digit ZIP Code destinations as   
  prescribed by the Postal Service.                                     
\7\ Rate applies to letter-size Automation-Presort category mail        
  presorted to carrier routes specified by the Postal Service.          
\8\ Rates apply to bulk-entered mailings of at least 500 flat-size      
  pieces, each of which must be delivery-point barcoded or bear a ZIP+4 
  barcode, and must meet other preparation requirements prescribed by   
  the Postal Service.                                                   
\9\ Rate applies to flat-size Automation-Presort category mail not mail 
  at the \3/5\-Digit rate.                                              
\10\ Rate applies to flat-size Automation-Presort category mail         
  presorted to single or multiple three- and five-digit ZIP Code        
  destinations as specified by the Postal Service.                      
\11\ Nonpresorted pre-barcoded parcels must be properly prepared and    
  submitted in mailings of at least 50 pieces.                          


                   First-Class Mail Rate Schedule 222                   
                     [Stamped Cards and Post Cards]                     
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  Rate  
                       Postage rate unit                         (cents)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cards                                                                   
  Regular                                                               
    Single Piece                                                        
    Presort \1\                                                         
  Automation-Presort <SUP>1, <SUP>2                                               
    Basic Presort \3\                                                   
    3-Digit Presort \4\                                                 
    5-Digit Presort \5\                                                 
    Carrier Route Presort \6\                                           
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Schedule 222 Notes:                                                     
\1\ A mailing fee of $     must be paid once each year at each office of
  mailing by any person who mails other than Single Piece First-Class   
  Mail. Payment of the fee allows the mailer to mail at any First-Class 
  rate.                                                                 
\2\ Rates apply to bulk-entered mailings of at least 500 pieces, which  
  must be barcoded and meet other preparation requirements prescribed by
  the Postal Service.                                                   
\3\ Rate applies to Automation-Presort category mail not mailed at 3-   
  Digit, 5-Digit, or Carrier Route rates.                               
\4\ Rate applies to Automation-Presort category mail presorted to single
  or multiple three-digit ZIP Code destinations as prescribed by the    
  Postal Service.                                                       
\5\ Rate applies to Automation-Presort category mail presorted to single
  or multiple five-digit ZIP Code destinations as prescribed by the     
  Postal Service.                                                       
\6\ Rate applies to Automation-Presort category mail presorted to       
  carrier routes specified by the Postal Service.                       


[[Page 422]]


                          First-Class Mail Rate Schedules 223 Priority Mail Subclass *                          
                                                    [Dollars]                                                   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Weight not                                                                                                   
    exceeding        L, 1,2,3         Zone 4          Zone 5          Zone 6          Zone 7          Zone 8    
    (pounds)                                                                                                    
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 1..............                                                                                                
 2..............                                                                                                
 3..............                                                                                                
 4..............                                                                                                
 5..............                                                                                                
 6..............                                                                                                
 7..............                                                                                                
 8..............                                                                                                
 9..............                                                                                                
10..............                                                                                                
11..............                                                                                                
12..............                                                                                                
13..............                                                                                                
14..............                                                                                                
15..............                                                                                                
16..............                                                                                                
17..............                                                                                                
18..............                                                                                                
19..............                                                                                                
20..............                                                                                                
21..............                                                                                                
22..............                                                                                                
23..............                                                                                                
24..............                                                                                                
25..............                                                                                                
26..............                                                                                                
27..............                                                                                                
28..............                                                                                                
29..............                                                                                                
30..............                                                                                                
31..............                                                                                                
32..............                                                                                                
33..............                                                                                                
34..............                                                                                                
35..............                                                                                                
36..............                                                                                                
37..............                                                                                                
38..............                                                                                                
39..............                                                                                                
40..............                                                                                                
41..............                                                                                                
42..............                                                                                                
43..............                                                                                                
44..............                                                                                                
45..............                                                                                                
46..............                                                                                                
47..............                                                                                                
48..............                                                                                                
49..............                                                                                                
50..............                                                                                                
51..............                                                                                                
52..............                                                                                                
53..............                                                                                                
54..............                                                                                                
55..............                                                                                                
56..............                                                                                                
57..............                                                                                                
58..............                                                                                                
59..............                                                                                                
60..............                                                                                                
61..............                                                                                                
62..............                                                                                                
63..............                                                                                                
64..............                                                                                                
65..............                                                                                                
66..............                                                                                                
67..............                                                                                                
68..............                                                                                                
69..............                                                                                                

[[Page 423]]

                                                                                                                
70..............                                                                                                
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Notes:                                                                                                         
1. The 2-pound rate is charged for matter sent in a `flat rate' envelope provided by the Postal Service.        
2. Add      $  for each pickup stop.                                                                            
3. Pieces presented in mailings of at least 300 pieces and meeting applicable Postal Service regulations for    
  presorted Priority Mail received the cente per-piece discount.                                                
4. EXCEPTION: Parcels weighing less than 15 pounds, measuring over 84 inches in length and girth combined, and  
  chargeable with a minimum rate equal to that for a 15-pound parcel for the zone to which addressed.           
5. Pieces presented in mailings of at least 50 pieces and meeting applicable Postal Service regulations for pre-
  barcoded Priority Mail parcels receive a discount of    cents per piece (experimental).                       


                    Standard Mail Rate Schedule 321.1                   
                         [Single piece subclass]                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Rate\1\
                                                                 (cents)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Basic:                                                                  
  One ounce or less                                                     
  Not more than two ounces                                              
  Not more than three ounces                                            
  Not more than four ounces                                             
  Not more than five ounces                                             
  Not more than six ounces                                              
  Not more than seven ounces                                            
  Not more than eight ounces                                            
  Not more than nine ounces                                             
  Not more than ten ounces                                              
  Not more than eleven ounces                                           
  Not more than thirteen ounces                                         
  More than thirteen ounces but less than sixteen ounces                
  Nonstandard Surcharge \2\                                             
Keys and identification Devices                                         
  First 2 ounces                                                        
  Each additional 2 ounces                                              
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Schedule 321.1 Notes:                                                   
\1\ When the postage rate computed at the single piece rate is higher   
  than the rate prescribed in the other Standard Class parcel categories
  contained in rate schedules 322.1, 322.2, 322.3, or .323.1 for which  
  the piece qualifies, the lower rate applies.                          
\2\ Applies only to pieces weighing one ounce or less.                  


           Standard Mail Rate Schedule 321.2A Regular Subclass          
                          [Presort Category\1\]                         
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Rate\1\
                                                                 (cents)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Letter size                                                             
  Piece Rate                                                            
    Basic                                                               
    3/5-Digit                                                           
  Destination Entry Discount per Piece                                  
      BMC                                                               
      SCF                                                               
Non-Letter Size                                                         
  Piece Rate                                                            
    Minimum per Piece 2/                                                
      Basic                                                             
      3/5 Digit                                                         
    Destination Entry Discount per Piece                                
      BMC                                                               
      SCF                                                               
  Pound Rate 2/                                                         
    Plus per Piece Rate                                                 
      Basic                                                             
      3/5-Digit                                                         
    Destination Entry Discount per Pound                                
      BMC                                                               
      SCF                                                               
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Schedule 321.2A Notes:                                                  
\1\ A fee of    must be paid each 12-month period for each bulk mailing 
  permit                                                                
\2\ Mailer pays either the minimum piece rate or the pound rate,        
  whichever is higher.                                                  


[[Page 424]]


           Standard Mail Rate Schedule 321.2B Regular Subclass          
                        [Automation Category \1\                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  Rate  
                        Letter size \2\                          (cents)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Piece Rate                                                              
  Basic Letter \3\                                                      
  3-Digit Letter \4\                                                    
  5-Digit Letter \5\                                                    
Destination Entry Discount per Peice                                    
  BMC                                                                   
  SCF                                                                   
Flat size \6\                                                           
Piece Rate                                                              
  Minimum per Piece \7\                                                 
    Basic Flat \8\                                                      
    \3/5\-Digit Flat \9\                                                
  Destination Entry Discount per Piece                                  
    BMC                                                                 
    SCF                                                                 
Pound Rate \7\                                                          
  Plus per piece Rate                                                   
    Basic Flat                                                          
    \3/5\-Digit Flat                                                    
  Destination Entry Discount per Pound                                  
    BMC                                                                 
    SCF                                                                 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Schedule 321.2B Notes:                                                  
\1\ A fee of $ must be paid once each 12-month period for each bulk     
  mailing permit.                                                       
\2\ For letter-size automation pieces meeting applicable Postal Service 
  regulations.                                                          
\3\ Rate applies to letter-size automation mail not mailed at 3-digit, 5-
  digit or carrier route rates.                                         
\4\ Rate applies to letter-size automation presorted to single or       
  multiple three-digit ZIP Code destinations as prescribed by the Postal
  Service.                                                              
\5\ Rate applies to letter-size automation presorted to single or       
  multiple five-digit ZIP Code destinations as prescribed by the Postal 
  Service.                                                              
\6\ For flat-size automation mail meeting applicable Postal Service     
  regulations.                                                          
\7\ Mailer pays minimum piece rate or pound rate, whichever is higher.  
\8\ Rate applies to flat-size automation mail not mailed at \3/5\-digit 
  rate.                                                                 
\9\ Rate applies to flat-size automation mail presorted to single or    
  multiple three- and five-digit ZIP Code destinations as prescribed by 
  the Postal Service.                                                   


                    Standard Mail Rate Schedule 321.3                   
                  [Enhanced Carrier Route Subclass \1\]                 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  Rate  
                                                                 (cents)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Letter Size                                                             
Piece Rate                                                              
  Basic                                                                 
  Basic Automated Letter \2\                                            
  High Density                                                          
  Saturation                                                            
Destination Entry Discount per Piece                                    
  BMC                                                                   
  SCF                                                                   
  DDU \3\                                                               
Non-Letter Size                                                         
  Piece Rate                                                            
    Minimum per Piece \4\                                               
      Basic                                                             
      High Density                                                      
      Saturation                                                        
    Destination Entry Discount per Piece                                
      BMC                                                               
      SCF                                                               
      DDU \3\                                                           
  Pound Rate \4\                                                        
    Plus per Piece Rate                                                 
      Basic                                                             
      High Density                                                      
      Saturation                                                        
    Destination Entry Discount per Pound                                
      BMC                                                               
      SCF                                                               
      DDU \3\                                                           
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Schedule 321.3 Notes:                                                   
\1\ A fee of $       must be paid each 12-month period for each bulk    
  mailing permit.                                                       
\2\ Rate applies to letter-size automation mail presorted to routes     
  specified by the Postal Service.                                      
\3\ Applies only to enhanced carrier route mail.                        
\4\ Mailer pays either the minimum piece rate or the pound rate,        
  whichever is higher.                                                  


     Standard Mail Rate Schedule 321.4A--Nonprofit Subclass Presort     
                             Categories \1\                             
                              [Full Rates]                              
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  Rate  
                                                                 (cents)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Letter Size:                                                            
  Piece Rate:                                                           
    Basic.....................................................  ........
    \3/5\-Digit...............................................  ........
  Destination Entry Discount per Piece:                                 
    BMC.......................................................  ........
    SCF.......................................................  ........
Non-Letter Size:                                                        
  Piece Rate:                                                           
    Minimum per Piece: \2\                                      ........
      Basic...................................................  ........
      \3/5\-Digit.............................................  ........
    Destination Entry Discount per Piece:                               
      BMC.....................................................  ........
      SCF.....................................................  ........
  Pound Rate:\2\                                                        
    Plus per Piece Rate:                                                
      Basic...................................................  ........
      \3/5\-Digit.............................................  ........
    Destination Entry Discount per Pound:                               
      BMC.....................................................  ........
      SCF.....................................................  ........
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Schedule 321.4A Notes                                                   
\1\ A fee of $85.00 must be paid once each 12-month period for each bulk
  mailing permit.                                                       

[[Page 425]]

                                                                        
\2\ Mailer pays either the minimum piece rate or the pound rate,        
  whichever is higher.                                                  


    Standard Mail Rate Schedule 321.4B--Nonprofit Subclass Automation   
                              Categories\1\                             
                              [Full Rates]                              
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  Rate  
                                                                 (cents)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Letter Size                                                             
  Piece Rate:                                                           
    Basic Letter \3\..........................................  ........
    3-Digit Letter \4\........................................  ........
    5-Digit Letter \5\........................................  ........
  Destination Entry Discount per Piece:                                 
    BMC.......................................................  ........
    SCF.......................................................  ........
Flat Size: \6\                                                          
  Piece Rate:                                                           
  Minimum per Piece: \7\                                                
    Basic Flat \8\............................................  ........
    3/5-Digit \9\.............................................  ........
  Destination Entry Discount per Piece:                                 
    BMC.......................................................  ........
    SCF.......................................................  ........
  Pound Rate: \7\                                                       
    Plus per Piece Rate                                                 
      Basic Flat..............................................  ........
      3/5-Digit Flat..........................................  ........
    Destination Entry Discount per Pound:                               
      BMC.....................................................  ........
      SCF.....................................................  ........
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Schedule 321.4B Notes                                                   
\1\ A fee of $85.00 must be paid once each 12-month period for each bulk
  mailing permit.                                                       
\2\ For letter-size automation pieces meeting applicable Postal Service 
  regulations.                                                          
\3\ Rate applies to letter-size automation mail not mailed at 3-digit, 5-
  digit or carrier route rates.                                         
\4\ Rate applies to letter-size automation mail presorted to single or  
  multiple three-digit ZIP Code destinations as prescribed by the Postal
  Service.                                                              
\5\ Rate applies to letter-size automation mail presorted to single or  
  multiple five-digit ZIP Code destinations as prescribed by the Postal 
  Service.                                                              
\6\ For flat-size automation mail meeting applicable Postal Service     
  regulations.                                                          
\7\ Mailer pays minimum piece rate or pound rate, whichever is higher.  
\8\ Rate applies to flat-size automation mail not mailed at 3/5-digit   
  rate.                                                                 
\9\ Rate applies to flat-size automation mail presorted to single or    
  multiple three-and five-digit ZIP Code destinations as specified by   
  the Postal Service.                                                   


   Standard Mail Rate Schedule 321.5--Nonprofit Enhanced Carrier Route  
                              Subclass \1\                              
                              [Full Rates]                              
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  Rate  
                                                                 (cents)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Letter Size:                                                            
  Piece Rate:                                                           
    Basic.....................................................  ........
    Basic Automated Letter \2\................................  ........
    High Density..............................................  ........
    Saturation................................................  ........
  Destination Entry Discount per Piece:                                 
    BMC.......................................................  ........
    SCF.......................................................  ........
    DDU \3\...................................................  ........
Non-Letter Size:                                                        
  Piece Rate:                                                           
    Minimum per Piece: \4\                                              
      Basic...................................................  ........
      High Density............................................  ........
      Saturation..............................................  ........
    Destination Entry Discount per Piece:                               
      BMC.....................................................  ........
      SCF.....................................................  ........
      DDU \3\.................................................  ........
  Pound Rate: \4\                                                       
    Plus per Piece Rate:                                                
      Basic...................................................  ........
      High Density............................................  ........
      Saturation..............................................  ........
    Destination Entry Discount per Pound:                               
      BMC.....................................................  ........
      SCF.....................................................  ........
      DDU \3\.................................................  ........
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Schedule 321.5 Notes                                                    
\1\ A fee of $ must be paid each 12-month period for each bulk mailing  
  permit.                                                               
\2\ Rate applies to letter-size automation mail presorted to routes     
  specified by the Postal Service.                                      
\3\ Applies only to enhanced carrier route mail.                        
\4\ Mailer pays either the minimum piece rate or the pound rate,        
  whichever is higher.                                                  


                      Standard Mail Rate Schedule 322.1A Parcel Post Subclass Basic Rates*                      
                                                    [Dollars]                                                   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Weight not                                                                                                     
  exceeding      Local      Zone \1/2\     Zone 3       Zone 4      Zone 5      Zone 6      Zone 7      Zone 8  
  (pounds)                                                                                                      
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 1..........                                                                                                    
 2..........                                                                                                    
 3..........                                                                                                    
 4..........                                                                                                    
 5..........                                                                                                    
 6..........                                                                                                    
 7..........                                                                                                    
 8..........                                                                                                    
 9..........                                                                                                    
10..........                                                                                                    
11..........                                                                                                    
12..........                                                                                                    
13..........                                                                                                    

[[Page 426]]

                                                                                                                
14..........                                                                                                    
15..........                                                                                                    
16..........                                                                                                    
17..........                                                                                                    
18..........                                                                                                    
19..........                                                                                                    
20..........                                                                                                    
21..........                                                                                                    
22..........                                                                                                    
23..........                                                                                                    
24..........                                                                                                    
25..........                                                                                                    
26..........                                                                                                    
27..........                                                                                                    
28..........                                                                                                    
29..........                                                                                                    
30..........                                                                                                    
31..........                                                                                                    
32..........                                                                                                    
33..........                                                                                                    
34..........                                                                                                    
35..........                                                                                                    
36..........                                                                                                    
37..........                                                                                                    
38..........                                                                                                    
39..........                                                                                                    
40..........                                                                                                    
41..........                                                                                                    
42..........                                                                                                    
43..........                                                                                                    
44..........                                                                                                    
45..........                                                                                                    
46..........                                                                                                    
47..........                                                                                                    
48..........                                                                                                    
49..........                                                                                                    
50..........                                                                                                    
51..........                                                                                                    
52..........                                                                                                    
53..........                                                                                                    
54..........                                                                                                    
55..........                                                                                                    
56..........                                                                                                    
57..........                                                                                                    
58..........                                                                                                    
59..........                                                                                                    
60..........                                                                                                    
61..........                                                                                                    
62..........                                                                                                    
63..........                                                                                                    
64..........                                                                                                    
65..........                                                                                                    
66..........                                                                                                    
67..........                                                                                                    
68..........                                                                                                    
69..........                                                                                                    
70..........                                                                                                    
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Notes:                                                                                                        
1. For Intra-BMC parcels, deduct:                                                                               
2. For nonmachinable Inter-BMC parcels, add:                                                                    
3. For each pickup stop, add:                                                                                   


                    Standard Rate Schedule 322.1B Parcel Post Subclass Destination BMC Rates*                   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Weight not                                               Weight not                                            
 exceeding    Zones \1/    Zone 3     Zone 4     Zone 5    exceeding  Zones \1/    Zone 3     Zone 4     Zone 5 
  (pounds)       2\                                        (pounds)       2\                                    
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  .........                                                      36                                             

[[Page 427]]

                                                                                                                
 2.........                                                      37                                             
 3.........                                                      38                                             
 4.........                                                      39                                             
 5.........                                                      40                                             
 6.........                                                      41                                             
 7.........                                                      42                                             
 8.........                                                      43                                             
 9.........                                                      44                                             
10.........                                                      45                                             
11.........                                                      46                                             
12.........                                                      47                                             
13.........                                                      48                                             
14.........                                                      49                                             
15.........                                                      50                                             
16.........                                                      51                                             
17.........                                                      52                                             
18.........                                                      53                                             
19.........                                                      54                                             
20.........                                                      55                                             
21.........                                                      56                                             
22.........                                                      57                                             
23.........                                                      58                                             
24.........                                                      59                                             
25.........                                                      60                                             
26.........                                                      61                                             
27.........                                                      62                                             
28.........                                                      63                                             
29.........                                                      64                                             
30.........                                                      65                                             
31.........                                                      66                                             
32.........                                                      67                                             
33.........                                                      68                                             
34.........                                                      69                                             
35.........                                                      70                                             
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*A fee of $   must be paid each year.                                                                           


              Standard Mail Rate Schedule 322.3A Bound Printed Matter Subclass Single Piece Rates*              
                                                    [Dollars]                                                   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Weight not                                                  Zones                                             
   exceeding   -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   (pounds)        Local        1 & 2          3           4           5           6           7           8    
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.5...........                                                                                                  
2.............                                                                                                  
2.5...........                                                                                                  
3.............                                                                                                  
3.5...........                                                                                                  
4.............                                                                                                  
4.5...........                                                                                                  
5.............                                                                                                  
6.............                                                                                                  
7.............                                                                                                  
8.............                                                                                                  
9.............                                                                                                  
10............                                                                                                  
Per piece rate                                                                                                  
Per pound rate                                                                                                  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Includes both catalogs and similar bound printed matter.                                                      


[[Page 428]]


  Standard Mail Rate Schedule 322.3B Bound Printed Matter Subclass Bulk 
                   and Carrier Route Presort Rates \1\                  
                                [Dollars]                               
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             Per-     Carrier     Per-  
                   Zone                      piece   route \2\    pound 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Local                                                                   
1 & 2                                                                   
3                                                                       
4                                                                       
5                                                                       
6                                                                       
7                                                                       
8                                                                       
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Includes both catalogs and similar bound printed matter.            
\2\ Applies to mailings of at least 300 pieces presorted to carrier     
  route as prescribed by the Postal Service.                            


   Standard Mail Rate Schedules 323.1 & 323.2 Special and Library Rate  
                               Subclasses                               
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  Rates 
                                                                 (cents)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Schedule 323.1: Special                                                 
  First Pound                                                           
    Not presorted                                                       
    LEVEL A Presort (5-digits) \1\ \2\                                  
    LEVEL B Presort (BMC) \1\ \3\                                       
  Each additional pound through 7 pounds                                
  Each additional pound over 7 pounds                                   
Schedule 323.2: Library                                           Full  
                                                                  Rates 
                                                                 (cents)
  First pound                                                           
  Each additional pound through 7 pounds                                
  Each additional pound over 7 pounds                                   
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Schedule 323.1 Notes:                                                   
\1\ A fee must be paid once each 12-month period for each permit.       
\2\ For mailings of 500 or more pieces properly prepared and presorted  
  to five-digit destination ZIP Codes.                                  
\3\ For mailings of 500 or more pieces properly prepared and presorted  
  to Bulk Mail Centers.                                                 


          Periodicals Rate Schedule 421 Regular Subclass\1\ \2\         
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Rate \3\
                                           Postage rate unit     (cents)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Per pound:                                                              
  Nonadvertising Portion..............  Pound                           
  Advertising Portion:                                                  
    Delivery Office \4\...............  Pound                           
    SCF \5\...........................  Pound                           
    1&2...............................  Pound                           
    3.................................  Pound                           
    4.................................  Pound                           
    5.................................  Pound                           
    6.................................  Pound                           
    7.................................  Pound                           
    8.................................  Pound                           
  Science of Agriculture                                                
    Delivery Office...................  Pound                           
    SCF...............................  Pound                           
    Zone 1&2..........................  Pound                           
PER PIECE: Less Nonadvertising Factor          cents.\6\                
 of                                                                     
  Required Preparation \7\............  Piece                           
  Presorted to 3-digit city/5-digit...  Piece                           
  Presorted to Carrier Route..........  Piece                           
  Discounts:                                                            
    Prepared to Delivery Office \4\...  Piece                           
    Prepared to SCF \5\...............  Piece                           
    High Density \8\..................  Piece                           
    Saturation \9\....................  Piece                           
  Automation Discounts for Automation                                   
   Compatible Mail \10\                                                 
    From Required:                                                      
      Pre-barcoded letter size........  Piece                           
      Pre-barcoded flats..............  Piece                           
    From \3/5\ Digit:                                                   
      Pre-barcoded 3-digit letter size  Piece                           
      Pre-barcoded 5-digit letter size  Piece                           
      Pre-barcoded flats..............  Piece                           
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Schedule 421 Notes:                                                     
\1\ The rates in this schedule also apply to commingled nonsubscriber,  
  non-requester, complimentary, and sample copies in excess of 10       
  percent allowance in regular-rate, non-profit, and classroom          
  periodicals.                                                          
\2\ Rates do not apply to otherwise regular rate mail that qualifies for
  the Within-County rates in Schedule 423.2.                            
\3\ Charges are computed by adding the appropriate per-piece charge to  
  the sum of the nonadvertising portion and the advertising portion, as 
  applicable.                                                           
\4\ Applies to carrier route (including high density and saturation)    
  mail delivered within the delivery area of the originating post       
  office.                                                               
\5\ Applies to mail delivered within the SCF area of the originating SCF
  office.                                                               
\6\ For postage calculations, multiply the proportion of nonadvertising 
  content by this factor and subtract from the applicable piece rate.   
\7\ Mail presorted to 3-digit (other than 3-digit city), SCF, states, or
  mixed states.                                                         
\8\ Applicable to high density mail, deducted from carrier route presort
  rate.                                                                 
\9\ Applicable to saturation mail, deducted from carrier route presort  
  rate.                                                                 
\10\ For automation compatible mail meeting applicable Postal Service   
  regulations.                                                          


             Periodicals Rate Schedule 423.2--Within County             
                              [Full Rates]                              
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  Rate  
                                                                 (cents)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Per Pound:                                                              
  General.....................................................  ........
  Delivery Office\1\..........................................  ........
Per Piece:                                                              
  Required Presort............................................  ........
  Carrier Route...............................................  ........
  Presort.....................................................  ........
Per Piece Discounts:                                                    
  Delivery Office\2\..........................................  ........
  High Density (formerly 125 piece)\3\........................  ........
  Saturation..................................................  ........
  Automation Discounts for Automation Compatible Mail\4\ From           
   Required:                                                            
    3-Digit Pre-barcoded Letter size..........................  ........
    5-Digit Pre-barcoded Letter size..........................  ........
    3/5-Digit Pre-barcoded Flats..............................  ........
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Schedule 423.2 Notes                                                    
\1\ Applicable only to the pound charge of carrier route (including high
  density and saturation) presorted pieces to be delivered within the   
  delivery area of the originating post office                          
\2\ Applicable only to carrier presorted pieces to be delivered within  
  the delivery area of the originating post office.                     

[[Page 429]]

                                                                        
\3\ Applicable to high density mail, deducted from carrier route presort
  rate.                                                                 
\4\ For automation compatible pieces meeting applicable Postal Service  
  regulations.                                                          


 Rate Schedule 423.3--Publications of Authorized Nonprofit Organizations
                                  \10\                                  
                              [Full Rates]                              
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Rate \1\
                                            Postage rate unit    (cents)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Per Pound:                                                              
  Nonadvertising portion................  Pound...............  ........
  Advertising portion:\9\                                               
    Delivery Office \2\.................  Pound...............  ........
        SCF \3\.........................  Pound...............  ........
        1&2.............................  Pound...............  ........
        3...............................  Pound...............  ........
        4...............................  Pound...............  ........
        5...............................  Pound...............  ........
        6...............................  Pound...............  ........
        7...............................  Pound...............  ........
        8...............................  Pound...............  ........
Per Piece: Less Nonadvertising Factor of                                
 cents.\4\                                                              
  Required Preparation \5\..............  Piece...............  ........
  Presorted to 3-digit city/5-digit.....  Piece...............  ........
  Presorted to Carrier Route............  Piece...............  ........
  Discounts:                                                            
    Prepared to Delivery Office \2\.....  Piece...............  ........
    High Density (formerly 125-Piece)     Piece...............  ........
     \6\.                                                               
    Saturation \7\......................  Piece...............  ........
  Automation Discounts for Automation                                   
   Compatible Mail \8\                                                  
  From Required:                                                        
    Pre-barcoded Letter size............  Piece...............  ........
    Pre-barcoded Flats..................  Piece...............  ........
  From 3/5 Digit:                                                       
    3-Digit Pre-barcoded Letter size....  Piece...............  ........
    5-Digit Pre-barcoded Letter size....  Piece...............  ........
    Pre-barcoded Flats..................  Piece...............  ........
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Schedule 423.3 Notes                                                    
\1\ Charges are computed by adding the appropriate per-piece charge to  
  the sum of the nonadvertising portion and the advertising portion, as 
  applicable.                                                           
\2\ Applies to carrier route (including high density and saturation)    
  mail delivered within the delivery area of the originating post       
  office.                                                               
\3\ Applies to mail delivered within the SCF area of the originating SCF
  office.                                                               
\4\ For postage calculation, multiply the proportion of nonadvertising  
  content by this factor and subtract from the applicable piece rate.   
\5\ Mail presorted to 3-digit (other than 3-digit city), SCF, states, or
  mixed states.                                                         
\6\ Applicable to high density mail, deducted from carrier route presort
  rate.                                                                 
\7\ Applicable to saturation mail, deducted from carrier route presort  
  rate.                                                                 
\8\ For automation compatible mail meeting applicable Postal Service    
  regulations.                                                          
\9\ Not applicable to publications containing 10 percent or less        
  advertising content.                                                  
\10\ If qualified, nonprofit publications may use Within-County rates   
  for applicable portions of a mailing.                                 


      Periodicals Rate Schedule 423.4--Classroom Publications \10\      
                              [Full Rates]                              
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Rate \1\
                                            Postage rate unit    (cents)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Per Pound:                                                              
  Nonadvertising Portion................  Pound...............  ........
  Advertising Portion: \9\                                              
    Delivery Office \2\.................  Pound...............  ........
        SCF \3\.........................  Pound...............  ........
        1&2.............................  Pound...............  ........
        3...............................  Pound...............  ........
        4...............................  Pound...............  ........
        5...............................  Pound...............  ........
        6...............................  Pound...............  ........
        7...............................  Pound...............  ........
        8...............................  Pound...............  ........
Per Piece: Less Nonadvertising Factor of                                
 cents: \4\                                                             
  Required Preparation \5\..............  Piece...............  ........
  Presorted to 3-digit city/5-digit.....  Piece...............  ........
  Presorted to Carrier Route............  Piece...............  ........
  Discounts:                                                            
    Prepared to Delivery Office. \2\....  Piece...............  ........
    Prepared to SCF.....................  Piece...............  ........
    High Density (formerly 125-piece)...  Piece...............  ........
    Saturation \7\......................  Piece...............  ........
  Automation Discounts for Automation                                   
   Compatible Mail: \8\                                                 
    From Required:                                                      
      Pre-barcoded Letter size..........  Piece...............  ........
      Pre-barcoded Flats................  Piece...............  ........
    From 3/5-Digit:                                                     
      3-Digit Pre-barcoded Letter size..  Piece...............  ........
      5-Digit Pre-barcoded Letter size..  Piece...............  ........
      Pre-barcoded Flats................  Piece...............  ........
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Schedule 423.4 Notes                                                    
\1\ Charges are computed by adding the appropriate per-piece charge to  
  the sum of the nonadvertising portion and the advertising portion, as 
  applicable.                                                           
\2\ Applies to carrier route (including high density and saturation)    
  mail delivered within the delivery area of the originating post       
  office.                                                               
\3\ Applies to mail delivered within the SCF area of the originating SCF
  office.                                                               
\4\ For postage calculation, multiply the portion of nonadvertising     
  content by this factor and subtract from the applicable piece rate.   
\5\ Mail presorted to 3-digit (other than 3-digit city), SCF, states, or
  mixed states.                                                         
\6\ Applicable to high density mail, deducted from carrier route presort
  rate.                                                                 
\7\ Applicable to saturation mail, deducted from carrier route presort  
  rate.                                                                 
\8\ For automation compatible mail meeting applicable Postal Service    
  regulations.                                                          
\9\ Not applicable to publications containing 10 percent or less        
  advertising content.                                                  
\10\ If qualified, Classroom Mail may use Within County rates for       
  applicable portions of a mailing.                                     


------------------------------------------------------------------------
       Special services               Description              Fee      
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SCHEDULE SS-1                                                           
    Address Corrections.......  Per manual correction                   
                                Per automated                           
                                 correction                             
SCHEDULE SS-2--Business Reply    Active business reply                  
 Mail                            advance deposit                        
                                 account:                               
                                  Per piece:                            
                                   Pre-barcoded                         
                                   Nonletter-size,                      
                                    using reverse                       
                                    manifest                            
                                    (experimental)                      

[[Page 430]]

                                                                        
                                   Nonletter-size,                      
                                    using weight                        
                                    averaging                           
                                    (experimental)                      
                                   Other                                
                                Payment of postage due                  
                                 charges if active                      
                                 business reply mail                    
                                 advance deposit                        
                                 account not used:                      
                                    Per piece                           
                                Annual License and                      
                                 Accounting Fees:                       
                                   Accounting Fee for                   
                                    Advance Deposit                     
                                    Account                             
                                  Permit fee (with or                   
                                   without Advance                      
                                   Deposit Account)                     
                                Monthly Fees for                        
                                 customers using a                      
                                 reverse manifest or                    
                                 weight averaging for                   
                                 nonletter-size                         
                                 business reply                         
                                  Nonletter-size,                       
                                   using reverse                        
                                   manifest                             
                                   (experimental)                       
                                  Nonletter-size,                       
                                   using weight                         
                                   averaging                            
                                   (experimental)                       
                                Set-up/Qualification                    
                                 fee for customers                      
                                 using a reverse                        
                                 manifest or weight                     
                                 averaging for                          
                                 nonletter-size                         
                                 business reply                         
                                  Nonletter-size,                       
                                   using reverse                        
                                   manifest                             
                                   (experimental)                       
                                  Nonletter-size,                       
                                   using weight                         
                                   averaging                            
                                   (experimental)                       
                                \1\ Experimental per                    
                                 piece, monthly, and                    
                                 set-up/qualification                   
                                 fees are applicable                    
                                 only to participants                   
                                 selected by the                        
                                 Postal Service for                     
                                 the nonletter-size                     
                                 business reply mail                    
                                 experiment. The                        
                                 experimental fees                      
                                 expire June 8,                         
                                 1997.\1\                               
SCHEDULE SS-4                                                           
    Certificates of Mailing...  Individual Pieces       (in addition to 
                                                         postage)       
                                Original certificate                    
                                 of mailing for listed                  
                                 pieces of all classes                  
                                 of ordinary mail (per                  
                                 piece)                                 
                                Three or more pieces                    
                                 individually listed                    
                                 in a firm mailing                      
                                 book or an approved                    
                                 customer provided                      
                                 manifest (per piece)                   
                                Each additional copy                    
                                 of original                            
                                 certificate of                         
                                 mailing or original                    
                                 mailing receipt for                    
                                 registered, insured,                   
                                 certified, and COD                     
                                 mail (each copy)                       
                                Bulk Pieces:                            
                                Identical pieces of                     
                                 First-Class and                        
                                 Single Piece,                          
                                 Regular, and                           
                                 Nonprofit Standard                     
                                 Mail paid with                         
                                 ordinary stamps,                       
                                 precanceled stamps,                    
                                 or meter stamps are                    
                                 subject to the                         
                                 following fees:                        
                                Up to 1,000 pieces                      
                                 (one certificate for                   
                                 total number).                         
                                Each additional 1,000                   
                                 pieces or fraction.                    
                                Duplicate copy........                  
SCHEDULE SS-5                                                           
    Certified Mail............  Service (per mailpiece  (in addition to 
                                                         postage)       
SCHEDULE SS-6                                                           
    Collect on Delivery.......  Amount to be            (in addition to 
                                 collected, or           postage)       
                                 Insurance Coverage                     
                                 Desired                                
                                Notice of nondelivery                   
                                 of COD                                 
                                Alteration of COD                       
                                 charges or                             
                                 designation of new                     
                                 addresses                              
                                Registered COD                          
SCHEDULE SS-8                                                           
    Money Orders..............  Domestic                                
                                $0.01 to $700                           
                                APO-FPO $0.01 to $700                   
                                Inquiry Fee, which                      
                                 includes the issuance                  
                                 of copy of a paid                      
                                 money order                            
SCHEDULE SS-9--Insured Mail     Document                (in addition to 
 Part a--Express Mail            Reconstruction          postage) no    
 Insurance                       Coverage.               charge.        
                                $0.01 to $500.........                  
                                Merchandise Declared    no charge for   
                                 Value Fee.              each $100 (or  
                                $ 0.01 to $ 500.......   fraction       
                                500.01 to 5000........   thereof) over  
                                                         $500 in value. 
Part b--General Insurance.....  Declared Value Fee....  (in addition to 
                                                         postage).      

[[Page 431]]

                                                                        
                                $ 0.01 to $ 50........  plus for each   
                                50.01 to $ 100........   $100 (or       
                                100.01 to $5000.......   fraction       
                                                         thereof) over  
                                                         $100 in        
                                                         declared value.
  SCHEDULE SS-10--Post Office   I. Semi-annual Box      Fee Group A, B, 
 Boxes and Caller Service        Fees \1\.               C, D and E \3\ 
                                1. Semi-annual Box      Fee Group--A, B,
                                 Fees\1\.                C, D, E\3\     
                                  Box Size \2\                          
                                   1                                    
                                   2                                    
                                   3                                    
                                   4                                    
                                   5                                    
                                II. Semi-annual Caller  Fee Group A, B, 
                                 Service Fees            C, D           
                                III. Annual Call                        
                                 Number Reservation                     
                                 Fee (all applicable                    
                                 fee groups)                            
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ A customer ineligible for carrier delivery may obtain a post office 
  box at no charge, subject to administrative decisions regarding       
  customer's proximity to post office.                                  
\2\ Box Size 1=under 296 cubic inches; 2=296-499 cubic inches; 3=500-999
  cubic inches; 4=1000-1999 cubic inches; 5=2000 cubic inches and over. 
\3\ Group E post office box customers subject to these fees are those   
  eligible for carrier delivery.                                        


------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   Description              Fee         
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SCHEDULE SS-11a                                                         
    Zip Coding of Mailing       Per thousand                            
     Lists.                      addresses                              
SCHEDULE SS-11b                                                         
    Correction of Mailing       Per submitted                           
     Lists                       address                                
                                Minimum charge                          
                                 per list                               
                                 corrected                              
SCHEDULE SS-11c                                                         
    Address Changes for                                                 
     Election Boards and                                                
     Registration                                                       
                                Per change of                           
                                 address                                
Commissions                                                             
SCHEDULE SS-11d                                                         
    Corrections Associated                                              
     with Arrangement of                                                
     Address Cards in Carrier                                           
     Delivery Per correction                                            
Sequence                                                                
NOTE: When rural routes have                                            
 been consolidated or changed                                           
 to another post office, no                                             
 charge will be made for                                                
 correction if the list                                                 
 contains only names of                                                 
 persons residing on the route                                          
 or routes involved.                                                    
SCHEDULE SS-12                                                          
On-site Meter Setting.........  First Meter......                       
                                By appointment                          
                                Unscheduled                             
                                 request                                
                                Additional meters                       
                                Checking meter in                       
                                 or out of (per                         
                                 meter)                                 
SCHEDULE SS-13                                                          
    Parcel Air Lift...........  Up to 2 pounds                          
                                                   Fee (in addition to  
                                                    Parcel Post postage)
                                Over 2 up to 3                          
                                 pounds                                 
                                Over 3 up to 4                          
                                 pounds                                 
                                Over 4 pounds                           
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 432]]


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                       Fees \2\ (in addition to                                                         
                                   Declared Value of Article \1\               postage)                                Handling charge                  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Schedule SS-14--Registered Mail  $0.00 to $100....................  (without insurance)             None.                                               
                                 0.00 to 100......................  (with insurance)                                                                    
                                 100.01 to 500                                                                                                          
                                 500.01 to 1,000                                                                                                        
                                 1,000.01 to 2,000                                                                                                      
                                 2,000.01 to 3,000                                                                                                      
                                 3,000.01 to 4,000                                                                                                      
                                 4,000.01 to 5,000                                                                                                      
                                 5,000.01 to 6,000                                                                                                      
                                 6,000.01 to 7,000                                                                                                      
                                 7,000.01 to 8,000                                                                                                      
                                 8,000.01 to 9,000                                                                                                      
                                 9,000.01 to 10,000                                                                                                     
                                 10,000.01 to 11,000                                                                                                    
                                 11,000.01 to 12,000                                                                                                    
                                 12,000.01 to 13,000                                                                                                    
                                 13,000.01 to 14,000                                                                                                    
                                 14,000.01 to 15,000                                                                                                    
                                 15,000.01 to 16,000                                                                                                    
                                 16,000.01 to 17,000                                                                                                    
                                 17,000.01 to 18,000                                                                                                    
                                 18,000.01 to 19,000                                                                                                    
                                 19,000.01 to 20,000                                                                                                    
                                 20,000.01 to 21,000                                                                                                    
                                 21,000.01 to 22,000                                                                                                    
                                 22,000.01 to 23,000                                                                                                    
                                 23,000.01 to 24,000                                                                                                    
                                 24,000.01 to 25,000                                                                                                    
                                 25,000.01 to $1 million..........  plus..........................  cents for each $1,000 (or fraction thereof) over    
                                                                                                     $25,000.                                           
                                 Over $1 million to $15 million...  plus..........................  cents for each $1,000 (or fraction thereof) over $1 
                                                                                                     million.                                           
                                 Over $15 million.................  plus..........................  Amount determined by the Postal Service based on    
                                                                                                     weight, space and value.                           
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Articles with a declared value of more than $25,000 can be registered, but compensation for loss or damage is limited to $25,000.                   
\2\ Fees for articles with declared values of more than $100 include insurance.                                                                         


[[Page 433]]


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  Description                         Fee       
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SCHEDULE SS-15                                                                                                  
                                                                                                 (in addition to
                                                                                                        postage)
    Restricted Delivery........................  Per Piece                                                      
SCHEDULE SS-16--Return Receipts                  Receipts Issued at Time of Mailing \1\                         
                                                   Items other than merchandise                                 
                                                   Merchandise (without another special                         
                                                    service)                                                    
                                                 Receipt Issued after Mailing \2\                               
SCHEDULE SS-18                                                                                                  
    Special handling...........................  Not more than 10 pounds                                        
                                                 More than 10 pounds                                            
SCHEDULE SS-19                                                                                                  
    Stamped                                      Single Sale                                     (in addition to
                                                                                                        postage)
Envelopes                                                                                                       
                                                 BULK (500) #6\3/4\ size: Regular Window                        
                                                 BULK (500) size > #6\3/4\ through #10 \1\                      
                                                  Regular Window                                                
                                                 Multi-Color Printing (500) #6\3/4\ size, #10                   
                                                  size \1\                                                      
                                                 Printing charge per 500 Envelopes (for each                    
                                                  type of printed envelope)                                     
                                                     Minimum Order (500) envelopes)                             
                                                     Order for 1,000 or more envelopes                          
                                                 Double Window (500)--Size > #6\3/4\ through                    
                                                  #10 \1\                                                       
                                                 Household (50): size #6\3/4\--Regular Window                   
                                                 size > #6\3/4\ through #10--Regular Window                     
SCHEDULE SS-19A--Stamped Cards                   Stamped Card                                    (in addition to
                                                 Double Stamped Card                                    postage)
SCHEDULE SS-20                                                                                                  
    Merchandise                                  Per Transaction                                                
Return                                                                                                          
                                                 Shipper must have an advance deposit account                   
                                                  (see DMCS Schedule 1000)                                      
SCHEDULE 1000                                                                                                   
    Fees.......................................  First-Class Presorted Mailing Fee                              
                                                 Periodicals Fees                                               
                                                     A. Original Entry                                          
                                                     B. Additional Entry                                        
                                                     C. Re-entry                                                
                                                     D. Registration for News Agents                            
                                                 Regular, Enhanced Carrier Route and                            
                                                  Nonprofit Standard Mail Bulk Mailing Fee                      
                                                 Parcel Post: Destination BMC                                   
                                                 Special Standard Mail Presorted Mailing Fee                    
                                                 Authorization to Use Permit Imprint                            
                                                 Merchandise Return (per facility receiving                     
                                                  merchandise return labels)                                    
                                                 Business Reply Mail Permit                                     
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Fee for precancelled envelopes is the same.                                                                 
\1\ This receipt shows the signature of the person to whom the mailpiece was delivered, the date of delivery and
  the delivery address, if such address is different from the address on the mailpiece.                         
\2\ This receipt shows to whom the mailpiece was delivered and the date of delivery.                            

[61 FR 32657, June 25, 1996; 61 FR 37316, July 17, 1996, as amended at 
61 FR 55100, 55102, Oct. 24, 1996; 62 FR 35425, 35426, July 1, 1997]


<R04>
  Subpart D--Rules Applicable to Requests for Changes in the Nature of 
                             Postal Services


<R05>
Sec. 3001.71   Applicability.

    The rules in this subpart govern the procedure with regard to 
proposals of the Postal Service pursuant to section 3661 of the Act 
requesting from the Commission an advisory opinion on changes in the 
nature of postal services which will generally affect service on a 
nationwide or substantially nationwide basis. The Rules of General 
Applicability in subpart A of this part are also applicable to 
proceedings on requests subject to this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.72   Filing of formal requests.

    Whenever the Postal Service determines to request that the 
Commission issue an advisory opinion on a proposed change in the nature 
of postal services subject to this subpart, the Postal

[[Page 434]]

Service shall file with the Commission a formal request for such an 
opinion in accordance with the requirements of Secs. 3001.9 to 3001.11 
and 3001.74. Such request shall be filed not less than 90 days in 
advance of the date on which the Postal Service proposes to make 
effective the change in the nature of postal services involved. Within 5 
days after the Postal Service has filed a formal request for a 
recommended decision in accordance with this subsection, the Secretary 
shall lodge a notice thereof with the Director of the Federal Register 
for publication in the Federal Register.

[38 FR 4330, Feb. 13, 1973, as amended at 51 FR 8827, Mar. 14, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.73   Filing of prepared direct testimony.

    Simultaneously with the filing of a formal request for an advisory 
opinion under this subpart, the Postal Service shall file all of the 
prepared direct evidence upon which it proposes to rely in the 
proceeding on the record before the Commission to establish that the 
proposed change in the nature of postal services is in accordance with 
and conforms to the policies of the Act. Such prepared direct evidence 
shall be in the form of prepared written testimony and documentary 
exhibits which shall be filed in accordance with Sec. 3001.31.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.74   Contents of formal requests.

    (a) General requirements. Each formal request filed under this 
subpart shall include such information and data and such statements of 
reasons and basis as are necessary and appropriate to fully inform the 
Commission and the parties of the nature, scope, significance and impact 
of the proposed change in the nature of postal services and to show that 
such change in the nature of postal service is in accordance with and 
conforms to the policies established under the Act. Detailed data and 
information and statements of reasons or basis set forth in the Postal 
Service's prepared direct evidence may be relied upon for purposes of 
the formal request without restatement therein by reference in the 
request to the portions of the prepared direct evidence relied upon.
    (b) Specific information. Subject to the right of the Commission to 
request additional information, each formal request shall include the 
following:
    (1) A detailed statement of the present nature of the postal 
services proposed to be changed and the change proposed;
    (2) The proposed effective date for the proposed change in the 
nature of postal services;
    (3) A full and complete statement of the reasons and basis for the 
Postal Service's determination that the proposed change in the nature of 
postal services is in accordance with and conforms to the policies of 
the Act.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.75   Service by the Postal Service.

    Immediately after the issuance of an order or orders by the 
Commission designating an officer of the Commission to represent the 
interests of the general public in a proceeding before the Commission 
under this subpart, the Postal Service shall serve copies of its formal 
request for an advisory opinion and its prepared direct evidence upon 
such officer and the intervenors as provided by Sec. 3001.12. Service 
shall also be made on persons who are limited participators.

[38 FR 3511, Feb. 7, 1973, as amended at 51 FR 8827, Mar. 14, 1986; 58 
FR 38977, July 21, 1993]


<R04>
       Subpart E--Rules Applicable to Rate and Service Complaints


<R05>
Sec. 3001.81   Applicability.

    The rules in this subpart govern the procedure with regard to rate 
and service complaints filed under section 3662 of the Act. The Rules of 
General Applicability in subpart A of this part are also applicable to 
proceedings on such complaints.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.82   Scope and nature of complaints.

    Interested parties who believe the Postal Service is charging rates 
which do not conform to the policies set out in the Act, or who believe 
that they are not receiving postal service in accordance with the 
policies of such title, may file and serve a written complaint with the 
Commission in the form and manner required by Secs. 3001.9 to 3001.12.

[[Page 435]]

The Commission shall entertain only those complaints which clearly raise 
an issue concerning whether or not rates or services contravene the 
policies of the Act; thus, complaints raising a question as to whether 
the Postal Service has properly applied its existing rates and fees or 
mail classification schedule to a particular mail user or with regard to 
an individual, localized, or temporary service issue not on a 
substantially nationwide basis shall generally not be considered as 
properly raising a matter of policy to be considered by the Commission. 
The Commission shall, in the exercise of its discretion, decline to 
entertain a complaint during the period the complainant is continuing to 
pursue the general subject matter of the complaint before an 
Administrative Law Judge or the judicial officer of the Postal Service.

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 37 FR 25027, Nov. 25, 1972]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.83   Contents of complaints.

    Subject to the right of the Commission to require the furnishing of 
additional information, each complaint shall include the following 
information:
    (a) The full name and address of the complainant(s);
    (b) A full and complete statement of the grounds for such complaint, 
including specific reference to the postal rates or services involved 
and the policies to which it is claimed they do not conform;
    (c) A list or description of all persons or classes of persons known 
or believed to be similarly affected by the rates or services involved 
in the complaint;
    (d) A statement of the specific relief or redress requested;
    (e) Copies of all correspondence or written communications between 
the complainant, his/her agent, representative, or attorney, and the 
Postal Service or any officer, employee or instrumentality thereof, and 
which relates to the subject matter of the complaint; provided, however, 
that any such documents which are a part of a public file in any 
proceeding before an Administrative Law Judge or the Judicial Officer of 
the Postal Service need not be included if the complaint states the 
title, docket reference, nature, current status, and disposition of such 
proceeding.

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 37 FR 25027, Nov. 25, 1972; 58 
FR 38976, 38977, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.84   Answers by the Postal Service.

    Within 30 days after the filing of a complaint with the Commission 
(unless more time is allowed under Sec. 3001.85(a)), the Postal Service 
shall file and serve an answer. Such answer shall be in the form and 
manner required by Secs. 3001.9 to 3001.12, and shall include the 
following:
    (a) Specific admission, denial or explanation of each fact alleged 
in the complaint or, if the Postal Service is without knowledge thereof, 
a statement to that effect. Each fact alleged in a complaint not thus 
specifically answered shall be deemed to have been admitted;
    (b) A statement as to the position of the Postal Service on the 
allegations in the complaint that the rates or service involved are not 
in accord with the policies of the Act, and the facts and reasons in 
support of such position;
    (c) The position of the Postal Serv- ice on the specific relief or 
redress requested by the complainant, the disposition of the complaint 
recommended by the Postal Service, including whether or not a hearing 
should be held, and a statement of any facts and reasons in support of 
such position.

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 49 FR 6490, Feb. 22, 1984; 51 
FR 8827, Mar. 14, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.85   Informal procedures.

    (a) In case of a complaint alleging service not in accordance with 
the policies of the Act, the Commission, acting through such appropriate 
Commission employees as the Chairman shall designate, may use 
correspondence, conferences, or other appropriate informal inquiry 
methods to define the issues, further the exchange of information and 
explanations between the Postal Service and the complainant, and 
facilitate negotiated settlement. On receiving a service complaint, the 
Commission will give a notice of whether or not it intends to use 
informal procedures, In either case, it will give the

[[Page 436]]

Postal Service such additional time to answer the complaint as is just 
and appropriate. After expeditiously conducting informal inquiries, it 
will issue an order summarizing the results. All correspondence and 
other documents issued by or lodged with the Commission during informal 
inquiries will be part of the public record of the case.
    (b) It shall be the general policy and practice of the Commission to 
encourage the resolution and settlement of complaints by informal 
procedures, including correspondence, conferences between the parties, 
and the conduct of proceedings off the record with the consent of the 
parties.

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 49 FR 6490, Feb. 22, 1984; 51 
FR 8827, Mar. 14, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.86   Proceedings on the record.

    If a complaint is not resolved or settled under informal procedures, 
the Commission shall consider whether or not, in its discretion, a 
proceeding on the record with an opportunity for hearing should be held 
on such complaint. If the Commission has reason to believe that the 
complaint may be justified and that a hearing may otherwise be 
appropriate in the exercise of its discretion, the Commission shall 
issue a notice of proceeding pursuant to Sec. 3001.17, and further 
formal proceedings shall then be held as appropriate under the 
Commission's rules in subpart A of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.87   Commission determinations.

    If the Commission determines, after the completion of proceedings 
which provide an opportunity for hearing, that a complaint is justified 
in whole or in part, the Commission shall issue a recommended decision 
to the Postal Service if the complaint involves a matter of rates and 
fees or mail classification and shall render a public report if the 
complaint involves other matters. The Commission shall notify the 
complainant, the Postal Service, and any other parties in each complaint 
proceeding of the action taken or the final disposition of the 
complaint.


<R04>
  Subpart F--Rules Applicable to the Filing of Testimony by Intervenors


<R05>
Sec. 3001.91   Applicability and general policy.

    (a) The rules in this subpart identify those areas in which 
intervenors in rate and classification proceedings could assist the 
Commission. Intervenors are free to file any relevant and material 
evidence which is not unduly repetitious or cumulative.
    (b) Intervenors are invited to submit the information specified in 
Sec. 3001.92 (a) through (1) on a voluntary basis as part of their own 
direct cases. The Commission's request that intervenors voluntarily file 
such information is not in derogation of the Commission's and the 
presiding officer's authority, pursuant to Secs. 3001.23 through 
3001.28, respecting the provision of such or other information. 
Intervenors, particularly those making contentions under section 
3622(b)(4) of the Act, shall be aware that their failure to provide 
relevant and material information will be taken into account in 
determining the weight which the Commission accords to their arguments 
and evidence.
    (c) All evidence shall be filed in accordance with Sec. 3001.31. The 
rules of general applicability of subpart A of this part are also 
applicable to filings subject to this subpart.

[38 FR 7536, Mar. 22, 1973, as amended at 51 FR 8827, Mar. 14, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.92   Submissions by intervenors.

    In addition to any other direct testimony submitted by an intervenor 
in a rate or classification proceeding, and in addition to further 
requests for information by the Commission, the Commission requests that 
the following information be submitted where applicable and where it is 
within the ability of the intervenor to produce it. If it is alleged 
that such information is representative of a significant segment of a 
rate-category of mail or of the users thereof it should be accompanied 
by a demonstration to that effect.
    (a) Description of intervenor. A statement as to the nature of the 
business and operations of the intervenor. If the intervenor is an 
association, the names

[[Page 437]]

of the members of the association and a general description of their 
business and operations.
    (b) Usage of postal services. An identification of the extent to and 
method by which the postal services are used including an estimated 
itemization of the postage cost by class and rate.
    (c) Intervenor's mailing operations. A description of the mailing 
and handling operations of the intervenor for items which are to pass 
through the Postal Service. Descriptions of premailing operations should 
include the details as to any special arrangements with the Postal 
Service. Also, a statement as to the total mail handling costs exclusive 
of Postal Service payments including a breakdown of such costs by, and 
identification of, the functions for which the costs are incurred.
    (d) Intervenor's postage costs. A statement of the relative 
importance of postage costs to other expenses. An estimated itemization 
of postage costs by class of mail as related to total operating 
expenses. If more than one major product is affected by postage costs, 
data should be presented for each, e.g., each periodical of a firm in 
the publishing business.
    (e) Financial impact of rate or classification changes. An estimate 
of the financial impact of the proposed rate or classification changes 
on the intervenor, or aggregate data for members of mail user 
associations, together with details of the basis of estimates and 
supporting data.
    (f) Absorption/avoidance of rate changes. An analysis as to the 
ability or inability of the intervenor to absorb, avoid, or pass on 
postal rate changes, to customer groups (or advertisers or sponsoring 
organizations, if any). The analysis should include an analysis of the 
intervenor's customers' demand for the product of the intervenor's 
industry.
    (g) Demand for postal services. An indication of the demand of the 
intervenor's industry for postal services including an estimate of the 
elasticity of such demand.
    (h) Competitor operations. If the intervenor is a competitor of the 
Postal Service, a definition of the areas of competition between the 
intervenor and the Postal Service and a demonstration of the 
intervenor's ability or inability to meet postal competition. Include a 
brief historical description of the company's operations during the past 
5 years, showing growth in each major segment of the company's business 
and a statement of the current rates and all conditions of service 
applicable to the portion of the intervenor's operations which is 
affected by comparable service of the Postal Service. The statement 
should include data on the costs of the services which the intervenor 
contends are competitive with services of the Postal Service. The 
statement of costs should identify by character and amount those 
attributed to the competitive service and the intervenor's rationale 
(i.e., cost and pricing hypothesis) for such attribution.
    (i) Impact of rate changes on users' suppliers. If the intervenor is 
a manufacturer or supplier of goods or services provided to users of the 
Postal Service, a statement of the impact on expenses and revenues 
resulting from postage changes, together with statistical or other 
accounting data and the reasons supporting such statement.
    (j) Statement of revenues, volumes, costs, and profits. For all 
intervenors, a certified statement of the total revenues, costs, and 
profits for each of the last 5 years together with an estimate of the 
impact of the proposed postal changes on total revenues, costs, and 
profits. Also the intervenor's volume of mail passing through the Postal 
Service (by class and subclass) and the comparable volume of traffic 
moving by competitive services (or the volume of services performed in 
competition with the Postal Service, or the volume of materials 
manufactured for or supplied to the Postal Service or users of the 
Postal Service). Volume data should be presented for each of the 5 years 
for which total revenues, costs, and profits are reported. An estimate 
of the impact on volume resulting from the proposed postal increases 
should be included.
    (k) User studies of Postal Service. Any studies of the Postal 
Service's costs, revenues, or operations which would be of help to the 
Commission in evaluating the merits of the Postal Service's request.

[[Page 438]]

    (l) Workpapers. (1) Whenever an intervenor presents evidence it 
shall accompany such evidence with seven sets of workpapers, five for 
use by the Commission staff and two which shall be available for use by 
the public at the Commission offices. Two additional sets shall be 
delivered to counsel for the U.S. Postal Service.
    (2) Workpapers shall contain the data and analyses underlying the 
submissions, including:
    (i) A description of the methods used in collecting, summarizing and 
expanding the data and a clear indication of how the workpapers relate 
to the various submissions;
    (ii) Summaries of sample data and other data used; and
    (iii) Any special studies made.
    (3) Workpapers shall be neat and legible.
    (4) Workpapers shall include citations sufficient to enable a 
reviewer to trace any number used but not derived in the associated 
testimony back to published documents or, if not obtained from published 
documents, to primary data sources. Citations shall be sufficiently 
detailed to enable a reviewer to identify and locate the specific data 
used, e.g., by reference to document, page, line, column, etc. With the 
exception of workpapers that follow a standardized and repetitive 
format, the required citations themselves, or a cross-reference to a 
specific page, line, and column of a table of citations, shall appear on 
each page of each workpaper. Workpapers that follow a standardized and 
repetitive format shall include the citations described in this 
paragraph for a sufficient number of representative examples to enable a 
reviewer to trace numbers directly or by analogy.

[38 FR 7536, Mar. 22, 1973, as amended at 50 FR 43393, Oct. 25, 1985; 51 
FR 8827, Mar. 14, 1986]


<R04>
  Subpart G--Rules Applicable to the Filing of Periodic Reports by the 
                           U.S. Postal Service


<R05>
Sec. 3001.101   Applicability and general policy.

    The rules in this subpart identify reports<SUP>1</SUP> financial 
statements and cost analyses which the Postal Service will file with the 
Secretary of the Commission on a periodic basis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    <SUP>1</SUP>It is realized that some items, characterized as 
``reports,'' are not reports in the true sense of the word since they 
are not published and heretofore have only been intended for internal 
use.

[41 FR 47438, Oct. 29, 1976, as amended at 51 FR 24531, July 7, 1986; 58 
FR 38977, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.102  Filing of reports.

    Each report listed in this section shall be filed with the Secretary 
of the Commission within two weeks of its presentation for use by postal 
management unless otherwise noted. The reports and information required 
to be provided by this subpart need not include matters exempt from 
disclosure by law. Whenever a specific source is cited in this section, 
that citation includes any successor or substituted source.
    (a) Annual reports. The following information will be filed by the 
Postal Service annually.
    (1) Cost and Revenue Analysis Report which will identify each change 
in attribution assumptions from the prior year's report. The Postal 
Service will file concurrently portions of LIOCATT used in the report, 
transportation workpapers 31 and 57 and, if changed from the prior year, 
data collection forms and corresponding training handbooks.
    (2) Cost Segments and Components.
    (3) City Delivery Information including the number of routes by 
type, the number of possible deliveries by type, the number of 
collection boxes and

[[Page 439]]

businesses served (120 days from the close of the fiscal year).
    (4) Rural Carrier Information including the number of routes by type 
and miles, stops, boxes served and mail pieces by route type (120 days 
from the close of the fiscal year).
    (5) Civil Service Retirement Fund Deficit Report (2 weeks after 
release of the Annual Report of the Postmaster General).
    (6) Worker's Compensation Report including summary workpapers (2 
weeks after release of the Annual Report of the Postmaster General).
    (7) Annual Report of the Postmaster General.
    (8) Congressional Budget Submission including workpapers. The Postal 
Service will also file concurrently Summary Tables SE 1, 2 and 6 
(coincide with submission to Congress).
    (9) Audit Adjustment Vouchers, if any.
    (10) Billing determinants, at the level of detail employed in the 
most recent formal request for a change in rates or fees, except that 
the filing of billing determinant information for Express Mail, Priority 
Mail, and parcel post pursuant to this section may be delayed for up to 
one year.
    (b) Quarterly reports. The folllowing information will be filed by 
the Postal Service quarterly:
    (1) Revenue, Pieces and Weight by Classes of Mail and Special 
Services.
    (2) Origin/Destination Information Report National Service Index.
    (3) Investment Income Statements (60 days from the close of the 
Quarter, except for the last report for the fiscal year--2 weeks after 
release of the Annual Report of the Postmaster General).
    (c) Accounting period reports. The following information will be 
filed by the Postal Service each accounting period:
    (1) Cash Flow Statement (60 days from the close of the Accounting 
Period, except for the last report for the fiscal year--2 weeks after 
release of the Annual Report of the Postmaster General).
    (2) Summary Financial and Operating Report.
    (3) National Payroll Hours Summary.
    (4) National Consolidated Trial Balances and the Revenue and Expense 
Summary.
    (d) Miscellaneous reports. The following information will be filed 
by the Postal Service as updated:
    (1) Before/After Pay Increase Reports.
    (2) Before/After COLA Cost Report.
    (3) A master list of publications and handbooks including those 
related to internal information systems or data collection procedures 
(when changed).
    (4) Notice of Changes in Data Reporting Systems (90 days before 
implementing changes in data reporting systems).

[51 FR 24531, July 7, 1986, as amended at 54 FR 35495, Aug. 28, 1989; 58 
FR 38977, July 21, 1993]


<R04>
Subpart H--Rules Applicable to Appeals of Postal Service Determinations 
                  To Close or Consolidate Post Offices

    Source: 42 FR 10993, Feb. 25, 1977, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.110   Applicability.

    Rules in this subpart govern the procedure regarding the appeal of a 
determination of the Postal Service to close or consolidate a post 
office by patrons of the post office in question. Pursuant to section 
404(b) of the Act any decision to close or consolidate a post office 
must be preceded by 60 days notice to persons served by such post 
office, the opportunity for such persons to present their views, and a 
written determination based upon consideration of each of the factors 
listed in section 404(b)(2) of the Act. This notice must include a 
provision stating that, pursuant to Pub. L. 94-421, a final Postal 
Service determination to close or consolidate a post office may be 
appealed to the Postal Rate Commission at 1333 H Street, NW., Suite 300, 
Washington, DC 20268-0001, within 30 days after the issuance of a 
written determination by the Postal Service. The rules of general 
applicability in subpart A of this part, which do not relate solely to 
evidentiary proceedings on the record, are

[[Page 440]]

also applicable to proceedings subject to this subpart.

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 58 FR 38977, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.111  Initiation of review proceedings.

    (a) Petition for review. Review of a determination of the Postal 
Service to close or consolidate a post office shall be obtained by 
filing a petition for review with the Secretary of this Commission. Such 
petition must be received by the Commission within 30 days after the 
Service has made available to persons served by that post office the 
written determination to close or consolidate required by 39 U.S.C. 
404(b) (3) through (4). The petition shall specify the parties seeking 
review, all of whom must be persons served by the post office proposed 
to be closed or consolidated and shall identify the Postal Service as 
respondent. The Commission encourages parties seeking review to attach a 
copy of the Postal Service written determination, as the appeal process 
is thereby expedited. If two or more persons are entitled to petition 
for review of the same determination and their interests are such as to 
make joinder practicable, they may file a joint petition for review and 
may thereafter proceed as a single petitioner.
    (b) Intervention. A person served by the post office to be closed or 
consolidated pursuant to the Postal Service written determination under 
review who desires to intervene in the proceeding, or any other 
interested person, or any counsel, agent or other person authorized or 
recognized by the Postal Service as such interested person's 
representative or the representative of such interested person's 
recognized group, such as Postmasters, shall file with the Secretary of 
the Commission and serve upon all parties a notice of intervention in a 
form prescribed by Sec. 3001.20. The notice shall contain a concise 
statement of the interest of the moving party and the grounds upon which 
intervention is sought. A notice of intervention shall be filed within 
25 days of the date on which the notice for review is filed. The 
provisions of Sec. 3001.20 (c) through (f) of Subpart A of this part 
shall apply to notices of intervention in review proceedings.

[48 FR 33707, July 25, 1983, as amended at 58 FR 38977, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.112   The record on review.

    The written determination sought to be reviewed or enforced, the 
conclusions and findings upon which it must be based under section 
404(b)(3) of the Act, the notices to local patrons and the evidence 
contained in the entire administrative record before the Postal Service 
shall constitute the record on review. The record shall contain all 
evidence considered by the Postal Service in making its determination 
and shall contain no evidence not previously considered by the Postal 
Service.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.113   Filing of the record.

    (a) Time for filing of the record by the Postal Service. The Postal 
Service shall file the record with the Secretary of the Commission 
within 15 days after the date on which the petition for review is filed 
with the Commission. The Commission may shorten or extend the time 
prescribed above. The Secretary shall give notice to all parties of the 
date on which the record is filed.
    (b) Composition of the filing. The Postal Service may file the 
entire record or such parts thereof as the parties may designate by 
stipulation filed with the Postal Service. The original papers in the 
Postal Service proceeding or certified copies thereof may be filed. All 
parts of the record retained by the Postal Service shall be a part of 
the record on review for all purposes.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.114   Suspension pending review.

    (a) Application. Application for suspension of a determination of 
the Postal Service to close or consolidate any post office pending the 
outcome of an appeal to the Postal Rate Commission shall be made at the 
time of the filing of a petition for review or of the filing of a notice 
of intervention in an extant appellate proceeding. The application shall 
show the reasons for the relief requested and the facts relied upon, and 
if the facts are subject to dispute the application shall be supported 
by affidavits or other sworn statements or copies thereof. The applicant 
must be a

[[Page 441]]

person served by the affected post office. Immediate notice of the 
application shall be given to all parties to the proceeding. The 
application shall be filed with the Secretary of the Commission.
    (b) Answer and filing of the relevant record by the U.S. Postal 
Service. Within 10 days after the application for suspension is filed, 
the Postal Service shall file with the Secretary of the Commission and 
serve on the petitioners an answer to the application supported by 
affidavits or other sworn statements or copies thereof. The Postal 
Service, within 10 days from the date of filing of the application, 
shall file with the Secretary such parts of the record as are relevant 
to the relief sought.

[36 FR 396, Jan. 12, 1971, as amended at 58 FR 38977, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.115  Participant statement or brief.

    (a) Participant statement. Upon the filing of the petition for 
review of a decision to close or consolidate a post office, the 
Secretary shall furnish the petitioner with a copy of PRC Form 61, a 
form designed to permit the appellant to make a concise statement of 
his/her arguments in support of the petition and the instructions 
regarding its use. In addition to eliciting this information, the 
instructions for Form 61 shall provide: (1) Notification that, if the 
appellant prefers, he or she may file a brief as described in paragraph 
(b) of this section presenting the arguments, in lieu of completing PRC 
Form 61; (2) a concise explanation of the purpose of the form; and (3) 
notification that the completed form, or a brief as described in 
paragraph (b) of this section, in lieu thereof, must be filed with the 
Commission not more than 35 days following the date of filing of the 
petition (which date shall be set forth, as it appears in the 
Commission's records).
    (b) Appellant's initial brief. The initial brief of the appellant 
shall be filed with the Secretary of the Commission and served on all 
parties 35 days after the filing of the petition for review of a 
decision to close or consolidate a post office. The brief will be 
limited in length to 30 pages, typewritten and double spaced, and shall 
include the following in the order indicated:
    (1) A subject index with page references, and a list of all cases 
and authorities relied upon, arranged alphabetically, with references to 
the pages where the citation appears (which need not be included in the 
page count);
    (2) A concise statement of the case from the viewpoint of the filing 
participant;
    (3) A clear, concise and definitive statement of the position of the 
author as to the merits of the determination under review;
    (4) A discussion of the evidence, reasons, and authorities relied 
upon with exact references to the record and the authorities; and
    (5) Proposed holding with appropriate references to the record or 
the prior discussion of the evidence and authorities relied upon, and to 
the appellate criteria of section 404(b)(5) of the Act.

Briefs before the Commission shall be completely self-contained and 
shall not incorporate by reference any portion of any other brief, 
pleading or document. Testimony and exhibits shall not be quoted or 
included in briefs except for short excerpts pertinent to the argument 
presented.
    (c) Answering brief of the Postal Service. The answering brief of 
the Postal Service shall be filed 20 days after the date designated for 
filing of the appellant's brief and shall follow the format detailed in 
paragraph (b) of this section.
    (d) Reply by appellant. The appellant may file a written response to 
the brief of the Postal Service 15 days after the date designated for 
filing of that brief, which shall be strictly limited in content to 
reply to arguments made by the Postal Service. If presented as a brief, 
such reply brief shall conform to the format detailed in paragraph (b) 
of this section.
    (e) Intervenor statements or briefs. An intervenor shall file its 
brief within the time allowed for initial and reply, or answering, 
briefs, as appropriate. The Secretary shall furnish to each intervenor a 
copy of PRC Form 61 as soon as intervenor status is granted. If the 
intervenor chooses to file a brief, the

[[Page 442]]

brief shall follow the format detailed in paragraph (b) of this section.

[42 FR 10993, Feb. 25, 1977, as amended at 48 FR 33707, July 25, 1983; 
58 FR 38976, 38977, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.116  Oral argument.

    Oral argument will be held in these appeal cases only when a party 
has made a showing that, owing to unusual circumstances, oral argument 
is a necessary addition to the written filings. Any request for oral 
argument shall be filed within 7 days of the date on which reply briefs 
are due. If a request for oral argument is granted, it will be held at 
the Postal Rate Commission's offices at 1333 H Street, NW., Suite 300, 
Washington, DC 20268-0001.

[48 FR 33708, July 25, 1983, as amended at 58 FR 38977, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.117   Posting of documents by Postal Service for inspection by affected postal patrons.

    In all proceedings conducted pursuant to this subpart H, the Postal 
Service shall cause to be displayed prominently, in the post office or 
offices serving the patrons affected by the determination to close or 
consolidate a post office which is under review, a copy of the service 
list and all pleadings, notices, orders, briefs and opinions filed in 
such proceedings. Failure by the Postal Service to display prominently 
any such document shall be deemed sufficient reason to suspend the 
effectiveness of the Postal Service determination under review until 
final disposition of the appeal.

[42 FR 10993, Feb. 25, 1977. Redesignated at 48 FR 33708, July 25, 1983]


<R04>
  Subpart I--Rules Applicable to Requests for Market Tests of Proposed 
                         Classification Changes

    Source: 61 FR 24454, May 15, 1996, unless otherwise noted.

    Effective Date Note: At 61 FR 24454, May 15, 1996, subpart I 
consisting of Secs. 3001.161 through 3001.166 were added, effective May 
15, 1996 through May 15, 2001.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.161  Applicability.

    (a) This section and Secs. 3001.162 through 3001.166 apply in cases 
in which the Postal Service requests a recommended decision pursuant to 
section 3623 preceded by testing in the market in order to develop 
information necessary to support a permanent change. The requirements 
and procedures specified in these sections apply exclusively to the 
Commission's determination to recommend in favor of or against a market 
test proposed by the Postal Service, and do not supersede any other 
rules applicable to the Postal Service's request for recommendation of a 
permanent change in mail classification. In administering this subpart, 
it shall be the policy of the Commission to recommend market tests that 
are reasonably calculated to produce information needed to support a 
permanent change in mail classification, and that are reasonably limited 
in scope, scale, duration, and potential adverse impact. Except in 
extraordinary circumstances and for good cause shown, the Commission 
shall not recommend market tests of more than one year in duration; 
however, this limitation is not intended to bar the Postal Service from 
conducting more than one market test in support of a potential permanent 
change in mail classification in appropriate circumstances.
    (b) This section and Secs. 3001.162 through 3001.166 are effective 
May 15, 1996 through May 15, 2001.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.162  Filing of market test proposal and supporting direct evidence.

    Whenever the Postal Service determines to request that the 
Commission submit a recommended decision on a change in mail 
classification preceded by testing in the market, the Postal Service 
shall file with the Commission, in addition to its request for a 
permanent change in mail classification pursuant to section 3623, a 
request for a recommended decision in favor of its proposed market test 
of the requested change in mail classification. Each formal request 
filed under this subpart shall include such information and data and 
such statements of reasons and bases as are necessary and appropriate 
fully to inform the Commission and the parties of the nature, scope, 
significance and impact of the proposed

[[Page 443]]

market test, and to show that it is in the public interest and in 
accordance with the policies of the Act and the applicable criteria of 
the Act. Each formal request shall also include the following particular 
information:
    (a) A description of the services to be provided in the market test, 
and the relationship between the services to be provided and the 
permanent change or changes in the mail classification schedule 
requested by the Postal Service;
    (b) A statement of each rate or fee to be charged for each service 
to be provided during the market test, together with all information 
relied upon to establish consistency of those rates and fees with the 
factors specified in section 3622(b);
    (c) A description of the number and extent of the service areas in 
which the market test will be conducted, including the number and type 
of postal facilities which will be used;
    (d) A statement of the planned duration of the market test;
    (e) Proposed Domestic Mail Classification Schedule provisions which 
incorporate the information required in paragraphs (a) through (d) of 
this section;
    (f) A statement of the goals and objectives of the proposed market 
test, supported by quantitative projections of anticipated results to 
the extent practicable.
    (g) A statement of those features of the proposed market test that, 
in the opinion of the Postal Service, cannot be modified without 
significantly impairing the value of the test;
    (h) An estimate of the number of customers who will participate in 
the market test to the extent that such an estimate is practicable, 
together with a description of the means by which the Postal Service 
plans to provide equal access to all potential users in the test market 
service areas; and
    (i) A plan for testing the proposed change or changes in the market, 
including a plan for gathering the data needed to support a permanent 
change in mail classification and for reporting the test data to the 
Commission. If periodic reporting of the test data would be harmful to 
the purposes of the test, such as by revealing information that might 
encourage competitors or mailers to take actions that would affect the 
test results, the plan may provide for presentation of the test data as 
part of the subsequent filing of data supporting a permanent mail 
classification change.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.163  Procedures--expedition of public notice and procedural schedule.

    (a) The purpose of this section is to provide a schedule for 
expediting proceedings in which the Postal Service proposes to conduct a 
market test of a requested change in mail classification it has 
submitted to the Commission pursuant to section 3623.
    (b) Persons who are interested in participating in proceedings to 
consider Postal Service requests to conduct a market test may register 
at any time with the Secretary of the Postal Rate Commission, who shall 
maintain a publicly available list of the names and business addresses 
of all such registrants. Persons whose names appear on this list will 
automatically become parties to each proceeding in which the Postal 
Service requests to conduct a market test pursuant to this subpart. 
Other interested persons may intervene pursuant to Sec. 3001.20 within 
28 days after the filing of a formal request made under the provisions 
of this subpart. Parties may withdraw from the register or a particular 
case by filing a notice with the Secretary of the Commission.
    (c) When the Postal Service files a request under the provisions of 
this subpart, it shall on that same day effect service by hand delivery 
of the complete filing to each person registered pursuant to paragraph 
(b) who maintains an address for service within the Washington 
metropolitan area and serve the complete filing by Express Mail service 
on all other registrants. Each registrant is responsible for insuring 
that his or her address remains current.
    (d) When the Postal Service files a request under the provisions of 
this subpart, it shall on that same day send by Express Mail to all 
participants in the most recent omnibus rate case a notice which briefly 
describes its proposal. This notice shall indicate on its

[[Page 444]]

first page that it is a notice of a Market Test Request to be considered 
under Secs. 3001.161 through 3001.166, and identify the last day for 
filing a notice of intervention with the Commission.
    (e) Within 5 days after receipt of a Postal Service request under 
the provisions of this subpart, the Commission shall issue a notice of 
proceeding and provide for intervention by interested parties pursuant 
to Sec. 3001.20. In the event that a party wishes to dispute a genuine 
issue of material fact to be resolved in the consideration of the Postal 
Service's request, that party shall file with the Commission a request 
for a hearing within the time allowed in the notice of proceeding. The 
request for a hearing shall state with specificity the fact or facts set 
forth in the Postal Service's filing that the party disputes, and when 
possible, what the party believes to be the true fact or facts and the 
evidence it intends to provide in support of its position. The 
Commission will hold hearings on a Postal Service request made pursuant 
to this subpart when it determines that there is a genuine issue of 
material fact to be resolved, and that a hearing is needed to resolve 
that issue.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.164  Rule for decision.

    The Commission will issue a decision on the Postal Service's 
proposed market test in accordance with the policies of the Postal 
Reorganization Act, but will not recommend modification of any feature 
of the proposed market test which the Postal Service has identified in 
accordance with Sec. 3001.162(g). The purpose of this subpart is to 
allow for consideration of proposed market tests within 90 days, 
consistent with the procedural due process rights of interested persons.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.165  Data collection and reporting requirements.

    In any case in which the Commission has issued a recommended 
decision in favor of a market test requested by the Postal Service, and 
the Board of Governors has put the market test recommended by the 
Commission into effect, the Postal Service shall gather test data and 
report them to the Commission in accordance with the plan submitted 
pursuant to Sec.  3001.162(h). If the Postal Service's plan for 
reporting test data does not provide for periodic reporting during the 
conduct of the test, the Postal Service shall submit all test data to 
the Commission no later than 60 days following the conclusion of the 
test.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.166  Suspension, continuation or termination of proceeding.

    (a) In any case in which the Commission has issued a recommended 
decision in favor of a market test requested by the Postal Service, and 
the Board of Governors has put the market test recommended by the 
Commission into effect, the Postal Service may move for suspension of 
the proceeding in which its request for a permanent change in mail 
classification is to be considered. The Commission shall grant the 
Postal Service's motion for suspension if, in the Commission's opinion, 
it would be reasonable under the circumstances to defer consideration of 
the request until the information to be produced in connection with the 
market test becomes available.
    (b) At any time during the pendency of a market test recommended by 
the Commission pursuant to this subpart, or following the completion of 
such a market test, the Postal Service may move to revise or withdraw 
its request for a permanent change in mail classification. If the Postal 
Service moves to revise its request, it shall file with the Commission 
all data necessary to support its amended request. If the Postal Service 
moves to withdraw its request, it shall explain the circumstances 
leading to its motion, but need not produce the test data that would 
otherwise be submitted pursuant to Sec. 3001.165.


<R04>
Subpart J--Rules Applicable to Requests for Provisional Service Changes 
                           of Limited Duration

    Source: 61 FR 24456, May 15, 1996, unless otherwise noted.

    Effective Date Note: At 61 FR 24456, May 15, 1996, subpart J 
consisting of Secs. 3001.171 through 3001.176 were added, effective May 
15, 1996 through May 15, 2001.

[[Page 445]]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.171  Applicability.

    (a) This section and Secs. 3001.172 through 3001.176 apply in cases 
in which the Postal Service requests that the Commission recommend the 
establishment of a provisional service which will supplement, but will 
not alter, existing mail classifications and rates for a limited and 
fixed duration. The requirements and procedures specified in these 
sections apply exclusively to the Commission's determination to 
recommend in favor of or against a provisional service proposed by the 
Postal Service, and do not supersede the rules applicable to requests 
for permanent changes in rates, fees, mail classifications, and in the 
nature of postal services. In administering this subpart, it shall be 
the policy of the Commission to recommend the introduction of 
provisional services that enhance the range of postal services available 
to the public, without producing a material adverse effect overall on 
postal revenues or costs, and without causing unnecessary or 
unreasonable harm to competitors of the Postal Service. Except in 
extraordinary circumstances and for good cause shown, the Commission 
shall not recommend provisional services of more than two years in 
duration; however, the Commission may grant a request to extend a 
provisional service for an additional year if a Postal Service request 
to establish the provisional service as a permanent mail classification 
is pending before the Commission.
    (b) This section and Secs. 3001.172 through 3001.176 are effective 
May 15, 1996 through May 15, 2001.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.172  Filing of formal request and prepared direct evidence.

    (a) Whenever the Postal Service determines to request that the 
Commission submit a decision recommending the establishment of a 
provisional service of limited and fixed duration, it shall file a 
request for a change in mail classification pursuant to section 3623 
that comports with the requirements of this subpart and of subpart C of 
this part. Each formal request shall include the following particular 
information:
    (1) A description of the proposed classification, including proposed 
Domestic Mail Classification Schedule language and rate schedules;
    (2) A statement of the goals and objectives of introducing the 
proposed provisional service, supported by quantitative projections of 
anticipated results to the extent practicable.
    (3) A statement of those features of the proposed provisional 
service that, in the opinion of the Postal Service, cannot be modified 
without significantly reducing the benefits of introducing the proposed 
service;
    (4) An explanation and complete documentation of the development of 
the rates proposed for the provisional service;
    (5) A termination date on which the proposed provisional service 
will be discontinued;
    (6) An estimate of the effect of implementing the proposed 
provisional service on overall Postal Service costs and revenues during 
the period in which it is in effect; and
    (7) A plan for meeting the data collection and reporting 
requirements specified in Sec. 3001.175.
    (b) If the Postal Service believes that data required to be filed 
under Sec. 3001.64 are unavailable, it shall explain their 
unavailability, as required by Sec. 3001.64 (a)(2)(i), (ii), and (iv). 
In particular, if the provisional character of the request bears on the 
unavailability of the data in question, the Postal Service shall explain 
in detail the nexus between these circumstances. A satisfactory 
explanation of the unavailability of data will be grounds for excluding 
from the proceeding a contention that the absence of the data should 
form a basis for rejection of the request, unless the party desiring to 
make such contention:
    (1) Demonstrates that, having regard to all the facts and 
circumstances of the case, it was clearly unreasonable for the Postal 
Service to propose the change in question without having first secured 
the data which are unavailable, or
    (2) Demonstrates other compelling circumstances requiring that the 
absence of the data in question be treated as bearing on the merits of 
the proposal.

[[Page 446]]


<R05>
Sec. 3001.173  Procedures--expedition of public notice and procedural schedule.

    (a) The purpose of this section is to provide a schedule for 
expediting proceedings in which the Postal Service requests that the 
Commission recommend the establishment of a provisional service which 
will supplement, but will not alter, existing mail classifications and 
rates for a limited and fixed duration.
    (b) Persons who are interested in participating in proceedings to 
consider Postal Service requests to establish a provisional service may 
register at any time with the Secretary of the Postal Rate Commission, 
who shall maintain a publicly available list of the names and business 
addresses of all such registrants. Persons whose names appear on this 
list will automatically become parties to each proceeding in which the 
Postal Service requests establishment of a provisional service pursuant 
to this subpart. Other interested persons may intervene pursuant to 
Sec. 3001.20 within 28 days after the filing of a formal request made 
under the provisions of this subpart. Parties may withdraw from the 
register or a particular case by filing a notice with the Secretary of 
the Commission.
    (c) When the Postal Service files a request under the provisions of 
this subpart, it shall on that same day effect service by hand delivery 
of the complete filing to each person registered pursuant to paragraph 
(b) of this section who maintains an address for service within the 
Washington metropolitan area and serve the complete filing by Express 
Mail service on all other registrants. Each registrant is responsible 
for insuring that his or her address remains current.
    (d) When the Postal Service files a request under the provisions of 
this subpart, it shall on that same day send by Express Mail service to 
all participants in the most recent omnibus rate case a notice which 
briefly describes its proposal. Such notice shall indicate on its first 
page that it is a notice of a Request for Establishment of a Provisional 
Service to be considered under Secs. 3001.171 through 3001.176, and 
identify the last day for filing a notice of intervention with the 
Commission.
    (e) Within 5 days after receipt of a Postal Service request under 
the provisions of this subpart, the Commission shall issue a notice of 
proceeding and provide for intervention by interested parties pursuant 
to Sec. 3001.20. In the event that a party wishes to dispute a genuine 
issue of material fact to be resolved in the consideration of the Postal 
Service's request, that party shall file with the Commission a request 
for a hearing within the time allowed in the notice of proceeding. The 
request for a hearing shall state with specificity the fact or facts set 
forth in the Postal Service's filing that the party disputes, and when 
possible, what the party believes to be the true fact or facts and the 
evidence it intends to provide in support of its position. The 
Commission will hold hearings on a Postal Service request made pursuant 
to this subpart when it determines that there is a genuine issue of 
material fact to be resolved, and that a hearing is needed to resolve 
that issue.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.174  Rule for decision.

    The Commission will issue a decision on the Postal Service's 
proposed provisional service in accordance with the policies of the 
Postal Reorganization Act, but will not recommend modification of any 
feature of the proposed service which the Postal Service has identified 
in accordance with Sec. 3001.172(a)(3). The purpose of this subpart is 
to allow for consideration of proposed provisional services within 90 
days, consistent with the procedural due process rights of interested 
persons.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.175  Data collection and reporting requirements.

    In any case in which the Commission has issued a recommended 
decision in favor of a provisional service of limited duration requested 
by the Postal Service, and the Board of Governors has put the 
provisional service recommended by the Commission into effect, the 
Postal Service shall collect and report data pertaining to the 
provisional service during the period in which it is in effect in 
accordance with the periodic reporting requirements specified in

[[Page 447]]

Sec. 3001.102. If the Postal Service's regular data reporting systems 
are not revised to include the provisional service during the period of 
its effectiveness, the Postal Service shall perform, and provide to the 
Commission on a schedule corresponding to Sec. 3001.102 reports, special 
studies to provide equivalent information to the extent reasonably 
practicable.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.176  Continuation or termination of provisional service.

    At any time during the period in which a provisional service 
recommended by the Commission and implemented by the Board of Governors 
is in effect, the Postal Service may submit a formal request that the 
provisional service be terminated, or that it be established, either as 
originally recommended by the Commission or in modified form, as a 
permanent mail classification. Following the conclusion of the period in 
which the provisional service was effective, the Postal Service may 
submit a request to establish the service as a mail classification under 
any applicable subpart of the Commission's rules.


<R04>
           Subpart K--Rules for Use of Multi-Year Test Periods

    Source: 61 FR 24457, May 15, 1996, unless otherwise noted.

    Effective Date Note: At 61 FR 24457, May 15, 1996, subpart K 
consisting of Secs. 3001.181 through 3001.182 were added, effective May 
15, 1996 through May 15, 2001.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.181  Use of multi-year test period for proposed new services.

    (a) The rules in Secs. 3001.181 and 3001.182 apply to Postal Service 
requests pursuant to section 3623 for the establishment of a new postal 
service, with attendant rates, which in the estimation of the Postal 
Service cannot generate sufficient volumes and revenues to recover all 
costs associated with the new service in the first full fiscal year of 
its operation. In administering these rules, it shall be the 
Commission's policy to adopt test periods of up to 5 fiscal years for 
the purpose of determining breakeven for newly introduced postal 
services where the Postal Service has presented substantial evidence in 
support of the test period proposed.
    (b) This section and Sec. 3001.182 are effective May 15, 1996 
through May 15, 2001.


<R05>
Sec. 3001.182  Filing of formal request and prepared direct evidence.

    In filing a request for establishment of a new postal service 
pursuant to section 3623, the Postal Service may request that its 
proposal be considered for a test period of longer duration than the 
test period prescribed in Sec. 3001.54(f)(2). Each such request shall be 
supported by the following information:
    (a) The testimony of a witness on behalf of the Postal Service, who 
shall provide:
    (1) A complete definition of the multi-year test period requested 
for the proposed new service;
    (2) A detailed explanation of the Postal Service's preference of a 
multi-year test period, including the bases of the Service's 
determination that the test period prescribed in Sec. 3001.54(f)(2) 
would be inappropriate; and
    (3) A complete description of the Postal Service's plan for 
achieving an appropriate contribution to institutional costs from the 
new service by the end of the requested test period.
    (b) Complete documentary support for, and detail underlying, the 
test period requested by the Postal Service, including:
    (1) Estimated costs, revenues, and volumes of the proposed new 
service for the entire requested test period;
    (2) Return on Investment projections and all other financial 
analyses prepared in connection with determining the cost and revenue 
impact of the proposed new service; and
    (3) Any other analyses prepared by the Postal Service that bear on 
the overall effects of introducing the proposed new service during the 
requested test period.


<R03>
PART 3002--ORGANIZATION--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
3002.1  Purpose.
3002.2  The Commission and its offices.
3002.3  Administrative Office.

[[Page 448]]

3002.4  Office of Technical Analysis and Planning.
3002.5  Office of Administrative Law Judges.
3002.6  Office of the General Counsel.
3002.7  Office of the Consumer Advocate.
3002.8  Official seal.

Appendix A to Part 3002

    Authority: 84 Stat. 759, 39 U.S.C. 3603; Freedom of Information Act, 
5 U.S.C. 552, 81 Stat. 54.


<R05>
Sec. 3002.1   Purpose.

    This part is published in compliance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a)(1) and 
constitutes a general description of the Postal Rate Commission.

[36 FR 21994, Nov. 18, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 3002.2  The Commission and its offices.

    (a) The Commissioners. The Postal Rate Commission is an independent 
establishment of the executive branch of the U.S. Government created by 
the Postal Reorganization Act (84 Stat. 719, title 39, U.S.C.). The 
Commission consists of five Commissioners appointed by the President and 
confirmed by the Senate, one of whom is designated as Chairman by the 
President.
    (b) The Chairman and Vice-Chairman. The Chairman has the 
administrative responsibility for assigning the business of the 
Commission to the other Commissioners and to the offices and employees 
of the Commission. He/She has the administrative duty to preside at the 
meetings and sessions of the Commision and to represent the Commission 
in matters specified by statute or executive order or as the Commission 
directs. The Commission shall elect annually a member of the Commission 
to serve as Vice-Chairman of the Commission for a term of one year or 
until a successor is elected. In case of a vacancy in the Office of the 
Chairman of the Commission, or in the absence or inability of the 
Chairman to serve, the Vice-Chairman, unless otherwise directed by the 
Chairman, shall have the administrative responsibilities and duties of 
the Chairman during the period of vacancy, absence, or inability.

[48 FR 13167, Mar. 30, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 3002.3  Administrative Office.

    (a) The incumbent head of the office is responsible for exercising 
two executive functions of the Commission and utilizes the title of 
either ``Secretary'' or ``Chief Administrative Officer'', as 
appropriate.
    (b) As Secretary of the Commission, the incumbent head shall have 
custody of the Commission's seal, the minutes of all action taken by the 
Commission, its rules and regulations, its administrative and other 
orders, and records. All orders and other actions of the Commission 
shall be authenticated or signed by the Secretary or any such other 
person as may be authorized by the Commission.
    (c) As Chief Administrative Officer the incumbent head is also 
responsible, subject to the policy guidelines of the Commission, for: 
Development, implementation, and administration of the Commission's 
financial management system and accounting activities including those 
relating to the budget and the payroll; development and administration 
in conjunction with the Personnel Officer of a personnel program 
designed to meet the needs of the Commission and its employees; 
development and administration, subject to the supervision of the 
Chairman, of a public information program appropriate to the agency 
mission; provision of facilities and operating and support services 
essential to the efficent and effective conduct of operations; 
acquisition, planning and assignment of office space; procurement and 
supply; serving as the contracting officer for the Commission and 
controlling the obligation of Commission funds, as authorized by the 
Commission.
    (d) The personnel management functions set out above are the 
immediate responsibility of the Personnel Officer, whose position is 
located in the Administrative Office.

[48 FR 13167, Mar. 30, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 3002.4  Office of Technical Analysis and Planning.

    (a) The Office of Technical Analysis and Planning is responsible for 
technical (as opposed to legal) analysis and the formulation of policy 
recommendations for the Commission.

[[Page 449]]

    (b) This office provides the analytic support to the Commission for 
reviewing the record of rate and classification requests, post office 
closings and other issues which come before the Commission. The 
functional areas of expertise within this office are:
    (1) The economic analysis of the market for postal services 
including the alternative sources for such services and the users of the 
service;
    (2) The analysis of the operational characteristics of the postal 
system and its interface with various segments of the economy; and,
    (3) The analysis of the costs of operating the Postal Service and 
how such costs are influenced by the operational characteristics.
    (c) These functional activities are combined in the evaluation of 
the revenue requirements of the Postal Service under possible 
alternative operating circumstances for the purpose of developing rate 
structures. They are also used to evaluate the impact of various 
proposed changes to the Domestic Mail Classification Schedule and the 
consequences of these changes upon the mailers and upon the revenue 
requirements and rate structure of the Postal Service.
    (d) The office also collects, analyzes and periodically summarizes 
financial and various other statistical information for use in its 
ongoing activities and for the development of future methods, techniques 
and systems of analysis and reporting.

[48 FR 13168, Mar. 30, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 3002.5  Office of Administrative Law Judges.

    The Office of Administrative Law Judges is responsible for 
discharging the functions and exercising the powers of such 
Administrative Law Judges as the Commission may from time to time 
employ, in hearings, and in accordance with the provisions of sections 
556 and 557 of the Administrative Procedures Act (5 U.S.C. 556 and 557).

[48 FR 13168, Mar. 30, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 3002.6  Office of the General Counsel.

    The General Counsel directs and coordinates the functions of the 
Office of the General Counsel and is directly responsible for the 
counseling and advisory services set forth in 39 CFR 3000.735-203. In 
accordance with Sec. 3001.8 of the rules of practice, the General 
Counsel does not appear as an attorney in hearings in any proceeding 
before the Commission and takes no part in the preparation of evidence 
or argument presented in such hearings. The General Counsel represents 
the Commission in court proceedings and performs legal research on 
issues coming before the Commission; advises the Commission on the legal 
aspects of proposed legislation and rulemaking, the legal aspects of 
proposed action and policies on procurement, contracting, personnel 
matters, and other internal legal questions.

[48 FR 13168, Mar. 30, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 3002.7  Office of the Consumer Advocate.

    (a) The Office of the Consumer Advocate provides representation for 
the interests of the general public in Commission proceedings. The 
office prepares and litigates before the Commission legal and 
evidentiary presentations in all formal Commission dockets under chapter 
36 of title 39, U.S. Code. It also is responsible for maintaining a 
continuing litigation capability including preparation for consideration 
of issues likely to reflect the interests of the general public in 
subsequent proceedings.
    (b) The head of this office is responsible for directing both legal 
and technical personnel to fulfill its functions. The office includes 
both litigation attorneys and a broad spectrum of technical expertise to 
analyze and evaluate the diverse economic, cost and market issues before 
the Commission. During the pendency of a proceeding, personnel serving 
in the Office of the Consumer Advocate are prohibited from participating 
or advising as to any intermediate or Commission decision in that 
proceeding pursuant to the Commission Rules of Practice.
    (c) A policy statement regarding the Office of the Consumer Advocate 
is contained as appendix A to this part.

[48 FR 13168, Mar. 30, 1983]

[[Page 450]]


<R05>
Sec. 3002.8   Official seal.

    (a) Authority. The Seal described in this section is hereby 
established as the official seal of the Postal Rate Commission.
    (b) Description. (1) On a white disc within a blue border with inner 
and outer rims gold and inscribed at top POSTAL RATE COMMISSION and in 
base, between two small five-pointed stars, 1970, all in gold, the 
shield of the coat of arms in full color blazoned as follows:

    Five blue stars on a white stripe running from the upper left to the 
lower right of the shield, with three white billets on each of the upper 
and lower sections of the shield, the former blue and the latter red.

    (2) The official seal of the Postal Rate Commission is modified when 
reproduced in black and white and when embossed, as it appears in this 
section.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC21OC91.065

    (c) Custody and authorization to affix. (1) The seal is the official 
emblem of the Postal Rate Commission and its use is therefore permitted 
only as provided in this part.
    (2) The seal shall be kept in the custody of the Secretary and is to 
be used to authenticate records of the Postal Rate Commission and for 
other official purposes.
    (3) Use by any person or organization outside of the Commission may 
be made only with the Commission's prior written approval. Such request 
must be made in writing to the Secretary.

[39 FR 2481, Jan. 22, 1974. Redesignated at 42 FR 3646, Jan. 19, 1977, 
and 48 FR 13168, Mar. 30, 1983]

                         Appendix A to Part 3002

    (The following policy statement regarding the Office of the Consumer 
Advocate (formerly Office of the Officer of the Commission) was adopted 
by the Commission and published at 47 FR 25523, June 14, 1982.)
    1. The officer of the Commission appointed under 39 U.S.C. 3624(a) 
shall be appointed from the Office of the Consumer Advocate and shall 
assist, using the means and procedures available to parties before the 
Commission, to develop a complete and accurate record by:
    (a) Identifying information or data that are needed in addition to 
those presented by other parties;
    (b) Identifying inaccuracies or fallacies in submitted data or 
information; and
    (c) Sponsoring relevant and material evidence which presents needed 
data or information, which critiques record evidence, or which supports 
proposals of the officer or other participants not inconsistent with 
Commission precedents and judicial decisions reviewing Commission 
precedents. The preceding shall not preclude the officer from offering 
testimony on a methodology which the Commission has previously 
considered but not adopted, if a fair reading of the Commission 
opinion(s) concerned shows that such methodology offers potential 
benefits and new data are available to remedy any defects cited by the 
Commission.
    2. To argue for equity on behalf of the general public and 
principally those segments of the general public who are not otherwise 
represented in PRC proceedings. In so doing, the officer shall consider 
both long and short term consequences.
    3. During the course of proceedings the officer, in accordance with 
Commission rules, shall maintain complete independence from the members 
of the Commission and the agency's advisory staff.

[48 FR 13168, Mar. 30, 1983]


<R03>
PART 3003--PRIVACY ACT RULES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
3003.1  Purpose and scope.
3003.2  Definitions.
3003.3  Procedures for requests pertaining to individual records in a 
          record system.
3003.4  Times, places, and requirements for identification of 
          individuals making requests.
3003.5  Disclosure of requested information to individuals.
3003.6  Special procedures: medical records.
3003.7  Request for correction or amendment to record.
3003.8  Agency review of request for correction or amendment of record.

[[Page 451]]

3003.9  Appeal of initial adverse agency determination on correction or 
          amendment.
3003.10  Disclosure of record to person other than the individual to 
          whom it pertains.
3003.11  Fees.
3003.12--3003.13  [Reserved]
3003.14  Specific exemptions.

    Authority: Privacy Act of 1974 (Pub. L. 93-579), 5 U.S.C. 522a.

    Source: 40 FR 38154, Aug. 27, 1975, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 3003.1   Purpose and scope.

    This part is published in compliance with the Privacy Act of 1974 
(Pub. L. 93-579). It establishes procedures, consistent with the 
purposes of the Act, by which individuals may safeguard their privacy by 
obtaining access to, and requesting amendments or corrections in, 
information about them which is under the Commission's control.


<R05>
Sec. 3003.2   Definitions.

    For purposes of this part:
    (a) Commission means The Postal Rate Commission.
    (b) Act means the Privacy Act of 1974 (Pub. L. 93-579).
    (c) Individual means a citizen of the United States or an alien 
lawfully admitted for permanent residence.
    (d) Maintain, used with reference to a record means to collect, to 
use, to disseminate, to have control over and responsibility for such 
record.
    (e) Record means any item, collection or grouping of information 
about an individual that is maintained by the Commission and that is 
retrievable by his or her name or an identifying particular, such as a 
number, symbol, fingerprint, or photograph, of the individual. 
Information maintained by the Commission includes but is not limited to, 
education, financial transactions, medical history, employment history 
and criminal history.
    (f) Routine use means, with respect to the disclosure of a record, 
the use of such a record for a purpose which is compatible with the 
purpose for which it was collected. The routine uses of record systems 
maintained by the Commission were established pursuant to notice in the 
Federal Register.
    (g) System of records means a group of any records under the control 
of the Commission from which information about an individual is 
retrievable by his or her name or by some identifying particular.


<R05>
Sec. 3003.3   Procedures for requests pertaining to individual records in a record system.

    (a)(1) An individual who wishes to know whether a system of records 
maintained by the Commission contains a record or records pertaining to 
him or her shall file a written inquiry to this effect with the Chief 
Administrative Officer of the Commission at the Commission's business 
address. The request shall clearly state on the outside of the envelope 
and in the body that it is a Privacy Act request.
    (2) The Chief Administrative Officer shall respond within 10 days of 
receipt of such an inquiry (exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and legal 
holidays) informing the individual whether a system of records 
maintained by the Commission contains such a record or records.
    (b) After an accounting of disclosures has been kept, an individual 
may request an accounting of disclosures of his or her record or records 
made within the immediately preceding year, except for those made:
    (1) To those officers and employees of the Commission who have a 
need for the record in the performance of their duties;
    (2) Required under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552);
    (3) To another agency or to an instrumentality of any governmental 
jurisdiction within or under the control of the United States for a 
civil or criminal law enforcement activity if the activity is authorized 
by law, and if the head of the agency or instrumentality has made a 
written request to the Commission specifying the particular portion 
desired and the law enforcement activity for which the record is sought.

Such a request shall be addressed in writing to the Chief Administrative 
Officer.
    (c)(1) An individual who desires to gain access to any record 
pertaining to him or her contained in a system of records maintained by 
the Commission shall file a written request with the Chief 
Administrative Officer at the Commission's business address.

[[Page 452]]

    (2) The written request shall state whether the individual intends 
to appear in person at the Commission's offices or whether he desires to 
receive a copy of the record or records pertaining to him or her through 
the mails.


<R05>
Sec. 3003.4   Times, places, and requirements for identification of individuals making requests.

    (a) An individual appearing in person pursuant to paragraph (c) of 
Sec. 3003.3, shall:
    (1) Appear at the Commission's business offices between the hours of 
8 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on any day except Saturdays, Sundays, and legal 
holidays;
    (2) Present suitable identification, such as a driver's license, 
employee identification card, or Medicare card;
    (3) If accompanied by another individual of his or her choosing, 
provide a written statement authorizing discussion of his or her record 
in the presence of the accompanying individual,
    (b) An individual who files a request through the mails pursuant to 
paragraph (c) of Sec. 3003.3 of this part shall include his or her date 
of birth and other suitable proof of identity, such as a facsimile of a 
driver's license, employee identification card, Medicare card.

[40 FR 38154, Aug. 27, 1975, as amended at 41 FR 52455, Nov. 30, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 3003.5   Disclosure of requested information to individuals.

    An individual who has filed a request in accordance with Sec. 3003.4 
shall be permitted to review the record or records pertaining to him or 
her and to have all or any portion thereof copied. Review of Commission 
records pursuant to Sec. 3003.4(a) will be conducted in the presence of 
a representative of the Commission.


<R05>
Sec. 3003.6   Special procedures: medical records.

    An individual who requests access to records containing medical 
information about himself or herself shall provide the Chief 
Administrative Officer with the name of a licensed medical practitioner. 
If in the Chief Administrative Officer's judgment transmission of the 
medical information to the individual could have an adverse effect upon 
him or her, the information will be transmitted directly to the named 
medical practitioner.


<R05>
Sec. 3003.7   Request for correction or amendment to record.

    (a) An individual may request that a record or records pertaining to 
him or her be amended or corrected. Such requests shall be submitted in 
writing to the Chief Administrative Officer at the Commission's business 
address.
    (b) An individual requesting amendment of a record or records 
pertaining to him or her shall furnish suitable identification, as 
provided in Sec. 3003.4(a)(2) and (b).
    (c) A request for amendment shall contain an exact description of 
the item or items sought to be amended and specific reasons for the 
requested amendment.


<R05>
Sec. 3003.8   Agency review of request for correction or amendment of record.

    (a) Within 10 days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal 
holidays) after receipt of a request to amend a record, the Chief 
Administrative Officer shall transmit to the requester a written 
acknowledgment of receipt of the request. Such an acknowledgment may, if 
necessary, request any additional information needed to make a 
determination on the request. No acknowledgment is required if the 
request can be reviewed, processed, and the individual notified of 
compliance or denial within the ten-day period.
    (b) The Chief Administrative Officer shall promptly review the 
record upon receipt of a request for amendment thereof.
    (c) If the Chief Administrative Officer determines that the 
requested amendment is appropriate to insure that the record is:
    (1) Relevant and necessary to accomplish the purposes of chapter 36 
of title 39, U.S.C.; and
    (2) As accurate, timely and complete as is reasonably necessary to 
assure fairness to the requester, the Chief Administrative Officer 
shall:
    (i) Change the record accordingly;
    (ii) Advise the requester that the change has been made and transmit 
a copy of the revision to him or her; and

[[Page 453]]

    (iii) After an accounting of disclosures has been kept pursuant to 5 
U.S.C. 552a(c), advise all previous recipients of the record of the fact 
that the amendment was made and the substance of the amendment.
    (d) If, after review of the record, the Chief Administrative Officer 
determines that the requested amendment is not in conformity with the 
requirements of the Act, he shall:
    (1) Advise the requester in writing of such determination, together 
with the specific reasons therefor; and
    (2) Inform the requester that further review of the request by the 
Chairman of the Commission is available if a written request therefor is 
made.


<R05>
Sec. 3003.9   Appeal of initial adverse agency determination on correction or amendment.

    (a) Within 30 days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal 
holidays) of receipt of a written request for review pursuant to 
Sec. 3003.8(d)(2), the Chairman shall make an independent review of the 
record, using the criteria of Sec. 3003.8(c) (1) and (2). If the 
Chairman determines that the record should be amended in accordance with 
the request, the Chief Administrative Officer shall:
    (1) Change the record accordingly;
    (2) Advise the requester that the change has been made; and
    (3) After an accounting of disclosures has been kept pursuant to 5 
U.S.C. 552a(c), advise all previous recipients of the record of the fact 
that the amendment was made and the substance of the amendment.
    (b) If the Chairman, after independent review, determines that the 
record should not be amended in accordance with the request, the Chief 
Administrative Officer shall advise the requester:
    (1) Of the determination and the reasons therefor:
    (2) Of his or her right to file with the Chief Administrative 
Officer a concise statement of his or her reasons for disagreeing with 
the refusal to amend the record:
    (3) That the record will be annotated to indicate to anyone 
subsequently having access to it that a statement of disagreement has 
been filed, and that the statement will be made available to anyone to 
whom the record is disclosed;
    (4) That the Chairman and the Chief Administrative Officer may, in 
their discretion, include a brief summary of their reasons for refusing 
to amend the record whenever such disclosure is made;
    (5) That any prior recipients of the disputed record will be sent a 
copy of the statement of disagreement, after an accounting of 
disclosures has been kept pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 552a(c);
    (6) Of his or her right to seek judicial review of the refusal to 
amend the record, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 552a(g)(1)(A).


<R05>
Sec. 3003.10   Disclosure of record to person other than the individual to whom it pertains.

    Commission employees or officers who have possession of or access to 
individuals' records may be subject to criminal penalties pursuant to 5 
U.S.C. 552a(i)(1) for disclosure thereof without the prior written 
consent of the individuals to whom the records pertain unless disclosure 
is:
    (a) To those officers and employees of the Commission who have a 
need for the record in the performance of their duties;
    (b) Required under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552);
    (c) For a routine use as defined in Sec. 3003.2(f);
    (d) To the Bureau of the Census for purposes of planning or carrying 
out a census or survey or related activity pursuant to the provisions of 
title 13;
    (e) To a recipient who has provided the agency with advance adequate 
written assurance that the record will be used solely as a statistical 
research or reporting record, and the record is to be transferred in a 
form that is not individually identifiable;
    (f) To the National Archives of the United States as a record which 
has sufficient historical or other value to warrant its continued 
preservation by the U.S. Government, or for evaluation by the 
Administrator of General Services or his designee to determine whether 
the record has such value;
    (g) To another agency or to an instrumentality of any governmental 
jurisdiction within or under the control

[[Page 454]]

of the United States for a civil or criminal law enforcement activity if 
the activity is authorized by law, and if the head of the agency which 
maintains the record has made a written request to the Commission 
specifying the particular portion desired and the law enforcement 
activity for which the record is sought;
    (h) To a person pursuant to a showing of compelling circumstances 
affecting the health or safety of an individual if upon such disclosure 
notification is transmitted to the last known address of such 
individual;
    (i) To either House of Congress, or, to the extent of matter within 
its jurisdiction, any committee or subcommittee thereof, any joint 
committee of Congress or subcommittee of any such joint committee;
    (j) To the Comptroller General, or any of his authorized 
representatives, in the course of the performance of the duties of the 
General Accounting Office; or
    (k) Pursuant to the order of a court of competent jurisdiction.


<R05>
Sec. 3003.11   Fees.

    There shall be no charge for the first copy of any records furnished 
pursuant to Secs. 3003.5 and 3003.6. Additional copies will be charged 
at the cost of reproduction.
Secs. 3003.12--3003.13  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 3003.14   Specific exemptions.

    The Postal Rate Commission has not established any system of records 
to be exempted from the provisions of Secs. 3003.3, 3003.4, 3003.5, 
3003.6, 3003.7, 3003.8, 3003.9, and 3003.11 of this part.

[41 FR 52455, Nov. 30, 1976]
[[Page 455]]


<R02>
                              FINDING AIDS


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts and 
an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in 
the CFR Index and Finding Aids volume to the Code of Federal Regulations 
which is published separately and revised annually.

  Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference
  Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
  Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
  List of CFR Sections Affected

[[Page 457]]

            Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference

                      (Revised as of July 1, 1997)

  The Director of the Federal Register has approved under 5 U.S.C. 
552(a) and 1 CFR Part 51 the incorporation by reference of the following 
publications. This list contains only those incorporations by reference 
effective as of the revision date of this volume. Incorporations by 
reference found within a regulation are effective upon the effective 
date of that regulation. For more information on incorporation by 
reference, see the preliminary pages of this volume.


39 CFR CHAPTER I

POSTAL SERVICE
                                                                  39 CFR


United States Postal Service

  Washington, D.C. 20260
Domestic Mail Manual, (most recent amendment                111.1; 111.3
  published in the Federal Register on May 5, 
  1994).
International Mail Manual, (most recent amendment             20.1; 20.3
  published in the Federal Register on March 10, 
  1994).
Postal Procurement Manual, (most recent amendment       601.100; 601.105
  published in the Federal Register on December 
  23, 1992).

            For information on where these materials are available see--
  39 CFR 20.2 Availability of International Mail 
  Manual
  39 CFR 111.2 Availability of the Domestic Mail 
  Manual
  39 CFR 601.104 Availability of Postal 
  Procurement Manual



[[Page 459]]


<R03>
                    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters


<R04>

                      (Revised as of June 20, 1997)

                      Title 1--General Provisions

         I  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register 
                (Parts 1--49)
        II  Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50--299)
        IV  Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400--500)

                          Title 2--[Reserved]

                        Title 3--The President

         I  Executive Office of the President (Parts 100--199)

                           Title 4--Accounts

         I  General Accounting Office (Parts 1--99)
        II  Federal Claims Collection Standards (General 
                Accounting Office--Department of Justice) (Parts 
                100--299)

                   Title 5--Administrative Personnel

         I  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1--1199)
        II  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300--1399)
        IV  Advisory Committee on Federal Pay (Parts 1400--1499)
         V  The International Organizations Employees Loyalty 
                Board (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
       VII  Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
      VIII  Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800--1899)
        IX  Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900--1999)
        XI  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Part 2100)
       XIV  Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of 
                the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal 
                Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400--2499)
        XV  Office of Administration, Executive Office of the 
                President (Parts 2500--2599)
       XVI  Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600--2699)
       XXI  Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100--3199)
      XXII  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Part 3201)
     XXIII  Department of Energy (Part 3301)

[[Page 460]]

      XXIV  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Part 3401)
      XXVI  Department of Defense (Part 3601)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Part 3801)
      XXIX  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900--3999)
       XXX  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4099)
      XXXI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100--4199)
    XXXIII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Part 4301)
      XXXV  Office of Personnel Management (Part 4501)
        XL  Interstate Commerce Commission (Part 5001)
       XLI  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Part 5101)
      XLII  Department of Labor (Part 5201)
     XLIII  National Science Foundation (Part 5301)
       XLV  Department of Health and Human Services (Part 5501)
      XLVI  Postal Rate Commission (Part 5601)
     XLVII  Federal Trade Commission (Part 5701)
    XLVIII  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Part 5801)
         L  Department of Transportation (Part 6001)
       LII  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Part 6201)
      LIII  Department of Education (Parts 6300--6399)
       LIV  Environmental Protection Agency (Part 6401)
      LVII  General Services Administration (Part 6701)
     LVIII  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Part 
                6801)
       LIX  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Part 
                6901)
        LX  United States Postal Service (Part 7001)
       LXI  National Labor Relations Board (Part 7101)
      LXII  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Part 7201)
     LXIII  Inter-American Foundation (Part 7301)
       LXV  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Part 
                7501)
      LXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Part 
                7601)
      LXIX  Tennessee Valley Authority (Part 7901)
      LXXI  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Part 8101)
     LXXIV  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission (Part 
                8401)
     LXXVI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Part 8601)
    LXXVII  Office of Management and Budget (Part 8701)

                          Title 6--[Reserved]

                         Title 7--Agriculture

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Agriculture 
                (Parts 0--26)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of 
                Agriculture
         I  Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, 
                Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 27--209)
        II  Food and Consumer Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 210--299)

[[Page 461]]

       III  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         V  Agricultural Research Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                700--799)
      VIII  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Federal Grain Inspection Service), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 900--999)
         X  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1000--1199)
        XI  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Northeast Dairy Compact Commission (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative 
                Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service 
                Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800--
                2099)
      XXVI  Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 2600--2699)
     XXVII  Office of Information Resources Management, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2800--2899)
      XXIX  Office of Energy, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2900--2999)
       XXX  Office of Finance and Management, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Office of Environmental Quality, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3100--3199)
     XXXII  [Reserved]
    XXXIII  Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3300--3399)
     XXXIV  Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3400--
                3499)
      XXXV  Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3500--3599)

[[Page 462]]

     XXXVI  National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 3600--3699)
    XXXVII  Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3700--3799)
   XXXVIII  World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3800--3899)
       XLI  [Reserved]
      XLII  Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200--
                4299)

                    Title 8--Aliens and Nationality

         I  Immigration and Naturalization Service, Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1--499)

                 Title 9--Animals and Animal Products

         I  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1--199)
        II  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Packers and Stockyards Programs), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--299)
       III  Food Safety and Inspection Service, Meat and Poultry 
                Inspection, Department of Agriculture (Parts 300--
                599)

                           Title 10--Energy

         I  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Department of Energy (Parts 200--699)
       III  Department of Energy (Parts 700--999)
         X  Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 
                1000--1099)
        XI  United States Enrichment Corporation (Parts 1100--
                1199)
        XV  Office of the Federal Inspector for the Alaska Natural 
                Gas Transportation System (Parts 1500--1599)
      XVII  Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700--
                1799)

                      Title 11--Federal Elections

         I  Federal Election Commission (Parts 1--9099)

                      Title 12--Banks and Banking

         I  Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  Federal Reserve System (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  Office of Thrift Supervision, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700--799)

[[Page 463]]

      VIII  Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XIV  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400--
                1499)
        XV  Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board (Parts 
                1500--1599)
      XVII  Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                1700-1799)
     XVIII  Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, 
                Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800--1899)

               Title 13--Business Credit and Assistance

         I  Small Business Administration (Parts 1--199)
       III  Economic Development Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)

                    Title 14--Aeronautics and Space

         I  Federal Aviation Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--199)
        II  Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation 
                (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200--399)
       III  Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 400--499)
         V  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)

                 Title 15--Commerce and Foreign Trade

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 
                0--29)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Commerce and 
                Foreign Trade
         I  Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                30--199)
        II  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 400--499)
       VII  Bureau of Export Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Technology Administration, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
      XIII  East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400--
                1499)

[[Page 464]]

            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade 
                Agreements
        XX  Office of the United States Trade Representative 
                (Parts 2000--2099)
            Subtitle D--Regulations Relating to Telecommunications 
                and Information
     XXIII  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                2300--2399)

                    Title 16--Commercial Practices

         I  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0--999)
        II  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000--1799)

             Title 17--Commodity and Securities Exchanges

         I  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1--199)
        II  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 400--499)

          Title 18--Conservation of Power and Water Resources

         I  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of 
                Energy (Parts 1--399)
       III  Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Water Resources Council (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800--899)
      XIII  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300--1399)

                       Title 19--Customs Duties

         I  United States Customs Service, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  United States International Trade Commission (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)

                     Title 20--Employees' Benefits

         I  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200--399)
       III  Social Security Administration (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 500--599)
         V  Employment and Training Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 600--699)
        VI  Employment Standards Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 
                800--899)
      VIII  Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 
                900--999)

[[Page 465]]

        IX  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 1000--1099)

                       Title 21--Food and Drugs

         I  Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1--1299)
        II  Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 1300--1399)
       III  Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400--
                1499)

                      Title 22--Foreign Relations

         I  Department of State (Parts 1--199)
        II  Agency for International Development, International 
                Development Cooperation Agency (Parts 200--299)
       III  Peace Corps (Parts 300--399)
        IV  International Joint Commission, United States and 
                Canada (Parts 400--499)
         V  United States Information Agency (Parts 500--599)
        VI  United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation, International 
                Development Cooperation Agency (Parts 700--799)
        IX  Foreign Service Grievance Board Regulations (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  International Boundary and Water Commission, United 
                States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 
                1100--1199)
       XII  United States International Development Cooperation 
                Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Board for International Broadcasting (Parts 1300--
                1399)
       XIV  Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor 
                Relations Authority; General Counsel of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign 
                Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  African Development Foundation (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700--1799)

                          Title 23--Highways

         I  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--999)
        II  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and 
                Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 1300--1399)

[[Page 466]]

                Title 24--Housing and Urban Development

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban 
                Development
         I  Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                100--199)
        II  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Government National Mortgage Association, Department 
                of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300--399)
         V  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 600--699) [Reserved]
       VII  Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and 
                Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700--
                799)
      VIII  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance 
                Programs and Section 202 Direct Loan Program) 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian 
                Housing, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 900--999)
         X  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Interstate Land Sales 
                Registration Program) (Parts 1700--1799)
       XII  Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 2000--2099)
        XX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 3200--3899)
       XXV  Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100--
                4199)

                           Title 25--Indians

         I  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--299)
        II  Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 300--399)
       III  National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500--599)
        IV  Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 
                700--799)
         V  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, 
                and Indian Health Service, Department of Health 
                and Human Services (Part 900)
        VI  Office of the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, 
                Department of the Interior (Part 1001)

[[Page 467]]

       VII  Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians, 
                Department of the Interior (Part 1200)

                      Title 26--Internal Revenue

         I  Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 1--799)

           Title 27--Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms

         I  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 1--299)

                   Title 28--Judicial Administration

         I  Department of Justice (Parts 0--199)
       III  Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice 
                (Parts 300--399)
         V  Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500--
                599)
        VI  Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700--799)

                            Title 29--Labor

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 
                0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor
         I  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 400--499)
         V  Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 
                500--899)
        IX  Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission 
                (Parts 900--999)
         X  National Mediation Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       XII  Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 
                1400--1499)
       XIV  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600--
                1699)
      XVII  Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2499)
       XXV  Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 2500--2599)
     XXVII  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2700--2799)
        XL  Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4999)

[[Page 468]]

                      Title 30--Mineral Resources

         I  Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Minerals Management Service, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 200--299)
       III  Board of Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                400--499)
        VI  Bureau of Mines, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                600--699)
       VII  Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 700--999)

                 Title 31--Money and Finance: Treasury

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--50)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
         I  Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                51--199)
        II  Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of International Investment, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 800--899)

                      Title 32--National Defense

            Subtitle A--Department of Defense
         I  Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1--399)
         V  Department of the Army (Parts 400--699)
        VI  Department of the Navy (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Department of the Air Force (Parts 800--1099)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to National 
                Defense
       XII  Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XVI  Selective Service System (Parts 1600--1699)
       XIX  Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Information Security Oversight Office, National 
                Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000--
                2099)
       XXI  National Security Council (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXIV  Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400--
                2499)
     XXVII  Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 
                2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of the Vice President of the United States 
                (Parts 2800--2899)
      XXIX  Presidential Commission on the Assignment of Women in 
                the Armed Forces (Part 2900)

[[Page 469]]

               Title 33--Navigation and Navigable Waters

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 1--
                199)
        II  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                          Title 34--Education

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Education (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Offices of the 
                Department of Education
         I  Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, 
                Department of Education (Parts 200--299)
       III  Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
                Services, Department of Education (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Vocational and Adult Education, Department 
                of Education (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages 
                Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of 
                Education (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Educational Research and Improvement, 
                Department of Education (Parts 700--799)
        XI  National Institute for Literacy (Parts 1100-1199)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Education
       XII  National Council on Disability (Parts 1200--1299)

                        Title 35--Panama Canal

         I  Panama Canal Regulations (Parts 1--299)

             Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property

         I  National Park Service, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--
                299)
       III  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400--499)
         V  Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Library of Congress (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800--
                899)
        IX  Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 
                900--999)
        XI  Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance 
                Board (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
       XIV  Assassination Records Review Board (Parts 1400-1499)

[[Page 470]]

             Title 37--Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights

         I  Patent and Trademark Office, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200--299)
        IV  Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Under Secretary for Technology, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 500--599)

           Title 38--Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief

         I  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0--99)

                       Title 39--Postal Service

         I  United States Postal Service (Parts 1--999)
       III  Postal Rate Commission (Parts 3000--3099)

                  Title 40--Protection of Environment

         I  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1--799)
         V  Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500--1599)

          Title 41--Public Contracts and Property Management

            Subtitle B--Other Provisions Relating to Public 
                Contracts
        50  Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1--50-
                999)
        51  Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or 
                Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1--51-99)
        60  Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal 
                Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 
                60-1--60-999)
        61  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 61-1--61-999)
            Subtitle C--Federal Property Management Regulations 
                System
       101  Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1--
                101-99)
       105  General Services Administration (Parts 105-1--105-999)
       109  Department of Energy Property Management Regulations 
                (Parts 109-1--109-99)
       114  Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1--114-99)
       115  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1--115-99)
       128  Department of Justice (Parts 128-1--128-99)
            Subtitle D--Other Provisions Relating to Property 
                Management [Reserved]
            Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management 
                Regulations System
       201  Federal Information Resources Management Regulation 
                (Parts 201-1--201-99) [Reserved]
            Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System
       301  Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1--301-99)
       302  Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1--302-99)

[[Page 471]]

       303  Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of 
                Certain Employees (Parts 303-1--303-2)
       304  Payment from a Non-Federal Source for Travel Expenses 
                (Parts 304-1--304-99)

                        Title 42--Public Health

         I  Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 1--199)
        IV  Health Care Financing Administration, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1000--1999)

                   Title 43--Public Lands: Interior

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Lands
         I  Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 200--499)
        II  Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1000--9999)
       III  Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation 
                Commission (Parts 10000--10005)

             Title 44--Emergency Management and Assistance

         I  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 0--399)
        IV  Department of Commerce and Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                       Title 45--Public Welfare

            Subtitle A--Department of Health and Human Services 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Welfare
        II  Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), 
                Administration for Children and Families, 
                Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support 
                Enforcement Program), Administration for Children 
                and Families, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for 
                Children and Families Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United 
                States, Department of Justice (Parts 500--599)
        VI  National Science Foundation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800--899)

[[Page 472]]

         X  Office of Community Services, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  ACTION (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Office of Human Development Services, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1300--1399)
       XVI  Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  National Commission on Libraries and Information 
                Science (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800--
                1899)
       XXI  Commission on Fine Arts (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXII  Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2299)
     XXIII  Arctic Research Commission (Part 2301)
      XXIV  James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 
                2400--2499)
       XXV  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2500--2599)

                          Title 46--Shipping

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 1--
                199)
        II  Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500--599)

                      Title 47--Telecommunication

         I  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Office of Science and Technology Policy and National 
                Security Council (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                300--399)

           Title 48--Federal Acquisition Regulations System

         1  Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1--99)
         2  Department of Defense (Parts 200--299)
         3  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300--
                399)
         4  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         5  General Services Administration (Parts 500--599)
         6  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
         7  Agency for International Development (Parts 700--799)
         8  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
         9  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        10  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)
        12  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)

[[Page 473]]

        13  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
        14  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        15  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
        16  Office of Personnel Management Federal Employees 
                Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                1600--1699)
        17  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700--1799)
        18  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1800--1899)
        19  United States Information Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        20  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000--2099)
        21  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation (Parts 2100--2199)
        23  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
        24  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2400--2499)
        25  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
        28  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
        29  Department of Labor (Parts 2900--2999)
        34  Department of Education Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                3400--3499)
        35  Panama Canal Commission (Parts 3500--3599)
        44  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 4400--4499)
        51  Department of the Army Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5100--5199)
        52  Department of the Navy Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5200--5299)
        53  Department of the Air Force Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation Supplement (Parts 5300--5399)
        54  Defense Logistics Agency, Department of Defense (Part 
                5452)
        57  African Development Foundation (Parts 5700--5799)
        61  General Services Administration Board of Contract 
                Appeals (Parts 6100--6199)
        63  Department of Transportation Board of Contract Appeals 
                (Parts 6300--6399)
        99  Cost Accounting Standards Board, Office of Federal 
                Procurement Policy, Office of Management and 
                Budget (Parts 9900--9999)

                       Title 49--Transportation

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Transportation 
                (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to 
                Transportation
         I  Research and Special Programs Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 100--199)
        II  Federal Railroad Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 300--399)

[[Page 474]]

        IV  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Federal Transit Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) 
                (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  National Transportation Safety Board (Parts 800--999)
         X  Surface Transportation Board, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1000--1399)

                   Title 50--Wildlife and Fisheries

         I  United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of 
                the Interior (Parts 1--199)
        II  National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Fishing and Related Activities (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife 
                Service, Department of the Interior and National 
                Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and 
                Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce); Endangered Species Committee 
                Regulations (Parts 400--499)
         V  Marine Mammal Commission (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 600--699)

                      CFR Index and Finding Aids

            Subject/Agency Index
            List of Agency Prepared Indexes
            Parallel Tables of Statutory Authorities and Rules
            Acts Requiring Publication in the Federal Register
            List of CFR Titles, Chapters, Subchapters, and Parts
            Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR



[[Page 475]]




<R03>
           Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR


<R04>

                      (Revised as of June 20, 1997)

                                                  CFR Title, Subtitle or
                     Agency                               Chapter

ACTION                                            45, XII
Administrative Committee of the Federal Register  1, I
Advanced Research Projects Agency                 32, I
Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental          5, VII
     Relations
Advisory Committee on Federal Pay                 5, IV
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation         36, VIII
African Development Foundation                    22, XV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 57
Agency for International Development              22, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
Agricultural Marketing Service                    7, I, IX, X, XI
Agricultural Research Service                     7, V
Agriculture Department
  Agricultural Marketing Service                  7, I, IX, X, XI
  Agricultural Research Service                   7, V
  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service      7, III; 9, I
  Commodity Credit Corporation                    7, XIV
  Cooperative State Research, Education, and      7, XXXIV
       Extension Service
  Economic Research Service                       7, XXXVII
  Energy, Office of                               7, XXIX
  Environmental Quality, Office of                7, XXXI
  Farm Service Agency                             7, VII, XVIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 4
  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation              7, IV
  Finance and Management, Office of               7, XXX
  Food and Consumer Service                       7, II
  Food Safety and Inspection Service              9, III
  Foreign Agricultural Service                    7, XV
  Forest Service                                  36, II
  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards        7, VIII; 9, II
       Administration
  Information Resources Management, Office of     7, XXVII
  Inspector General, Office of                    7, XXVI
  National Agricultural Library                   7, XLI
  National Agricultural Statistics Service        7, XXXVI
  Natural Resources Conservation Service          7, VI
  Operations, Office of                           7, XXVIII
  Rural Business-Cooperative Service              7, XVIII, XLII
  Rural Development Administration                7, XLII
  Rural Housing Service                           7, XVIII, XXXV
  Rural Telephone Bank                            7, XVI
  Rural Utilities Service                         7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
  Secretary of Agriculture, Office of             7, Subtitle A
  Transportation, Office of                       7, XXXIII
  World Agricultural Outlook Board                7, XXXVIII
Air Force Department                              32, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement       48, 53
Alaska Natural Gas Transportation System, Office  10, XV
     of the Federal Inspector
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Bureau of          27, I
AMTRAK                                            49, VII
American Battle Monuments Commission              36, IV
American Indians, Office of the Special Trustee   25, VII

[[Page 476]]

Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service        7, III; 9, I
Appalachian Regional Commission                   5, IX
Architectural and Transportation Barriers         36, XI
     Compliance Board
Arctic Research Commission                        45, XXIII
Armed Forces Retirement Home                      5, XI
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, United       22, VI
     States
Army Department                                   32, V
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 51
Assassination Records Review Board                36, XIV
Benefits Review Board                             20, VII
Bilingual Education and Minority Languages        34, V
     Affairs, Office of
Blind or Severely Disabled, Committee for         41, 51
     Purchase From People Who Are
Board for International Broadcasting              22, XIII
Census Bureau                                     15, I
Central Intelligence Agency                       32, XIX
Child Support Enforcement, Office of              45, III
Children and Families, Administration for         45, II, III, IV, X
Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee        45, XXII
     Commission
Civil Rights, Commission on                       45, VII
Civil Rights, Office for                          34, I
Coast Guard                                       33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
Commerce Department                               44, IV
  Census Bureau                                   15, I`
  Economic Affairs, Under Secretary               37, V
  Economic Analysis, Bureau of                    15, VIII
  Economic Development Administration             13, III
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Export Administration, Bureau of                15, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 13
  Fishery Conservation and Management             50, VI
  Foreign-Trade Zones Board                       15, IV
  International Trade Administration              15, III; 19, III
  National Institute of Standards and Technology  15, II
  National Marine Fisheries Service               50, II, IV
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric                15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
       Administration                             VI
  National Telecommunications and Information     15, XXIII; 47, III
       Administration
  National Weather Service                        15, IX
  Patent and Trademark Office                     37, I
  Productivity, Technology and Innovation,        37, IV
       Assistant Secretary for
  Secretary of Commerce, Office of                15, Subtitle A
  Technology, Under Secretary for                 37, V
  Technology Administration                       15, XI
  Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for      37, IV
Commercial Space Transportation                   14, III
Commodity Credit Corporation                      7, XIV
Commodity Futures Trading Commission              5, XLI; 17, I
Community Planning and Development, Office of     24, V, VI
     Assistant Secretary for
Community Services, Office of                     45, X
Comptroller of the Currency                       12, I
Construction Industry Collective Bargaining       29, IX
     Commission
Consumer Product Safety Commission                5, LXXI; 16, II
Cooperative State Research, Education, and        7, XXXIV
     Extension Service
Copyright Office                                  37, II
Cost Accounting Standards Board                   48, 99
Council on Environmental Quality                  40, V
Customs Service, United States                    19, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Department                                5, XXVI; 32, Subtitle A
  Advanced Research Projects Agency               32, I
  Air Force Department                            32, VII
  Army Department                                 32, V; 33, II; 36, III, 
                                                  48, 51

[[Page 477]]

  Defense Intelligence Agency                     32, I
  Defense Logistics Agency                        32, I, XII; 48, 54
  Defense Mapping Agency                          32, I
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 2
  Navy Department                                 32, VI; 48, 52
  Secretary of Defense, Office of                 32, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Intelligence Agency                       32, I
Defense Logistics Agency                          32, XII; 48, 54
Defense Mapping Agency                            32, I
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board           10, XVII
Delaware River Basin Commission                   18, III
Drug Enforcement Administration                   21, II
East-West Foreign Trade Board                     15, XIII
Economic Affairs, Under Secretary                 37, V
Economic Analysis, Bureau of                      15, VIII
Economic Development Administration               13, III
Economic Research Service                         7, XXXVII
Education, Department of                          5, LIII
  Bilingual Education and Minority Languages      34, V
       Affairs, Office of
  Civil Rights, Office for                        34, I
  Educational Research and Improvement, Office    34, VII
       of
  Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of   34, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 34
  Postsecondary Education, Office of              34, VI
  Secretary of Education, Office of               34, Subtitle A
  Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,  34, III
       Office of
  Vocational and Adult Education, Office of       34, IV
Educational Research and Improvement, Office of   34, VII
Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of     34, II
Employees' Compensation Appeals Board             20, IV
Employees Loyalty Board                           5, V
Employment and Training Administration            20, V
Employment Standards Administration               20, VI
Endangered Species Committee                      50, IV
Energy, Department of                             5, XXIII; 10, II, III, X
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 9
  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission            5, XXIV; 18, I
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 109
Energy, Office of                                 7, XXIX
Engineers, Corps of                               33, II; 36, III
Engraving and Printing, Bureau of                 31, VI
Enrichment Corporation, United States             10, XI
Environmental Protection Agency                   5, LIV; 40, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 15
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 115
Environmental Quality, Office of                  7, XXXI
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission           5, LXII; 29, XIV
Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary  24, I
     for
Executive Office of the President                 3, I
  Administration, Office of                       5, XV
  Environmental Quality, Council on               40, V
  Management and Budget, Office of                25, III, LXXVII; 48, 99
  National Drug Control Policy, Office of         21, III
  National Security Council                       32, XXI; 47, 2
  Presidential Documents                          3
  Science and Technology Policy, Office of        32, XXIV; 47, II
  Trade Representative, Office of the United      15, XX
       States
Export Administration, Bureau of                  15, VII
Export-Import Bank of the United States           5, LII; 12, IV
Family Assistance, Office of                      45, II
Farm Credit Administration                        5, XXXI; 12, VI
Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation          5, XXX; 12, XIV
Farm Service Agency                               7, VII, XVIII
Federal Acquisition Regulation                    48, 1

[[Page 478]]

Federal Aviation Administration                   14, I
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
Federal Claims Collection Standards               4, II
Federal Communications Commission                 5, XXIX; 47, I
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of   41, 60
Federal Crop Insurance Corporation                7, IV
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation             5, XXII; 12, III
Federal Election Commission                       11, I
Federal Emergency Management Agency               44, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 44
Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal    48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition     48, 16
     Regulation
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission              5, XXIV; 18, I
Federal Financial Institutions Examination        12, XI
     Council
Federal Financing Bank                            12, VIII
Federal Highway Administration                    23, I, II; 49, III
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation            1, IV
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office       12, XVII
Federal Housing Finance Board                     12, IX
Federal Inspector for the Alaska Natural Gas      10, XV
     Transportation System, Office of
Federal Labor Relations Authority, and General    5, XIV; 22, XIV
     Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations 
     Authority
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center           31, VII
Federal Maritime Commission                       46, IV
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service        29, XII
Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission  5, LXXIV; 29, XXVII
Federal Pay, Advisory Committee on                5, IV
Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                   28, III
Federal Procurement Policy Office                 48, 99
Federal Property Management Regulations           41, 101
Federal Property Management Regulations System    41, Subtitle C
Federal Railroad Administration                   49, II
Federal Register, Administrative Committee of     1, I
Federal Register, Office of                       1, II
Federal Reserve System                            12, II
  Board of Governors                              5, LVIII
Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board        5, VI, LXXVI
Federal Service Impasses Panel                    5, XIV
Federal Trade Commission                          5, XLVII; 16, I
Federal Transit Administration                    49, VI
Federal Travel Regulation System                  41, Subtitle F
Finance and Management, Office of                 7, XXX
Fine Arts, Commission on                          45, XXI
Fiscal Service                                    31, II
Fish and Wildlife Service, United States          50, I, IV
Fishery Conservation and Management               50, VI
Food and Drug Administration                      21, I
Food and Consumer Service                         7, II
Food Safety and Inspection Service                9, III
Foreign Agricultural Service                      7, XV
Foreign Assets Control, Office of                 31, V
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the       45, V
     United States
Foreign Service Grievance Board                   22, IX
Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel            22, XIV
Foreign Service Labor Relations Board             22, XIV
Foreign-Trade Zones Board                         15, IV
Forest Service                                    36, II
General Accounting Office                         4, I, II
General Services Administration                   5, LVII
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 61
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 5
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 101, 105
  Federal Travel Regulation System                41, Subtitle F
  Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel    41, 304
       Expenses
  Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death    41, 303
     of Certain Employees
[[Page 479]]

  Relocation Allowances                           41, 302
  Travel Allowances                               41, 301
Geological Survey                                 30, IV
Government Ethics, Office of                      5, XVI
Government National Mortgage Association          24, III
Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards          7, VIII; 9, II
     Administration
Great Lakes Pilotage                              46, III
Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation            45, XVIII
Health and Human Services, Department of          5, XLV; 45, Subtitle A
  Child Support Enforcement, Office of            45, III
  Children and Families, Administration for       45, II, III, IV, X
  Community Services, Office of                   45, X
  Family Assistance, Office of                    45, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 3
  Food and Drug Administration                    21, I
  Health Care Financing Administration            42, IV
  Human Development Services, Office of           45, XIII
  Indian Health Service                           25, V
  Inspector General (Health Care), Office of      42, V
  Public Health Service                           42, I
  Refugee Resettlement, Office of                 45, IV
Health Care Financing Administration              42, IV
Housing and Urban Development, Department of      5, LXV; 24, Subtitle B
  Community Planning and Development, Office of   24, V, VI
       Assistant Secretary for
  Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant          24, I
       Secretary for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 24
  Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office    12, XVII
       of
  Government National Mortgage Association        24, III
  Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office   24, II, VIII, X, XX
       of Assistant Secretary for
  Inspector General, Office of                    24, XII
  Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant  24, IX
       Secretary for
  Secretary, Office of                            24, Subtitle A, VII
Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of  24, II, VIII, X, XX
     Assistant Secretary for
Human Development Services, Office of             45, XIII
Immigration and Naturalization Service            8, I
Independent Counsel, Office of                    28, VII
Indian Affairs, Bureau of                         25, I, V
Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant           25, VI
     Secretary
Indian Arts and Crafts Board                      25, II
Indian Health Service                             25, V
Information Agency, United States                 22, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 19
Information Resources Management, Office of       7, XXVII
Information Security Oversight Office, National   32, XX
     Archives and Records Administration
Inspector General
  Agriculture Department                          7, XXVI
  Health and Human Services Department            42, V
  Housing and Urban Development Department        24, XII
Institute of Peace, United States                 22, XVII
Inter-American Foundation                         5, LXIII; 22, X
Intergovernmental Relations, Advisory Commission  5, VII
     on
Interior Department
  American Indians, Office of the Special         25, VII
       Trustee
  Endangered Species Committee                    50, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 14
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 114
  Fish and Wildlife Service, United States        50, I, IV
  Geological Survey                               30, IV
  Indian Affairs, Bureau of                       25, I, V
  Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant         25, VI
       Secretary
  Indian Arts and Crafts Board                    25, II
  Land Management, Bureau of                      43, II
  Minerals Management Service                     30, II

[[Page 480]]

  Mines, Bureau of                                30, VI
  National Indian Gaming Commission               25, III
  National Park Service                           36, I
  Reclamation, Bureau of                          43, I
  Secretary of the Interior, Office of            43, Subtitle A
  Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board   30, III
       of
  Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,     30, VII
       Office of
Internal Revenue Service                          26, I
International Boundary and Water Commission,      22, XI
     United States and Mexico, United States 
     Section
International Development, Agency for             22, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
International Development Cooperation Agency,     22, XII
     United States
  International Development, Agency for           22, II; 48, 7
  Overseas Private Investment Corporation         5, XXXIII; 22, VII
International Fishing and Related Activities      50, III
International Investment, Office of               31, VIII
International Joint Commission, United States     22, IV
     and Canada
International Organizations Employees Loyalty     5, V
     Board
International Trade Administration                15, III; 19, III
International Trade Commission, United States     19, II
Interstate Commerce Commission                    5, XL
James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation      45, XXIV
Japan-United States Friendship Commission         22, XVI
Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries       20, VIII
Justice Department                                5, XXVIII; 28, I
  Drug Enforcement Administration                 21, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 28
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             4, II
  Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                 28, III
  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the     45, V
       United States
  Immigration and Naturalization Service          8, I
  Offices of Independent Counsel                  28, VI
  Prisons, Bureau of                              28, V
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 128
Labor Department                                  5, XLII
  Benefits Review Board                           20, VII
  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board           20, IV
  Employment and Training Administration          20, V
  Employment Standards Administration             20, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 29
  Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office    41, 60
       of
  Federal Procurement Regulations System          41, 50
  Labor-Management Standards, Office of           29, II, IV
  Mine Safety and Health Administration           30, I
  Occupational Safety and Health Administration   29, XVII
  Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration     29, XXV
  Public Contracts                                41, 50
  Secretary of Labor, Office of                   29, Subtitle A
  Veterans' Employment and Training, Office of    41, 61; 20, IX
       the Assistant Secretary for
  Wage and Hour Division                          29, V
  Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of       20, I
Labor-Management Standards, Office of             29, II, IV
Land Management, Bureau of                        43, II
Legal Services Corporation                        45, XVI
Library of Congress                               36, VII
  Copyright Office                                37, II
Management and Budget, Office of                  5, III, LXXVII; 48, 99
Marine Mammal Commission                          50, V
Maritime Administration                           46, II
Merit Systems Protection Board                    5, II
Micronesian Status Negotiations, Office for       32, XXVII
Mine Safety and Health Administration             30, I
Minerals Management Service                       30, II

[[Page 481]]

Mines, Bureau of                                  30, VI
Minority Business Development Agency              15, XIV
Miscellaneous Agencies                            1, IV
Monetary Offices                                  31, I
National Aeronautics and Space Administration     5, LIX; 14, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 18
National Agricultural Library                     7, XLI
National Agricultural Statistics Service          7, XXXVI
National Archives and Records Administration      5, LXVI; 36, XII
  Information Security Oversight Office           32, XX
National Bureau of Standards                      15, II
National Capital Planning Commission              1, IV
National Commission for Employment Policy         1, IV
National Commission on Libraries and Information  45, XVII
     Science
National and Community Service, Corporation for   45, XXV
National Council on Disability                    34, XII
National Credit Union Administration              12, VII
National Drug Control Policy, Office of           21, III
National Foundation on the Arts and the           45, XI
     Humanities
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration    23, II, III; 49, V
National Indian Gaming Commission                 25, III
National Institute for Literacy                   34, XI
National Institute of Standards and Technology    15, II
National Labor Relations Board                    5, LXI; 29, I
National Marine Fisheries Service                 50, II, IV
National Mediation Board                          29, X
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration   15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
                                                  VI
National Park Service                             36, I
National Railroad Adjustment Board                29, III
National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)  49, VII
National Science Foundation                       5, XLIII; 45, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 25
National Security Council                         32, XXI
National Security Council and Office of Science   47, II
     and Technology Policy
National Telecommunications and Information       15, XXIII; 47, III
     Administration
National Transportation Safety Board              49, VIII
National Weather Service                          15, IX
Natural Resources Conservation Service            7, VI
Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, Office of      25, IV
Navy Department                                   32, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 52
Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation             24, XXV
Northeast Dairy Compact Commission                7, XIII
Nuclear Regulatory Commission                     5, XLVIII; 10, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 20
Occupational Safety and Health Administration     29, XVII
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission  29, XX
Offices of Independent Counsel                    28, VI
Operations Office                                 7, XXVIII
Overseas Private Investment Corporation           5, XXXIII; 22, VII
Panama Canal Commission                           48, 35
Panama Canal Regulations                          35, I
Patent and Trademark Office                       37, I
Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel      41, 304
     Expenses
Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of   41, 303
     Certain Employees
Peace Corps                                       22, III
Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation       36, IX
Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration       29, XXV
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation              29, XL
Personnel Management, Office of                   5, I, XXXV; 45, VIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 17
  Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal  48, 21
       Acquisition Regulation
  Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition   48, 16
     Regulation
[[Page 482]]

Postal Rate Commission                            5, XLVI; 39, III
Postal Service, United States                     5, LX; 39, I
Postsecondary Education, Office of                34, VI
President's Commission on White House             1, IV
     Fellowships
Presidential Commission on the Assignment of      32, XXIX
     Women in the Armed Forces
Presidential Documents                            3
Prisons, Bureau of                                28, V
Productivity, Technology and Innovation,          37, IV
     Assistant Secretary
Public Contracts, Department of Labor             41, 50
Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant    24, IX
     Secretary for
Public Health Service                             42, I
Railroad Retirement Board                         20, II
Reclamation, Bureau of                            43, I
Refugee Resettlement, Office of                   45, IV
Regional Action Planning Commissions              13, V
Relocation Allowances                             41, 302
Research and Special Programs Administration      49, I
Rural Business-Cooperative Service                7, XVIII, XLII
Rural Development Administration                  7, XLII
Rural Housing Service                             7, XVIII, XXXV
Rural Telephone Bank                              7, XVI
Rural Utilities Service                           7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation     33, IV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of          32, XXIV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of, and     47, II
     National Security Council
Secret Service                                    31, IV
Securities and Exchange Commission                17, II
Selective Service System                          32, XVI
Small Business Administration                     13, I
Smithsonian Institution                           36, V
Social Security Administration                    20, III; 48, 23
Soldiers' and Airmen's Home, United States        5, XI
Special Counsel, Office of                        5, VIII
Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,    34, III
     Office of
State Department                                  22, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 6
Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board of  30, III
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,       30, VII
     Office of
Surface Transportation Board                      49, X
Susquehanna River Basin Commission                18, VIII
Technology Administration                         15, XI
Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for        37, IV
Technology, Under Secretary for                   37, V
Tennessee Valley Authority                        5, LXIX; 18, XIII
Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board       12, XV
Thrift Supervision Office, Department of the      12, V
     Treasury
Trade Representative, United States, Office of    15, XX
Transportation, Department of                     5, L
  Coast Guard                                     33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 63
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 12
  Federal Aviation Administration                 14, I
  Federal Highway Administration                  23, I, II; 49, III
  Federal Railroad Administration                 49, II
  Federal Transit Administration                  49, VI
  Maritime Administration                         46, II
  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  23, II, III; 49, V
  Research and Special Programs Administration    49, I
  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation   33, IV
  Secretary of Transportation, Office of          14, II; 49, Subtitle A
  Surface Transportation Board                    49, X
Transportation, Office of                         7, XXXIII

[[Page 483]]

Travel Allowances                                 41, 301
Treasury Department                               5, XXI; 17, IV
  Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Bureau of        27, I
  Community Development Financial Institutions    12, XVIII
       Fund
  Comptroller of the Currency                     12, I
  Customs Service, United States                  19, I
  Engraving and Printing, Bureau of               31, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 10
  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center         31, VII
  Fiscal Service                                  31, II
  Foreign Assets Control, Office of               31, V
  Internal Revenue Service                        26, I
  International Investment, Office of             31, VIII
  Monetary Offices                                31, I
  Secret Service                                  31, IV
  Secretary of the Treasury, Office of            31, Subtitle A
  Thrift Supervision, Office of                   12, V
Truman, Harry S. Scholarship Foundation           45, XVIII
United States and Canada, International Joint     22, IV
     Commission
United States and Mexico, International Boundary  22, XI
     and Water Commission, United States Section
United States Enrichment Corporation              10, XI
Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation      43, III
     Commission
Veterans Affairs Department                       38, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 8
Veterans' Employment and Training, Office of the  41, 61; 20, IX
     Assistant Secretary for
Vice President of the United States, Office of    32, XXVIII
Vocational and Adult Education, Office of         34, IV
Wage and Hour Division                            29, V
Water Resources Council                           18, VI
Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of         20, I
World Agricultural Outlook Board                  7, XXXVIII

[[Page 485]]


<R03>
List of CFR Sections Affected

<R04>

All changes in this volume of the Code of Federal Regulations which were 
made by documents published in the Federal Register since January 1, 
1986, are enumerated in the following list. Entries indicate the nature 
of the changes effected. Page numbers refer to Federal Register pages. 
The user should consult the entries for chapters and parts as well as 
sections for revisions.
For the period before January 1, 1986, see the ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected, 1949-1963, 1964-1972, and 1973-1985'' published in seven 
separate volumes.

                                  1986

39 CFR
                                                                   51 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
3  Authority citation revised......................................18323
3.4  (g) amended....................................................9791
    (p) and (q) amended............................................18323
3.7  (c) amended...................................................18323
4  Authority citation revised; section authority citations removed
                                                                   18323
4.5  Amended.......................................................18323
10  IMM amended; incorporation by reference; interim...............17018
    IMM amended; incorporation by reference.......................17969,
21366, 28384, 331326, 33041, 39374, 45318
111  Authority citation revised.................6413, 9653, 17021, 41302
111.3  DMM amended; incorporation by reference.....................6413,
9653, 12997, 17629, 19548, 19832, 21756
    (e) table amended........................................8495, 43907
    DMM amended; incorporation by reference; interim........17021, 25526
    DMM interim amendment confirmed................................19548
    DMM amendment; incorporation by reference; interim rule 
extension of time..................................................29922
    DMM amended; incorporation by reference..........33610, 41302, 43195
221  Authority citation revised....................................40796
221.2  (a) revised.................................................40796
221.3  (a) revised; (c) amended....................................40796
221.5  Redesignated as 221.6 and revised; new 221.5 added..........40796
221.6  Redesignated as 221.7; new 221.6 redesignated from 221.5 
        revised....................................................40796
221.7  Redesignated as 221.8; new 221.7 redesignated from 221.6....40796
    Revised........................................................40797
221.8  Redesignated from 221.7.....................................40796
    Revised........................................................40797
222  Authority citation revised....................................40797
222.1  (a) and (c) revised; (e) amended............................40797
222.2  (a) and (b) amended.........................................40797
222.3  Revised.....................................................40797
222.4  Revised.....................................................40797
222.5  (a) introductory text, (1), and (7), and (b) amended; (c) 
        revised....................................................40798
222.6  (c) designated as (c) introductory text and revised; (c)(1) 
        through (4), (d), and (e) redesignated from 244.1 (a) (1) 
        through (4), (d), and (e)..................................40798
222.7  (a)(3) and (c)(2) and (3) amended...........................40798
222.8  (a)(3) and (c)(3) amended...................................40798
222.9  Heading, (a) introductory text, and (b) revised.............40798
222.10  Heading and text amended...................................40798

[[Page 486]]

223  Authority citation added; section authority citations removed
                                                                   40798
223.1  (d) removed; (e) redesignated as (d); (a), (c) heading and 
        text, and new (d) heading and text amended; (b) revised....40798
223.2  (a)(1), (2), and (4), and (c) amended; (b) revised..........40798
233  Authority citation revised; section authority citations 
        removed....................................................31328
233.7  Added.......................................................31328
244  Removed.......................................................40798
244.1  (a)(1) through (4), (b), and (c) redesignated as 222.6 
        (c)(1) through (4), (d), and (e)...........................40798
262.2  (a) amended.................................................26385
262.4  (a) amended.................................................26385
265  Authority citation revised...............................5326, 8825
265.4  Amended.....................................................26386
265.5  Amended.....................................................26386
265.6  (d) revised..................................................8825
    (a)(2), (c)(2), and (e)(2) amended; (b)(3)(viii) added.........26386
265.7  (a)(2), (b)(6), (d)(1)(i), and (e)(1) amended...............26386
265.8  (b)(3) amended...............................................5326
    (d)(4) removed; (d)(3) and (e)(8) revised.......................8826
    (b) (1) and (2) amended; (e)(9) removed; (e) (3), (5), and (6) 
revised............................................................26386
265.10  (a)(3) amended.............................................26386
265  Appendix A revised.............................................5326
266  Authority citation revised....................................26386
266.6  (a) amended.................................................26386
266.7  (a) amended.................................................26386
320  Authority citation revised; section authority citations 
        removed....................................................29638
320.8  Added.......................................................29638
776.2  Amended.....................................................40170
776.5  (g), (h), and (i) amended; (f) introductory text revised....40170
777  Revised........................................................6983
927--931  Undesignated center heading revised.......................6914
927  Authority citation revised.....................................6914
927.1  (a) revised; (b) and (c) amended.............................6914
927.2  (c), (d), and (f) amended....................................6914
951.6  (c) revised.................................................16517
Chapter III
3001.61--3001.67 (Subpart C)  Appendix A amended...................37019
3001.101  Amended..................................................24531
3001.102  Revised..................................................24531
3000.735-302  (h) added.............................................5069
3000.735-401  Amended...............................................5069
3000.735-402  (a)(1) revised........................................5069
3001  Authority citation revised; section authority citations 
        removed.....................................................8827
3001.31  (b) (k)(2) revised; (k)(3)(i)(j) added....................14992
3001.54  (f)(3)(iii)(c) revised....................................14993
3001.61--3001.68 (Subpart C)  Appendix A amended....................8827

                                  1987

39 CFR
                                                                   52 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
10  IMM amended; incorporation by reference.........................673,
6143, 10375, 13442
    IMM amendment at 52 FR 13442 eff. date deferred to 7-4-87......17401
    Redesignated as Part 20; new Part 10 added.....................29697
    Heading corrected..............................................33410
10.3  (d) table amended.............................................3226
20  Redesignated from Part 10......................................29697
    IMM amended; incorporation by reference........................43334
111  Authority citation revised....................................19350
111.3  DMM amended; incorporation by reference.....................4496,
5283, 19350, 20389
    DMM amended; incorporation by reference; interim........27993, 38408
    DMM amended; incorporation by reference.......................29012,
34779, 36762, 38229, 48438, 48683
    DMM amended; incorporation by reference (republication).........6144
    (e) table amended.......................................10750, 23981
224  Revised.......................................................46998
224.1  (c)(4)(ii)(A) amended.......................................12900

[[Page 487]]

    (c)(4)(ii)(A) amended; eff. 7-31--87...........................18911
224.2  (c)(4) corrected............................................49015
224.6  (b) introductory text republished; (b) (15) and (16) 
        amended; (b)(17) added.....................................12900
224.7  Amended.....................................................12900
225  Revised.......................................................46999
225.9  (b)(9) revised; eff. 7-31-87................................18912
226  Revised.......................................................46999
227  Added.........................................................47000
228  Added.........................................................47001
229  Added.........................................................47002
233  Authority citation revised.....................................4497
233.1  (c) added...................................................12901
233.7  Revised......................................................4497
    (c) and (h)(2) corrected........................................5765
265.6  (d) (1), (2), and (3) amended...............................13668
    (c) revised; eff. 7-6-87.......................................22778
265.7  (a)(1) amended; (a)(4) and (c)(2) revised...................13668
265.8  Revised.....................................................13668
265  Appendix A revised............................................13671
266.8  Revised.....................................................38230
273  Undesignated center heading above Part removed; part added....12901
447  Authority citation revised; section authority citations 
        removed....................................................43335
447.24  (b) introductory text revised; (b)(7) added................43335
777.23  (e) introductory text and (g) introductory text amended....48029
    Effective date clarification...................................48812
777.24  (b)(2), (e)(2), (f) introductory text, (1) and (4) 
        amended; (g) revised.......................................48029
    Effective date clarification...................................48812
777.26  (b) (3) and (4) amended....................................48029
    Effective date clarification...................................48812
777.27  (c)(4) amended.............................................48029
    Effective date clarification...................................48812
916  Removed; eff. 7-31-87.........................................18912
952  Authority citation revised; section authority citations 
        removed....................................................36762
952.2  Amended.....................................................36763
960  Authority citation revised.....................................6797
960.1  Amended......................................................6797
960.2  Revised......................................................6797
960.3  (a) revised..................................................6798
960.4  (b)(1), (2), and (5) and (c) revised; (b) introductory text 
        republished.................................................6798
960.5  (a) revised..................................................6798
960.6  (a) amended..................................................6798
960.8  Revised......................................................6798
960.9  (b) introductory text revised................................6798
960.11  Existing text designated as (a) and amended; (b) added......6798
960.12  (c) introductory text republished; (c)(3), (4), and (5) 
        amended; (b)(6) added.......................................6798
960.18  (a) amended.................................................6798
960.19  Existing text designated as (a); (b) added..................6798
960.20  Existing text designated as (a); (b) added..................6798
960.21  Revised.....................................................6799
962  Added.........................................................12904
963  Added; eff. 7-31-87...........................................18912
963.3  (e) corrected...............................................20599
963.17  (a) corrected..............................................20599
964  Added.........................................................36763
965  Added.........................................................29012
Chapter III
3001.42  (c)(4) revised; interim...................................13443
    (c)(5) added; interim..........................................13443
3001.61--3001.68 (Subpart C)  Appendix A amended.....15725, 19139, 28140

                                  1988

39 CFR
                                                                   53 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
20.3  Amended......................................................24068
    corrected......................................................24830
111.3  DMM amended; incorporation by reference......................124,
125, 3585, 5271, 16259, 18557, 21821
    DMM amendments at 53 FR 124 and 125 effective date deferred.....6985
    DMM amended; incorporation by reference; eff. in part 1-1-89 
                                                                    9891

[[Page 488]]

111.5  Heading and introductory text republished; (a)(2) (ii) and 
        (vi), (3) (i), (ii), and (vi), (5) (i), (iv) and (viii), 
        (6)(ii), and (7) (iii) and (v) revised; (a)(7)(vi) added 
                                                                   19299
    (b)(1) (i) and (iv), (4)(ii), (6)(iii), (9) (i) through (v) 
revised; (b)(1)(v), (2) (v), (vi), and (vii), (7) (i), (ii), and 
(iii), (8) (i) through (vii), and (9) (vi) and (vii) added.........19299
    (c)(2) (ii), (iii), and (iv), (6) (i), (ii), and (iii), (7) 
(ii) and (iii), and (8) (i), (ii), and (iii) and (d) (5), (6), and 
(9)(i) revised; (c)(2) (v) and (vi), (6) (iv) through (ix), 
(7)(iv) and (d)(8)(iv) added.......................................19299
    (e), (f)(2)(vi) and (6)(iii), (g)(6) (iii), (iv), and (v), and 
(i)(1) (iv) and (vii) and (5)(i) revised; (f)(2) (vii) and (viii) 
removed; (f)(6) (vi), (vii), and (viii) and (9), (g)(5)(iii) and 
(6) (vi), (vii), and (viii), and (i)(1)(ix) and (3) (iv) and (vi) 
added..............................................................19299
20.1  Amended......................................................52697
20.2  (a) introductory text and (c) amended; (b) revised...........52697
20.3  Heading republished; (a), (b), and (c) revised; (d) 
        redesignated as (e); new (d) added.........................52697
111.1  Amended.....................................................52698
111.2  (a) amended; (b) and (c) revised............................52698
111.3  DMM amended; incorporation by reference....................26250,
27854, 35315, 35818, 38008, 44188, 49657, 49880, 52163
    DMM amendment at 53 FR 35818 effective date deferred...........43201
    Heading republished; (a) and (c) revised.......................52698
228.3  (a) corrected................................................2496
232  Authority citation revised......................................126
232  Authority citation revised....................................39087
232.1  Authority citation removed....................................126
232.1  (q)(3) added................................................29460
233.4  (b) revised..................................................1780
265.6  (d) (1), (2), (4), (5) heading, (6)(ii)(B), and (8) 
        amended; formats added.....................................49983
265.8  (g)(5) amended..............................................49983
601  Revised.......................................................24266
946  Revised........................................................6986
964.3  (a) amended..................................................4849
964.6  Amended......................................................4849
964.17  Amended.....................................................4849
964.19  Amended.....................................................4849
Chapter III
3001.61--3001.68 (Subpart C)  Appendix A amended............15386, 23108
3001.61--3001.68 (Subpart C)  Appendix A corrected.................48641

                                  1989

39 CFR
                                                                   54 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
3.3  Amended.......................................................42301
3.4  Heading and introductory text republished; (p) amended; (y) 
        redesignated as (z); (i), (q), and (t) revised; new (y) 
        added......................................................42301
3.7  (c) removed; (d) redesignated as (c)..........................42301
4.5  Amended.......................................................42301
4.6  Redesignated as 4.7; new 4.6 added............................42301
4.7  Redesignated from 4.6.........................................42301
5  Authority citation revised......................................42301
5.3  Amended.......................................................42302
6  Authority citation revised......................................42303
6.3  Authority citation removed....................................42302
6.5  Amended.......................................................43202
8  Authority citation revised......................................42302
8.2  Authority citation removed....................................42302
8.3  Amended.......................................................42302
20.2  (b) corrected.................................................1050
20.3  Corrected.....................................................1050
111.1  Amended......................................................6911
    DMM amended; incorporation by reference........................15406
111.3  DMM amended; incorporation by reference.......9210, 12192, 27880, 
                                 32071, 33524, 37794, 39733,49979, 50619
221  Authority citation revised....................................29706
221.5  Revised.....................................................29706

[[Page 489]]

221.6  (a) introductory text, (c), and (d) revised.................29706
221.7  (c) (1) through (4) amended; (c)(5) removed.................29707
222.1  (e) amended.................................................29707
222.4  (a)(1) amended..............................................29707
222.5  (a) (2), (3), (4), and (c) revised; (a)(7) amended..........29707
222.6  (c)(3) revised..............................................29707
222.7  (a)(1), (3), (c)(1) introductory text, (1)(i), (2), and (3) 
        amended....................................................29707
222.8  (a) (1), (3), and (c)(1) (i), (iv), and (3) amended.........29707
222.9  Heading, (a) introductory text, and (b) amended.............29707
223.1  (a) and (c) revised.........................................29707
223.2  (b) heading, (1) and (2), (c) (1) and (3) revised...........29708
224  Heading revised...............................................29708
224.1  Removed; new 224.1 redesignated from 224.2 and heading and 
        (a) revised; (b) removed; (c) and (d) redesignated as (b) 
        and (c); new (c)(6) revised; new (d) and (f) added.........29708
224.2  Redesignated as 224.1 and heading and (a) revised; (b) 
        removed; (c) and (d) redesignated as (b) and (c); new 
        (c)(6) revised; new (d) and (f) added......................29708
224.5  Added.......................................................29708
225  Heading revised...............................................29708
225.1  Removed; new 225.1 redesignated from 225.2 and revised......29708
225.2  Redesignated as 225.1 and revised...........................29708
226  Heading revised...............................................29709
226.1  Revised.....................................................29709
226.2  (a) revised; (b) of section 226.4 and (d) redesignated as 
        (d) and (e)................................................29709
226.3  (a) revised; (c)(4) added...................................29709
226.4  Removed; new 226.4 redesignated from 226.5 and (d) removed; 
        (e) redesignated as (d); new (e) and (f) added; (a) and 
        new (d) revised............................................29709
226.5  Redesignated as 226.4 and (d) removed; (e) redesignated as 
        (d); new (e) and (f) added; (a) and new (d) revised; new 
        226.5 added................................................29709
227  Heading revised...............................................29709
227.1  Amended.....................................................29709
227.2  (a) amended.................................................29709
227.3  Revised.....................................................29709
227.4  Revised.....................................................29710
227.5  Revised.....................................................29710
227.6  Revised.....................................................29710
227.7  Added.......................................................29710
227.8  Added.......................................................29710
227.9  Added.......................................................29710
227.10  Added......................................................29710
227.11  Added......................................................29710
228.2  Revised.....................................................29710
228.3  Revised.....................................................29710
228.4  Revised.....................................................29710
228.5  Revised.....................................................29711
228.6  Added.......................................................29711
228.7  Added.......................................................29711
229.2  Heading and (b) removed; (c) redesignated as (b); (a) and 
        new (b)(7) revised; new (b) (1) through (5) amended........29711
229.3  Revised.....................................................29711
229.4  Revised.....................................................29711
232  Authority citation revised....................................47678
232.1  (b), (g) and (m) revised....................................20527
233  Authority citation revised....................................47520
233.2  (b)(1)(ix) added; note amended..............................37795
233.7  Heading and (b) revised; (a), (c), and (d) amended..........47520
233.8  Added.......................................................47520
233.9  Added.......................................................47522
233.10  Added......................................................47522
265.6  Format corrected.............................................3558
265.8  (b)(1)(ii) amended...........................................7417
265  Appendix A revised.............................................7417
601  Amended.......................................................15931
    amended........................................................43061
601.105  Table revised.............................................48243
777.13  (a) revised; (c) through (q) redesignated as (d) through 
        (r); (c) added.............................................10666
    (f)(1) introductory text and (ii)(B), (2) introductory text 
and (iii), and (o)(3) amended......................................10667
777.21  (h) added..................................................10667
777.23  (e)(3) and (l) redesignated as (e)(4) and (m); (c), 
        (d)(6), (e) (1) and (2), new (m)(1) and (3)(i) revised; 
        new (m)(3)(ix) removed; new (m)(3)(x) redesignated as 
        (m)(3)(ix); new (e)(3)(5) and (l) added....................10667

[[Page 490]]

777.25  (j) amended................................................10668
777.28  (n) amended................................................10668
966  Added.........................................................15754
Chapter III
3001.31  (k)(2) introductory text, (2) (ii), (iii), (iv) revised 
                                                                   35494
3001.54  (j)(7) added..............................................33526
    (j) (5), (6), and (7) revised..................................35495
3001.57  Added; eff. until 8-16-94.................................33687
3001.57a  Added; eff. until 8-16-94................................33688
3001.57b  Added; eff. until 8-16-94................................33688
3001.57c  Added; eff. until 8-16-94................................33689
3001.61--3001.68 (Subpart C)  Appendix A amended.............7191, 39527
    Appendix A corrected; CFR correction...........................11524
3001.102  (a)(10) added............................................35495

                                  1990

39 CFR
                                                                   55 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
20  IMM amended; incorporation by reference........................19260
111  DMM amended; incorporation by reference.........33289, 40658, 50003
111.3  DMM amended; incorporation by reference.....................3058,
                                              10061, 14419, 24561, 40658
    Corrected......................................................17715
233.2  (c) added...................................................32251
775.4  (b) revised.................................................10454
775.6  (a)(1)(ii) and (b)(3)(ii) revised; (b)(3) introductory text 
        amended....................................................10454
775.8  (b)(6) revised..............................................10454
776.4  (c) and (d) removed.........................................10455
776.5  (a) heading correctly revised...............................12822
    (a), (d), (e) heading and introductory text, (e)(l), (f) 
introductory text, (1), (4), (5), and (h) revised; (i) 
introductory text amended..........................................10455
946.11  Revised....................................................30907
Chapter III
3001.61--3001.68 (Subpart C)  Corrected......................8142, 10455

                                  1991

39 CFR
                                                                   56 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
20  IMM amended; incorporation by reference........................19949
111  DMM amended; incorporation by reference....2606, 3639, 12351, 19284
21305, 21308, 36729, 46554, 48438, 51840, 51982, 57733, 58859, 67529
    Corrected......................................................23736
111.2  (c) revised.................................................41463
111.3  (e) table amended.......................1112, 11513, 56013, 56015
221  Authority citation revised....................................55823
221.8  (a) introductory text amended; (c) added....................55823
222  Authority citation revised....................................55823
224  Authority citation revised...............................785, 55823
224.3  Revised.....................................................55823
224.4  (b)(5) and (6) redesignated as (b)(6) and (7); new (b)(5) 
        added........................................................785
    (b)(1) amended.................................................55823
232  Authority citation revised.....................................1112
233  Heading and authority citation revised........................55823
    Technical correction...........................................55157
233.1  Heading, (a) introductory text, (b) and (c) revised; 
        (a)(1), (2) and (3) amended; (a)(4), (5) and (d) added.....55823
233.7  (g) amended; (h) heading revised............................20361
265  Authority citation revised....................................55824
265.8  Redesignated as 265.9; new 265.8 added......................56934
265.9  Redesignated as 265.10; new 265.9 redesignated from 265.8 
                                                                   56934
    (e)(3) revised.................................................57805
265.10  Heading revised; (c) added.................................55824
    Redesignated as 265.11; new 265.10 redesignated from 265.9.....56934
265.11  Redesignated from 265.10...................................56934
265  Appendix A revised............................................57984
273.2  (a)(1), (e) introductory text, (2) and (g) amended..........55825
273.3  (a)(5) amended..............................................55825

[[Page 491]]

273.5  (b)(1), (2) and (c) introductory text amended...............55825
273.8  (a)(4) amended..............................................55825
601.105  Table amended..............................................2138
602.2  Revised.....................................................58859
602.3  Revised.....................................................58859
959.18  Amended....................................................55825

                                  1992

39 CFR
                                                                   57 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
20  IMM amended; incorporation by reference........................3554,
                                               9978, 21033, 30654, 45572
111  Corrected......................................................1519
    DMM amended; incorporation by reference........................5779,
5858, 6558, 14357, 20407, 27181, 28466, 29029, 30780, 32899, 43403, 
45889, 49139, 55113, 56276
    Meetings.......................................................47264
111.3  (e) table amended....................................21611, 21613
    (e) amended....................................................37884
232  Authority citation revised....................................36903
232.1  (k)(1), (2) and (3) redesignated as (k)(3), (4) and (5); 
        new (k)(1) and (2) added...................................36903
    (b)(2) redesignated as (b)(3); new (b)(2) added................38443
233.7  (j)(2) and (4) revised......................................32726
601.100  Procurement Manual amended; incorporation by reference....60998
601.105  Table amended.............................................31129
Chapter III
3001.61--3001.68 (Subpart C)  Appendix A amended...................20410

                                  1993

39 CFR
                                                                   58 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
20  IMM amended; incorporation by reference.......................29782,
57743, 60788
111  Regulation at 58 FR 13552 confirmed...........................42012
111  DMM amended; incorporation by reference......................13552,
31177, 60386
111.5  Revised.....................................................34902
233.3  Revised.....................................................36599
266.4  (b)(5) revised..............................................62036
Chapter III
3000  Authority citation revised...................................42874
3000.735-101--3000.735-104 (Subpart A)  Revised....................42874
3000.735-201--3000.735-205 (Subpart B)  Removed....................42874
3000.735-301--3000.735-316 (Subpart C)  Removed....................42874
3000.735-401--3000.735-405 (Subpart D)  Removed....................42874
3000.735-501--3000.735-502 (Subpart E)  Redesignated as Subpart B 
                                                                   42874
3001.5  (g) and (h) amended........................................38976
3001.6  (a), (b) and (c) amended...................................38976
3001.7  (a)(1)(i), (ii), (iii), (b)(2), (3), (c)(1) and (d)(1) 
        amended....................................................38976
3001.9  (a) amended................................................38976
3001.10  (a) amended...............................................38976
3001.11  (a) and (e) amended.......................................38976
3001.12  (e) and (g) amended.......................................38976
3001.13  Amended...................................................38976
3001.17  (c)(3) and (4) amended....................................38976
3001.19  Amended...................................................38976
3001.20  (b), (c) and (e) amended..................................38976
3001.20a  Introductory text and (a) amended........................38976
3001.20b  (b) amended..............................................38976
3001.21  (b) amended...............................................38976
3001.23  (b) and (d) amended.......................................38976
3001.24  (b), (d)(1) through (11) and (e) amended..................38976
3001.25  (c) and (e) amended.......................................38976
3001.26  (a) and (c) amended.......................................38976
3001.27  (c) amended...............................................38976
3001.31  (b), (d) and (k)(3)(iv) amended...........................38976
3001.31a  (b) and (c) amended......................................38976
3001.33  (e) and (h) amended.......................................38976
3001.36  Amended...................................................38976
3001.39  (a) amended...............................................38976
3001.42  (c)(2) amended............................................38976
3001.42a  Amended..................................................38976
3001.43  (e)(4) introductory text, (i), (f)(1), (g)(3), (5) and 
        (6) amended................................................38976
3001.54  (h)(5)(v)(a) and (p)(2) amended; (l) redesignated as 
        (l)(1); (l)(2) added.......................................38976
    (o)(2)(i), (3), (p)(2) and (r) amended.........................38977

[[Page 492]]

3001.55  Amended...................................................38977
3001.57  Heading amended...........................................38977
3001.57c  Heading amended..........................................38977
3001.61--3001.68 (Subpart C)  appendix A amended............33997, 54512
3001.63  Amended...................................................38977
3001.64  (c)(1) and (2) amended....................................38977
3001.65  Amended...................................................38977
3001.75  Amended...................................................38977
3001.83  (e) amended...............................................38976
    (a) amended....................................................38977
3001.101  Amended..................................................38977
3001.102  (a)(1), (d) introductory text and (4) amended............38977
3001.110  Amended..................................................38977
3001.111  (b) amended..............................................38977
3001.114  (a) amended..............................................38977
3001.115  (a) amended..............................................38976
    Heading revised................................................38977
3001.116  Amended..................................................38977

                                  1994

39 CFR
                                                                   59 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
1  Revised.........................................................18447
2  Revised.........................................................18447
3  Revised.........................................................18448
4  Revised.........................................................18450
5  Revised.........................................................18450
6  Revised.........................................................18451
7  Revised.........................................................18451
8  Removed.........................................................18447
11  Added..........................................................18454
20  IMM  amended; incorporation by reference................11192, 24943
      IMM amended; incorporation by reference; interim......65132, 65961
111  DMM  amended; incorporation by reference; eff. 7-3-94........11888, 
                                                     23162, 30701, 32337
    Regulation  at 59 FR 11888 effective date delayed to 6-12-94 
                                                                   17485
    Authority  citation revised....................................23162
    DMM  amended; incorporation by reference eff. 10-2-94..........32335
    Corrected......................................................33911
    DMM amended; incorporation by reference; interim.......39257, 44930, 
                                47085, 47086, 50691, 62323, 65147, 65967
    Regulation at 59 FR 23162 effective date delayed...............39967
221  Authority citation revised....................................18454
221.9  Added.......................................................18454
233.2  (b)(1) introductory text and (b)(2) Note revised; (b)(1)(x) 
        added.......................................................5326
233.7  (c) amended.................................................31154
    (i)(1)(iv) and (v) revised; (i)(1)(vi) removed.................35852
241  Heading revised...............................................29725
241.3  Added.......................................................29725
262.5  (c) and (d) added...........................................37160
265.6  (d)(2) and (4) removed; (d)(3) and (5) through (10) 
        redesignated as (d)(2) through (8); new (d)(2), (3)(ii), 
        (iii) and new (4)(iv) amended; (d)(1) and new (d)(4)(iii) 
        revised; interim...........................................11550
    (d)(8)  revised; interim.......................................22757
    (d)(8)   revised...............................................62324
    (d)(1), (2) and (4)(ii) revised................................67225
    Amended.................................................67226, 67227
265.9  (g)(5)(ii) and (iv) amended; interim........................11550
266.2  Amended.....................................................37160
266.3  (d) added...................................................37160
266.4  (b)(6) added................................................37160
266.5  (f) added...................................................37161
266.8  (e) added...................................................37161
266.9  Revised.....................................................35625
266.10  Added......................................................37161
491  Added.........................................................45625
946.11  Revised....................................................29372
953  Revised.......................................................31539
962.26  (c) amended; (b) and (d) revised; (e) removed...............2987
    Revised........................................................51860
963.1  Amended.....................................................10751
963.2  Amended.....................................................10751
963.3  (a) and (c) amended.........................................10752
Chapter III
3001  Authority citation revised....................................8542
3001.54  (j)(3),  (4) and (6) introductory text revised.............8542

                                  1995

39 CFR
                                                                   60 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
20  IMM amended; incorporation by reference...........7912, 14371, 30703
    Corrected......................................................18009

[[Page 493]]

    IMM amended; incorporation by reference; interim........49756, 65239
    IMM amended; interim; incorporation by reference...............61661
111  DMM amended; incorporation by reference.........5861, 10026, 19355, 
                                                            22273, 30702
    DMM amended; incorporation by reference...34854, 43005, 49758, 66146
    Corrected......................................................39112
224.1  (a) and (f) amended.........................................57344
224.2  Added.......................................................57344
233.1  (c)(3) revised...............................................5581
233.2  (b)(2) note amended.........................................54305
233.7  (a) revised; (j)(5) amended..................................5581
    (h)(1) amended..................................................8306
241.3  (d)(4) introductory text, (e)(2)(ii)(A), (f)(1), (2) 
        introductory text, (3), (4), (5), (g)(1)(i), (2), (3)(i) 
        and (4)(ii) revised........................................32273
261.2  (b) amended.................................................57344
261.4  (a) revised.................................................57344
262.2  (b) and (c) amended.........................................57344
262.4  (a) and (b) amended.........................................57344
262.5  (d)(2) amended..............................................57344
263.3  (a) amended.................................................57344
263.5  Amended.....................................................57344
263.6  Added.......................................................57344
264.3  (a) and (b) revised.........................................57344
264.4  Amended.....................................................57344
265  Authority citation revised....................................17224
265.3  (b) revised.................................................57344
265.4  Revised.....................................................57345
265.6  (a)(2), (b) introductory text and (d)(3)(i) amended.........57345
265.7  (a)(2), (b)(1) and (4) amended..............................57345
265.9  (b)(2)(ii) and (g)(4) amended...............................57345
265.10  Amended....................................................57345
265.11  Heading revised; (b) and (c) removed.......................36712
    (a)(4)(ii) amended.............................................57345
265.12  (b)(7) amended.............................................57345
    Added..........................................................17224
265.13  Added......................................................36712
266.3  (a) and (c) revised.........................................57345
266.5  (d) amended.................................................57345
266.6  (a)(1) and (d) amended......................................57345
266.7  (a)(4) amended; (c) removed.................................57345
266.10  (a), (b), (c), (d) introductory text and (2) amended.......57345
267.3  (a) revised.................................................57345
267.5  (c)(1) introductory text, (i), (ii) and (vi) revised........57345
    (c)(2)(i), (3)(v) and (e)(3)(i) amended........................57346
268  Authority citation revised....................................57346
268.1  (b) amended.................................................57346
447  Authority citation revised....................................47243
    Heading revised................................................47243
447.11--447.12 (Subpart A)  Revised................................47243
447.22  Removed....................................................47244
447.23  Redesignated as 447.21.....................................47244
447.24  Removed....................................................47244
447.25  (b) removed; (a) and (c) through (f) redesignated as 
        447.21(c) and 447.21(d) through 447.21(g)..................47244
447.26  Removed....................................................47244
447.27  Removed....................................................47244
447.31--447.34 (Subpart C)  Heading revised........................47244
447.31  Revised....................................................47244
447.32  Removed; new 447.32 redesignated from 447.33 and revised 
                                                                   47244
447.33  Redesignated as 447.32.....................................47244
447.34  Removed....................................................47245
447.41  Removed; new 447.41 redesignated from 447.51...............47245
447.42  Removed; new 447.42 redesignated from 447.52...............47245
447.43  Redesignated from 447.53 and revised.......................47245
447.51--447.52 (Subpart E)  Heading redesignated as 447.41--447.43 
        (Subpart D) heading........................................47245
    Heading redesignated from 447.61--447.62 (Subpart F) heading 
                                                                   47245
447.51  Redesignated as 447.41; new 447.51 redesignated from 
        447.51.....................................................47245
447.52  Redesignated as 447.42; new 447.52 redesignated from 
        447.62; (d)(2) revised.....................................47245
447.53  Redesignated as 447.43.....................................47245
447.61--447.62 (Subpart F)  Heading redesignated as 447.51--447.52 
        (Subpart E) heading........................................47245

[[Page 494]]

447.61 (Subpart F)  Redesignated as 447.51; new 447.61 
        redesignated from 447.71...................................47245
    Heading redesignated from 447.71 (Subpart G) heading...........47245
447.62  Redesignated as 447.52.....................................47245
447.71  Redesignated as 447.61.....................................47245
447.81 (Subpart H)  Removed........................................47245
447.91 (Subpart I)  Removed........................................47245
501 (Subchapter G)  Added..........................................30726
501.22  Eff. in part 1-2-96........................................30730
955  Authority citation revised....................................57938
955.1  (a) and (b)(2) amended; (b)(1) and (d)(5) revised...........57938
955.9  Amended.....................................................57938
955.13  Removed....................................................57938
    Redesignated from 955.36; (b)(1), (2), (c)(2)(ii), (4) and 
(d)(3) amended; (c)(1), (d)(1) and (e) revised; (f) added..........57939
955.18  Amended....................................................57938
955.35  Removed....................................................57938
    Redesignated from 955.37; (a) introductory text revised........57939
955.36  Redesignated as 955.13; new 955.36 added...................57939
955.37  Redesignated as 955.35.....................................57939
Chapter III
3001.10  (a) revised...............................................12115
3001.12  (b) revised...............................................12115
3001.20a  (c) revised..............................................12115
3001.25  (a) through (d) revised...................................12115
3001.26  (a) and (c) revised.......................................12116
3001.27  (a) and (c) revised.......................................12116
3001.30  (i) added.................................................12116
3001.57  Added; eff. 3-6-95 through 3-6-00.........................12119
3001.57a  Added; eff. 3-6-95 through 3-6-00........................12119
3001.57b  Added; eff. 3-6-95 through 3-6-00........................12120
3001.57c  Added; eff. 3-6-95 through 3-6-00........................12121

                                  1996

39 CFR
                                                                   61 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
5  Authority citation revised......................................36499
5.2  Revised.......................................................36499
7.1  (a) revised...................................................36499
10  Authority citation revised.....................................36499
    Heading revised................................................36499
10.1  Redesignated from 10.11 and revised..........................36499
10.2  Redesignated from 10.31 and revised..........................36499
10.3  Added........................................................36500
10.4  Redesignated from 10.41; (a) and (e)(2) revised..............36500
10.11--10.12 (Subpart A)  Heading removed..........................36499
10.11  Redesignated as 10.1........................................36499
10.12  Removed.....................................................36500
10.21--10.24 (Subpart B)  Heading removed..........................36499
10.21  Removed.....................................................36500
10.22  Removed.....................................................36500
10.23  Removed.....................................................36500
10.24  Removed.....................................................36500
10.31--10.32 (Subpart C)  Heading removed..........................36499
10.31  Redesignated as 10.2........................................36499
10.32  Removed.....................................................36500
10.41  Redesignated as 10.4........................................36500
10.42 (Subpart D)  Heading removed.................................36499
20  IMM amended; incorporation by reference; interim.......13770, 13776, 
                                       14026, 36501, 39592, 39593, 55573
111  DMM amended; incorporation by reference........10115, 17195, 17206, 
                                       42479, 48071, 48574, 52703, 53323
111.3  (e) table amended.............................60191, 64620, 67228
111.5  Revised.....................................................64620
233.3  (c)(9) revised..............................................42557
233.11  Added......................................................28060
233.12  Added......................................................56450
273.3  (a)(1) and (b)(1) revised...................................55750
447.21  Removed; new 447.21 redesignated from 447.23; introductory 
        text and (a) through (i) removed; (j) and (k) redesignated 
        as (a) and (b); heading and new (a) revised; new (c) and 
        new (d) through (g) redesignated from 447.25(a) and 
        447.25(c) through (f)......................................47244
Chapter III
3001.61--3001.69c (Subpart C)  Appendix A revised...........32657, 37316
    Appendix A corrected...........................................37316
    Appendix A amended......................................55100, 55102
3001.69  Added; eff. 5-15-96 through 5-15-01.......................24453

[[Page 495]]

3001.69a  Added; eff. 5-15-96 through 5-15-01......................24453
3001.69b  Added; eff. 5-15-96 through 5-15-01......................24453
3001.69c  Added; eff. 5-15-96 through 5-15-01......................24454
3001.161--3001.166 (Subpart I)  Added; eff. 5-15-96 through 5-15-
        01.........................................................24454
3001.171--3001.176 (Subpart J)  Added; eff. 5-15-96 through 5-15-
        01.........................................................24456
3001.181--3001.182 (Subpart K)  Added; eff. 5-15-96 through 5-15-
        01.........................................................24457

                                  1997

   (Regulations published from January 1, 1997, through July 1, 1997)

39 CFR
                                                                   62 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
3.7  (d) revised...................................................18519
4.6  Revised.......................................................18519
7.4  (d) and (e) removed............................................4459
20  IMM amended; incorporation by reference.......635, 640, 19224, 28633
    IMM amended; incorporation by reference; interim........1676, 17075, 
                                                            25136, 25517
111  DMM amended; incorporation by reference........15062, 24341, 26087, 
                                                                   31514
111.1  Revised.....................................................14827
111.2  Revised.....................................................14827
111.3  (e) redesignated as (f); (a) through (d) and new (f) 
        introductory text revised; new (e) added; new (f) table 
        amended....................................................14827
    (e) table amended..............................................30460
111.5  (e) table corrected...........................................646
    Revised............
</pre></body></html>
