<html><body><pre>
[Title 7 CFR ]
[Code of Federal Regulations (annual edition) - January 1, 2008 Edition]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]



[[Page i]]

          
<R02>
          7


          Parts 1900 to 1939

          Revised as of January 1, 2008


          Agriculture
          
<R03>


________________________

          Containing a codification of documents of general 
          applicability and future effect

          As of January 1, 2008
          With Ancillaries
                    Published by:
                    Office of the Federal Register
                    National Archives and Records
                    Administration
                    A Special Edition of the Federal Register

[[Page ii]]

          U.S. GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL EDITION NOTICE

          Legal Status and Use of Seals and Logos
          <GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>
          
          The seal of the National Archives and Records Administration 
              (NARA) authenticates the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) as 
              the official codification of Federal regulations established 
              under the Federal Register Act. Under the provisions of 44 
              U.S.C. 1507, the contents of the CFR, a special edition of the 
              Federal Register, shall be judicially noticed. The CFR is 
              prima facie evidence of the original documents published in 
              the Federal Register (44 U.S.C. 1510).

          It is prohibited to use NARA's official seal and the stylized Code 
              of Federal Regulations logo on any republication of this 
              material without the express, written permission of the 
              Archivist of the United States or the Archivist's designee. 
              Any person using NARA's official seals and logos in a manner 
              inconsistent with the provisions of 36 CFR part 1200 is 
              subject to the penalties specified in 18 U.S.C. 506, 701, and 
              1017.

          Use of ISBN Prefix

          This is the Official U.S. Government edition of this publication 
              and is herein identified to certify its authenticity. Use of 
              the 0-16 ISBN prefix is for U.S. Government Printing Office 
              Official Editions only. The Superintendent of Documents of the 
              U.S. Government Printing Office requests that any reprinted 
              edition clearly be labeled as a copy of the authentic work 
              with a new ISBN.

              <GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>
              
          U . S . G O V E R N M E N T P R I N T I N G O F F I C E

          ------------------------------------------------------------------

          U.S. Superintendent of Documents <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Washington, DC 
              20402-0001

          http://bookstore.gpo.gov

          Phone: toll-free (866) 512-1800; DC area (202) 512-1800

[[Page iii]]



<R02>
                            Table of Contents


<R03>
                                                                    Page
  Explanation.................................................       v

  Title 7:
    Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of Agriculture 
      (Continued)
          Chapter XVIII--Rural Housing Service, Rural 
          Business- Cooperative Service, Rural Utilities 
          Service, and Farm Service Agency, Department of 
          Agriculture (Continued)                                    5
  Finding Aids:
      Table of CFR Titles and Chapters........................     171
      Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR......     189
      List of CFR Sections Affected...........................     199

[[Page iv]]





                     ----------------------------

                     Cite this Code: CFR
                     To cite the regulations in 
                       this volume use title, 
                       part and section number. 
                       Thus, 7 CFR 1900.1 refers 
                       to title 7, part 1900, 
                       section 1.

                     ----------------------------

[[Page v]]



                               EXPLANATION

    The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and 
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided 
into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal 
regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the 
name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into 
parts covering specific regulatory areas.
    Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year 
and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:

Title 1 through Title 16.................................as of January 1
Title 17 through Title 27..................................as of April 1
Title 28 through Title 41...................................as of July 1
Title 42 through Title 50................................as of October 1

    The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each 
volume.

LEGAL STATUS

    The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially 
noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie 
evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).

HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

    The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual 
issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used 
together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
    To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its 
revision date (in this case, January 1, 2008), consult the ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected (LSA),'' which is issued monthly, and the ``Cumulative 
List of Parts Affected,'' which appears in the Reader Aids section of 
the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal 
Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.

EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES

    Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal 
Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source 
citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page 
number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication 
dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be 
exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In 
instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the 
Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In 
those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register 
states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be 
inserted following the text.

OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

    The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires 
Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information 
collection request.

[[Page vi]]

Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as 
amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are 
placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting 
requirements.

OBSOLETE PROVISIONS

    Provisions that become obsolete before the revision date stated on 
the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text 
of provisions in effect on a given date in the past by using the 
appropriate numerical list of sections affected. For the period before 
January 1, 1986, consult either the List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-
1963, 1964-1972, or 1973-1985, published in seven separate volumes. For 
the period beginning January 1, 1986, a ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected'' is published at the end of each CFR volume.

INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE

    What is incorporation by reference? Incorporation by reference was 
established by statute and allows Federal agencies to meet the 
requirement to publish regulations in the Federal Register by referring 
to materials already published elsewhere. For an incorporation to be 
valid, the Director of the Federal Register must approve it. The legal 
effect of incorporation by reference is that the material is treated as 
if it were published in full in the Federal Register (5 U.S.C. 552(a)). 
This material, like any other properly issued regulation, has the force 
of law.
    What is a proper incorporation by reference? The Director of the 
Federal Register will approve an incorporation by reference only when 
the requirements of 1 CFR part 51 are met. Some of the elements on which 
approval is based are:
    (a) The incorporation will substantially reduce the volume of 
material published in the Federal Register.
    (b) The matter incorporated is in fact available to the extent 
necessary to afford fairness and uniformity in the administrative 
process.
    (c) The incorporating document is drafted and submitted for 
publication in accordance with 1 CFR part 51.
    Properly approved incorporations by reference in this volume are 
listed in the Finding Aids at the end of this volume.
    What if the material incorporated by reference cannot be found? If 
you have any problem locating or obtaining a copy of material listed in 
the Finding Aids of this volume as an approved incorporation by 
reference, please contact the agency that issued the regulation 
containing that incorporation. If, after contacting the agency, you find 
the material is not available, please notify the Director of the Federal 
Register, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington DC 
20408, or call 202-741-6010.

CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

    A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a 
separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index 
and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Statutory 
Authorities and Agency Rules (Table I). A list of CFR titles, chapters, 
and parts and an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are 
also included in this volume.
    An index to the text of ``Title 3--The President'' is carried within 
that volume.
    The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. 
This index is based on a consolidation of the ``Contents'' entries in 
the daily Federal Register.
    A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to 
the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.

[[Page vii]]


REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL

    There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing 
in the Code of Federal Regulations.

INQUIRIES

    For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this 
volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at 
the top of odd-numbered pages.
    For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-741-6000 
or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC 20408 or e-mail 
fedreg.info@nara.gov.

SALES

    The Government Printing Office (GPO) processes all sales and 
distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call toll-free, 
866-512-1800, or DC area, 202-512-1800, M-F 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or 
fax your order to 202-512-2250, 24 hours a day. For payment by check, 
write to: US Government Printing Office - New Orders, P.O. Box 979050, 
St. Louis, MO 63197-9000. For GPO Customer Service call 202-512-1803.

ELECTRONIC SERVICES

    The full text of the Code of Federal Regulations, the LSA (List of 
CFR Sections Affected), The United States Government Manual, the Federal 
Register, Public Laws, Public Papers, Weekly Compilation of Presidential 
Documents and the Privacy Act Compilation are available in electronic 
format at www.gpoaccess.gov/nara (``GPO Access''). For more information, 
contact Electronic Information Dissemination Services, U.S. Government 
Printing Office. Phone 202-512-1530, or 888-293-6498 (toll-free). E-
mail, gpoaccess@gpo.gov.
    The Office of the Federal Register also offers a free service on the 
National Archives and Records Administration's (NARA) World Wide Web 
site for public law numbers, Federal Register finding aids, and related 
information. Connect to NARA's web site at www.archives.gov/federal-
register. The NARA site also contains links to GPO Access.

    Raymond A. Mosley,
    Director,
    Office of the Federal Register.
    January 1, 2008.







[[Page ix]]



                               THIS TITLE

    Title 7--Agriculture is composed of fifteen volumes. The parts in 
these volumes are arranged in the following order: parts 1-26, 27-52, 
53-209, 210-299, 300-399, 400-699, 700-899, 900-999, 1000-1199, 1200-
1599, 1600-1899, 1900-1939, 1940-1949, 1950-1999, and part 2000 to end. 
The contents of these volumes represent all current regulations codified 
under this title of the CFR as of January 1, 2008.

    The Food and Nutrition Service current regulations in the volume 
containing parts 210-299, include the Child Nutrition Programs and the 
Food Stamp Program. The regulations of the Federal Crop Insurance 
Corporation are found in the volume containing parts 400-699.

    All marketing agreements and orders for fruits, vegetables and nuts 
appear in the one volume containing parts 900-999. All marketing 
agreements and orders for milk appear in the volume containing parts 
1000-1199.

    For this volume, Robert J. Sheehan was Chief Editor. The Code of 
Federal Regulations publication program is under the direction of 
Michael L. White, assisted by Ann Worley.


[[Page 1]]


<R01>
                          TITLE 7--AGRICULTURE


<R02>

                 (This book contains parts 1900 to 1939)

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  SUBTITLE B--Regulations of the Department of Agriculture (Continued)

                                                                    Part

chapter xviii--Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-
  Cooperative Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm 
  Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Continued).....        1900

[[Page 3]]

  Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of Agriculture (Continued)

[[Page 5]]


<R02>
    CHAPTER XVIII--RURAL HOUSING SERVICE, RURAL BUSINESS-COOPERATIVE 
SERVICE, RURAL UTILITIES SERVICE, AND FARM SERVICE AGENCY, DEPARTMENT OF 
                         AGRICULTURE (CONTINUED)


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------


  Editorial Note: Nomenclature changes to chapter XVIII appear at 61 FR 
1109, Jan. 16, 1996, and 61 FR 2899, Jan. 30, 1996.

                    SUBCHAPTER H--PROGRAM REGULATIONS
Part                                                                Page
1900            General.....................................           7
1901            Program-related instructions................          19
1902            Supervised bank accounts....................          56
1904

Loan and grant programs (individual) [Reserved]

1910            General.....................................          66
1922

[Reserved]

1924            Construction and repair.....................          67
1925            Taxes.......................................         156
1927            Title clearance and loan closing............         158
1930            General.....................................         167
1931-1939

 [Reserved]

[[Page 7]]


<R03>
                    SUBCHAPTER H_PROGRAM REGULATIONS

<R05>


<R03>
PART 1900_GENERAL--Table of Contents

<R05>


                   Subpart A_Delegations of Authority

Sec.
1900.1 General.
1900.2 National office staff and state directors.
1900.3 State, district, and county office employees.
1900.4 Ratification.
1900.5 Assignment of cases.
1900.6 Chair, Loan Resolution Task Force.
1900.7 Effect on other regulations.

         Subpart B_Adverse Decisions and Administrative Appeals

1900.51 Definitions.
1900.52 General.
1900.53 Applicability.
1900.54 Effect on assistance pending appeal.
1900.55 Adverse action procedures.
1900.56 Non-appealable decisions.
1900.57 [Reserved]

Exhibit A to Subpart B [Reserved]
Exhibit B-1 to Subpart B--Letter for Notifying Applicants, Lender, 
          Holders and Borrowers of Adverse Decisions Where the Decision 
          Is Appealable
Exhibit B-2 to Subpart B--Letter for Notifying Applicants, Lenders and 
          Holders and Borrowers of Unfavorable Decision Reached at the 
          Meeting
Exhibit B-3 to Subpart B--Letter for Notifying Applicants, Lender, 
          Holders and Borrowers of Adverse Decisions Where the Decision 
          Involves an Appraisal (Not To Be Used in Cases Involving 
          Farmer Program Primary Loan Servicing Actions)
Exhibit B-4 to Subpart B--Letter for Notifying Applicants, Lenders and 
          Holders and Borrowers of Unfavorable Decision Reached After 
          State Director Review of an Appraisal (Not To Be Used in Cases 
          Involving Farmer Program Primary Loan Servicing Actions)
Exhibit C to Subpart B--Letter for Notifying Applicants, Lenders, 
          Holders, and Borrowers of Adverse Decisions When Part or All 
          of the Decision Is Not Appealable [Not Used in Connection With 
          Decisions Related to Nonprogram Applicants, Borrowers, or 
          Property]
Exhibit D to Subpart B--Hearings/Review Officer Designations

                 Subpart C_Applicability of Federal Law

1900.101 General
1900.102 Applicable law.

 Subpart D_Processing and Servicing FmHA or Its Successor Agency Under 
  Public Law 103	354 Assistance to Employees, Relatives, and Associates

1900.151 General.
1900.152 Definitions.
1900.153 Identifying and reporting an employee relationship.
1900.154 Determining the need for special handling.
1900.155 Designating the processing/servicing official.
1900.156 Special handling-processing.
1900.157-1900.200 [Reserved]

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 301; 7 U.S.C. 1989; 7 U.S.C. 6991, et. seq.; 42 
U.S.C. 1480; Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1953 (5 U.S.C. App.).


<R04>
                   Subpart A_Delegations of Authority


<R05>
Sec. 1900.1  General.

    The authorities contained in this subpart apply to all assets, 
functions, and programs now or hereafter administered or serviced by the 
Farmers Home Administration or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354, including but not limited to those relating to indebtedness, 
security, and other assets obtained or contracted through the Secretary 
of Agriculture, Resettlement Administration, Farm Security 
Administration, or Emergency Crop and Feed Loan Offices of the Farm 
Credit Administration, the Soil Conservation Service in connection with 
water conservation and utilization projects; the Puerto Rico Hurricane 
Relief Commission and successor agencies in connection with Puerto Rico 
Hurricane relief loans to individuals; State Rural Rehabilitation 
Corporations, the United States of America or its officials as trustees 
of the assets of State Rural Rehabilitation Corporations, Regional 
Agricultural Credit Corporations, Defense Relocation Corporations, land 
leasing and purchasing associations, corporations, and agencies, and 
whether the interest of the

[[Page 8]]

United States in the indebtedness, instrument of debt, security, 
security instrument, or other assets is that of obligee, owner, holder, 
insurer, assignee, mortgagee, beneficiary, trustee or other interest.

[44 FR 18162, Mar. 27, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 1900.2  National office staff and state directors.

    The following officials of the Farmers Home Administration or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354, in accordance with applicable 
laws, and the regulations implementing these laws, are severally 
authorized, for and on behalf of and in the name of the United States of 
America or the Farmers Home Administration or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354, to do and perform all acts necessary in connection 
with making and insuring loans, making grants and advances, servicing 
loans and other indebtedness and obtaining, servicing and enforcing 
security and other instruments related thereto: The Deputy Administrator 
Program Operations, the Assistant Administrators for Farmer Programs, 
Housing, and Community and Business Programs, the Assistant 
Administrator Accounting and Director Finance Office; each Director and 
the Insured Loan Officer, Finance Office; the Directors for the Water 
and Waste Disposal Division, the Community Facilities Division, the 
Business and Industry Division, the Multi-Family Housing Processing 
Division, the Multi-Family Housing Servicing and Property Management 
Division, the Single Family Housing Processing Division, the Single 
Family Housing Servicing and Property Management Division, the Farm Real 
Estate and Production Division, the Emergency Division; and each State 
Director within the area of that State Director's jurisdiction; and in 
the absence or disability of any such official, the person acting in 
that official's position; and the delegates of any such official. The 
authority includes, but is not limited to, the authority to:
    (a) Effect the assignment of, or the declaration of trust with 
respect to, insured security instruments to place them in trust with the 
United States of America as trustee for the benefit of any holder of the 
promissory note or bond secured by such security instrument.
    (b) Acknowledge receipt of notice of sale or assignment of insured 
loans and security instruments.
    (c) Appoint or request the appointment of substitute trustees in 
deeds of trust.
    (d) Execute proofs of claim in bankruptcy, death, and other cases.
    (e) Consent to sale or assignment of, or sell or assign, direct or 
insured loans and security instruments (except that in the case of 
Agency asset sales, District Directors and County Supervisors are 
delegated the authority to assign security instruments), endorsements, 
reinsurance agreements, or other instruments in connection therewith; 
and execute agreements to insure and reinsure, and to purchase and 
repurchase insured loans and security instruments.
    (f) Compromise, adjust, cancel or charge off indebtedness (except 
that County Supervisors are delegated authority to approve all 
settlements of sections 502 and 504 single family housing debt(s)).
    (g) Modify contracts and other instruments and compromise claims 
owed to the Farmers Home Administration or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 and covered by the Federal Claims Collection Act of 
1966 and the joint regulations issued under it by the Attorney General 
and the Comptroller General as provided for in applicable program 
regulations.
    (h) Perform all actions pertaining to the sale (or other disposal) 
of real or chattel property or interests therein and to execute and 
deliver bills of sale or other instruments to effect such sale (or 
disposition), which includes but is not limited to offering property for 
sale; advertising; receiving and accepting offers or bids; and closing 
sale transactions, including the collection of sale proceeds, and 
delivery of quitclaim deeds, easements, and right-of-way conveyances 
after those documents have been executed. The authority to execute any 
deeds of conveyance of inventory real property, including quitclaim 
deeds, easements, rights-of-

[[Page 9]]

way, or sale of any use rights is reserved to the State Director, and 
this authority may not be redelegated.
    (i) Approve and consent to transfers of security property to other 
parties with or without assumption of debts; and approve and accept 
transfers of security property or interests therein to the United States 
of America, and execute release from liability after determination is 
made in accordance with applicable program regulations.
    (j) Execute and deliver, or approve in writing, suspensions, 
releases or terminations of assignments, of income, renewals, 
extensions, partial and full releases and satisfactions of security, and 
personal or indemnity liability for indebtedness, waivers, subordination 
agreements, severance agreements, affidavits, acknowlegements, 
certificates of residence, evidence of consent, and other instruments or 
documents.
    (k) Accelerate and declare entire real estate or chattel 
indebtedness due and payable, foreclose or request foreclosure of real 
estate security instruments by exercise of power of sale or otherwise, 
and bid for and purchase at any foreclosure or other sale or otherwise 
acquire real property pledged, mortgaged, conveyed, attached, or levied 
upon to collect indetedness, and accept title to any property so 
purchased or acquired.
    (l) Require and accept further or additional security.
    (m) Accelerate and declare entire non-real estate indebtedness due 
and payable, and foreclose or request foreclosure of chattel security 
instruments by exercise of power of sale or otherwise.
    (n) Bid for and purchase at any foreclosure or other sale, or 
otherwise acquire personal property pledged, mortgaged, conveyed, 
attached, or levied upon to collect indebtedness, and accept title to 
any property so purchased or acquired.
    (o) Take possession of, maintain, and operate security or acquired 
real or personal property or interests therein, sell or otherwise 
dispose of such personal property, and execute and deliver contracts, 
caretaker's agreements, leases, and other instruments in connection 
therewith, as appropriate.
    (p) Execute proofs of loss on insurance contracts and endorse 
without recourse loss payment drafts and checks.
    (q) Issue, publish and serve notices and other instruments.
    (r) File or record instruments, whether separate instruments, or by 
making marginal entries, or by use of other methods permissible under 
State law.

[44 FR 18162, Mar. 27, 1979, as amended at 47 FR 5700, Feb. 8, 1982; 50 
FR 23901, June 7, 1985; 52 FR 44375, Nov. 19, 1987; 56 FR 6946, Feb. 21, 
1991]


<R05>
Sec. 1900.3  State, district, and county office employees.

    The following officials and employees of the Farmers Home 
Administration or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354, in 
accordance with applicable laws, and the regulations implementing these 
laws, for and on behalf of, and in the name of the United States of 
America or the Farmers Home Administration or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354, are also severally authorized within the area of 
their respective jurisdictions to perform the acts specified in 
paragraphs (g) through (r) of Sec. 1900.2; and within their loan 
approval authority to sell or otherwise dispose of real or chattel 
property or interests therein and to execute and deliver bills of sale 
or other instruments to effect such sale or disposition: Chief, Farmer 
Programs/Specialist; Chief, Rural Housing/Specialist; Chief, Community 
Programs/Specialist; Chief, Business and Industry/Specialist; Chief, 
Community and Business Programs/Specialist; Chief, Appraisal Staff/
Appraiser; Chief, Underwriting Staff/Underwriter; Chief, Underwriting 
and Appraisal Staff; Chief, Servicing and Inventory Staff/Credit 
Management Specialist/Realty Specialist; each District Director, 
Assistant District Director, Loan Specialist General, County (including 
Parish) Supervisor, Emergency Loan Supervisor, Assistant Emergency Loan 
Supervisor, or other supervisor or assistant supervisor, and in the 
absence or disability of any such official or employee, the person 
acting in the position.

[50 FR 23902, June 7, 1985, as amended at 55 FR 43325, Oct. 29, 1990]

[[Page 10]]


<R05>
Sec. 1900.4  Ratification.

    All written instruments affecting title to real or personal 
property, including but not limited to deeds, releases, satisfactions, 
subordination agreements, severance agreements, consents, waivers, 
assignments, declarations of trust, and heretofore executed by officials 
or employees of the agencies or other entities referred to in Sec. 
1900.1 to carry out any purpose authorized by law, incident to the 
administration of programs under the jurisdiction of said agencies or 
other entities, are hereby approved, confirmed, and ratified.

[44 FR 18162, Mar. 27, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 1900.5  Assignment of cases.

    The State Director may, in writing, assign responsibilities and 
functions to a different office or staff position within the FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 State organizational structure 
other than that referred to in regulations, provided no benefits, 
rights, or opportunities of the public are changed.

[55 FR 43325, Oct. 29, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 1900.6  Chair, Loan Resolution Task Force.

    The Chair, Loan Resolution Task Force is delegated the following 
authorities, to be exercised until September 30, 1996:
    (a) The responsibility for, under applicable Farmers Home 
Administration or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
regulations, collecting and settling all delinquent direct Farmer 
Program loans as defined in the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development 
Act, as amended, that have received all primary servicing rights and 
pre-acceleration homestead and preservation loan servicing rights under 
7 CFR part 1951, subpart S;
    (b) The responsibility for making and directing the making of loan 
servicing decisions, under applicable Farmers Home Administration or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 regulations, concerning 
delinquent direct Farmer Programs loans for which accrued principal and 
interest equals or exceeds one million dollars, to extend to borrowers 
their remaining primary servicing rights and pre-acceleration homestead 
and preservation loan servicing rights under 7 CFR part 1951, subpart S;
    (c) Authority for approving the grant of exceptions pursuant to 
Sec. Sec. 1951.916, 1955.21, 1956.99 and 1965.35 of this chapter, to 
the extent necessary to carry out the responsibilities described in 
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section.

[59 FR 43441, Aug. 24, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1900.7  Effect on other regulations.

    This subpart does not revoke or modify any other delegation or 
redelegation, instruction, procedure, or regulation issued by, or under 
authority of, the Administrator of the Farmers Home Administration or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354.

[44 FR 18162, Mar. 27, 1979. Redesignated at 55 FR 43325, Oct. 29, 1990. 
Further redesignated at 59 FR 43441, Aug. 24, 1994]


<R04>
         Subpart B_Adverse Decisions and Administrative Appeals

    Source: 60 FR 67318, Dec. 29, 1995, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1900.51  Definitions.

    Act means the Federal Crop Insurance Reform and Department of 
Agriculture Reorganization Act of 1994, Public Law No. 103-354 (7 U.S.C. 
6991 et seq.).
    Agency means the Rural Utilities Service (RUS), the Rural Housing 
Service (RHS), and the Rural Business-Cooperative Development Service 
(RBS), or their successor agencies.
    Refer to 7 CFR 11.1 for other definitions applicable to appeals of 
adverse decisions covered by this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 1900.52  General.

    This subpart specifies procedures for use by USDA personnel and 
program participants to ensure that full and complete consideration is 
given to program participants who are affected by an agency adverse 
decision.


<R05>
Sec. 1900.53  Applicability.

    (a) Appeals of adverse decisions covered by this subpart will be 
governed by 7 CFR part 11.

[[Page 11]]

    (b) The provisions of this subpart apply to adverse decisions 
concerning direct loans, loan guarantees, and grants under the following 
programs: RUS Water and Waste Disposal Facility Loans and Grants 
Program; RHS Housing and Community Facilities Loan Programs; RBS Loan, 
Grant, and Guarantee Programs and the Intermediary Relending Program; 
and determinations of the Rural Housing Trust 1987-1 Master Servicer.
    (c) This subpart does not apply to decisions made by parties outside 
an agency even when those decisions are used as a basis for decisions 
falling within paragraph (b) of this section, for example: decisions by 
state governmental construction standards-setting agencies (which may 
determine whether RHS will finance certain houses); Davis-Bacon wage 
rates; flood plain determinations; archaeological and historical areas 
preservation requirements; and designations of areas inhabited by 
endangered species.


<R05>
Sec. 1900.54  Effect on assistance pending appeal.

    (a) Assistance will not be discontinued pending the outcome of an 
appeal of a complete or partial adverse decision.
    (b) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (a) of this section, 
administrative offsets initiated under subpart C of part 1951 will not 
be stayed pending the outcome of an appeal and any further review of the 
decision to initiate the offset.


<R05>
Sec. 1900.55  Adverse action procedures.

    (a) If an applicant, guaranteed lender, a holder, borrower or 
grantee is adversely affected by a decision covered by this subpart, the 
decision maker will inform the participant of the adverse decision and 
whether the adverse decision is appealable. A participant has the right 
to request the Director of NAD to review the agency's finding of 
nonappealability in accordance with 7 CFR 11.6(a). In cases where the 
adverse decision is based on both appealable and nonappealable actions, 
the adverse action is not appealable.
    (b) A participant affected by an adverse decision of an agency is 
entitled under section 275 of the Act to an opportunity for a separate 
informal meeting with the agency before commencing an appeal to NAD 
under 7 CFR part 11.
    (c) Participants also have the right under section 275 of the Act to 
seek mediation involving any adverse decision appealable under this 
subpart if the mediation program of the State in which the participant's 
farming operation giving rise to the decision is located has been 
certified by the Secretary for the program involved in the decision. An 
agency shall cooperate in such mediation. Any time limitation for appeal 
will be stayed pending completion of the mediation process (7 CFR 
11.5(c)).


<R05>
Sec. 1900.56  Non-appealable decisions.

    The following are examples of decisions which are not appealable:
    (a) Decisions which do not fall within the scope of this subpart as 
set out in Sec. 1900.53.
    (b) Decisions that do not meet the definition of an ``adverse 
decision'' under 7 CFR part 11.
    (c) Decisions involving parties who do not meet the definition of 
``participant'' under 7 CFR part 11.
    (d) Decisions with subject matters not covered by 7 CFR part 11.
    (e) Interest rates as set forth in agency procedures, except for 
appeals alleging application of an incorrect interest rate.
    (f) The State RECD Director's refusal to request an administrative 
waiver provided for in agency program regulations.
    (g) Denials of assistance due to lack of funds or authority to 
guarantee.

[[Page 12]]


<R05>
Sec. 1900.57  [Reserved]


<R05>
           Sec. Exhibit A to Subpart B of Part 1900 [Reserved]


<R05>
    Sec. Exhibit B-1 to Subpart B of Part 1900--Letter for Notifying 
Applicants, Lender, Holders and Borrowers of Adverse Decisions Where the 
                         Decision Is Appealable

                 UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

  Farmers Home Administration or its successor agency under Public Law 
                                 103-354

                            (Insert Address)

________________________________________________________________________
Date
    Dear ------------:
    After careful consideration, we [were unable to take favorable 
action on your application/request for Farmers Home Administration or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 services] [are cancelling/
reducing the assistance you are presently receiving]. The specific 
reasons for our decision are:

(Insert here the adverse decision and all of the specific reasons for 
the adverse action.)

    If you have any questions concerning the decision or the facts used 
in making our decision and desire further explanation, you may call or 
write the County Office (insert phone number) to request a meeting with 
(this office) (The County Committee) within 15 calendar days of the date 
of this letter. You should present any new information or evidence along 
with possible alternatives for our consideration. You may also bring a 
representative [or legal counsel] with you. You also have the right to 
appeal this decision to a hearing officer in lieu of, or in addition to, 
a meeting with [this office] [the County Committee]. See attachment for 
your appeal rights. (Attach Form FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 1900-1.) (For guaranteed loans, except loss claims, 
the applicant and lender must jointly request a meeting and/or an 
appeal.)
    If you do not wish a meeting, as outlined above, a request for a 
hearing must be sent to the Area Supervisor, National Appeals Staff 
(address) ------------, postmarked no later than (month) ----------, 
(date) ----------.

(insert date 30 days from date of letter.)

    The Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act prohibits creditors from 
discriminating against credit applicants on the basis of race, color, 
religion, national origin, sex, marital status, handicap, or age 
(provided that the applicant has the capacity to enter into a binding 
contract), because all or part of the applicant's income derives from 
any public assistance program, or because the applicant has in good 
faith exercised any right under the Consumer Credit Protection Act. The 
Federal Agency that administers compliance with the law concerning this 
creditor is the Federal Trade Commission, Equal Credit Opportunity, 
Washington, DC 20580.
 Sincerely,
________________________________________________________________________
(Decision Maker)
(County Supervisor may sign for County Committee)
________________________________________________________________________
(Title)

[55 FR 9874, Mar. 16, 1990]


<R05>
    Sec. Exhibit B-2 to Subpart B of Part 1900--Letter for Notifying 

 Applicants, Lenders and Holders and Borrowers of Unfavorable Decision 
                         Reached at the Meeting

                 UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

  Farmers Home Administration or its successor agency under Public Law 
                                 103-354

                            (Insert Address)

________________________________________________________________________
Date
    Dear ------------:
    We appreciated the opportunity to review the facts relative to [your 
application/request for FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 services] [the assistance you are presently receiving]. We 
regret that our meeting with you did not result in a satisfactory 
conclusion.

(Insert here the adverse decision and all the specific reasons for the 
adverse action).

    See attachment for your appeal rights. (Attach Form FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1900-1) (For guaranteed loans, 
except loss claims, the applicant and lender must jointly request an 
appeal.)
    A request for a hearing must be sent to the Area Supervisor, 
National Appeals Staff ------------, postmarked no later than (month) --
----------, (date) ------------

(insert date 30 days from date of letter.)

    The Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act prohibits creditors from 
discriminating against credit applicants on the basis of race, color, 
religion, national origin, sex, marital status, handicap, or age 
(provided that the applicant has the capacity to enter into a binding 
contract), because all or part of the applicant's income derives from 
any public assistance program, or because the applicant has in good 
faith exercised any right

[[Page 13]]

under the Consumer Credit Protection Act. The Federal Agency that 
administers compliance with the law concerning this creditor is the 
Federal Trade Commission, Equal Credit Opportunity, Washington, DC 
20580.
 Sincerely,
________________________________________________________________________
(Decision Maker)
(County Supervisor may sign for County Committee)
________________________________________________________________________
(Title)

[55 FR 9874, Mar. 16, 1990]


<R05>
    Sec. Exhibit B-3 to Subpart B of Part 1900--Letter for Notifying 

Applicants, Lender, Holders and Borrowers of Adverse Decisions Where the 
Decision Involves an Appraisal (Not To Be Used in Cases Involving Farmer 
                 Program Primary Loan Servicing Actions)

                 UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

  Farmers Home Administration or its successor agency under Public Law 
                                 103-354

                            (Insert Address)

________________________________________________________________________
Date
    Dear------------:
    After careful consideration, we [were unable to take favorable 
action on your application/request for Farmers Home Administration or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 services] [are cancelling/
reducing the assistance you are presently receiving]. The specific 
reasons for our decision are:

(Insert here the adverse decision and all of the specific reasons for 
the adverse action.)

    If you have any questions concerning the decision or the facts used 
in making our decision and desire further explanation, you may call or 
write the County Office (insert phone number) to request a meeting with 
(this office) (The County Committee) within 15 calendar days of the date 
of this letter. You should present any new information or evidence along 
with possible alternatives for our consideration. You may also bring a 
representative or legal counsel with you.
    If you do not wish to have a meeting as outlined above, you may 
contest the appraisal of the property value. In order to contest the 
appraisal you must first request review of the appraisal by the FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 State Director. Your 
request for review by the State Director should be made through our 
office. You will be advised of the results of the State Director's 
review. If after the State Director's review you still disagree with the 
appraisal you may request a hearing. When you receive the results of the 
State Director's review you will be advised on how to ask for a hearing. 
Your request for review of the appraisal must be postmarked no later 
than (month)----------, (date) -------- (insert date 15 days from date 
of letter).
    The Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act prohibits creditors from 
discriminating against credit applicants on the basis of race, color, 
religion, national origin, sex, marital status, handicap, or age 
(provided that the applicant has the capacity to enter

[55 FR 9874, Mar. 16, 1990]


<R05>
    Sec. Exhibit B-4 to Subpart B of Part 1900--Letter for Notifying 

 Applicants, Lenders and Holders and Borrowers of Unfavorable Decision 
 Reached After State Director Review of an Appraisal (Not To Be Used in 
     Cases Involving Farmer Program Primary Loan Servicing Actions)

                 UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

  Farmers Home Administration or its successor agency under Public Law 
                                 103-354

                            (Insert Address)

________________________________________________________________________
Date
    Dear ------------:
    At your request we have reviewed the appraisal of the property you 
wish to purchase. We have determined that the value estimate of the 
property is both supportable and defensible (as required by FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 regulations and appraisal 
industry standards) and therefore acceptable.
    You have the right to appeal this decision. You must show why the 
appraisal is in error. You may submit an independent appraisal, at your 
expense, from a qualified appraiser who is a designated member of [the 
American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers, Society of Real Estate 
Appraisers, American Society of Farm Managers and Rural Appraisers, 
etc.,] or an equivalent organization requiring appraisal education, 
testing and experience. The appraisal must conform to Agency Appraisal 
regulations applicable to the loan program.
    See attachment for your appeal rights.
    A request for a hearing must be sent to the Area Supervisor, 
National Appeals Staff (address) ------------, postmarked no later than 
(month) ------------, (date) ------------,

(insert date 30 days from date of letter)

    The Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act prohibits creditors from 
discriminating

[[Page 14]]

against credit applicants on the basis of race, color, religion, 
national origin, sex, marital status, handicap, or age (provided that 
the applicant has the capacity to enter into a binding contract), 
because all or part of the applicant's income derives from any public 
assistance program, or because the applicant has in good faith exercised 
any right under the Consumer Credit Protection Act. The Federal Agency 
that administers compliance with the law concerning this creditor is the 
Federal Trade Commission, Equal Credit Opportunity, Washington, DC 
20580.
 Sincerely,
________________________________________________________________________
(State Director)

[55 FR 9875, Mar 16, 1990]


<R05>
     Sec. Exhibit C to Subpart B of Part 1900--Letter for Notifying 

 Applicants, Lenders, Holders, and Borrowers of Adverse Decisions When 
 Part or All of the Decision Is Not Appealable [Not Used in Connection 
With Decisions Related to Nonprogram Applicants, Borrowers, or Property]

                 UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

  Farmers Home Administration or its successor agency under Public Law 
                                 103-354

                            (Insert Address)

________________________________________________________________________
(Date)
    Dear ------------:
    After careful consideration we [were unable to take favorable action 
on your application/request for Farmers Home Administration or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 services] [are cancelling/
reducing the assistance you are presently receiving].

(Insert and number all of the specific reasons for the adverse action. 
Examples of nonappealable reasons are listed in Sec. 1900.55(a)).

    If you have any questions about this action, we would like the 
opportunity to explain in detail why your request has not been approved, 
explain any possible alternative, or provide any other information you 
would like. You may bring any additional information you may have and 
you may bring a representative or counsel if you wish. Please call 
(telephone number) for an appointment.
    Applicants and borrowers generally have a right to appeal adverse 
decisions, but FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
decisions based on certain reasons are not appealable. We have 
determined that the reason(s) numbered -------- for the decision in this 
case make(s) the decision not appealable under FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 regulations. You may, however, write the 
Area Supervisor, National Appeals Staff (insert address) for a review of 
the accuracy of our finding that the decision is not appealable, 
postmarked no later than (month) --------, (date) -------- (insert date 
30 days from date of letter).
    The Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act prohibits creditors from 
discriminating against credit applicants on the basis of race, color, 
religion, national origin, sex, marital status, handicap, or age 
(provided that the applicant has the capacity to enter into a binding 
contract), because all or part of the applicant's income derives from 
any public assistance program, or because the applicant has in good 
faith exercised any right under the Consumer Credit Protection Act. The 
Federal Agency that administers compliance with the law concerning this 
creditor is the Federal Trade Commission, Equal Credit Opportunity, 
Washington, DC 20580.
 Sincerely,
________________________________________________________________________
(Decision Maker)
(County Supervisor may sign for County Committee)
________________________________________________________________________
(Title)

[55 FR 9875, Mar. 16, 1990, as amended at 58 FR 52646, Oct. 12, 1993]

    Editorial Note: At 58 FR 52646, Oct. 12, 1993, the Farmers Home 
Administration attempted to amend exhibit C of subpart B of part 1900 by 
removing in the second paragraph the words ``(month) --------,''; 
however, because ``(month) --------'' does not exist in the second 
paragraph, this amendment could not be incorporated.

      Exhibit D to Subpart B of Part 1900--Hearings/Review Officer 
                              Designations

                   Hearing/Review Officer Designations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Decisionmaker or decision       Hearing officer     Review officer
------------------------------------------------------------------------
County Supervisor...............  National Appeals    State Director and/
                                   Staff Hearing       or Director,
                                   Officer.            National Appeals
                                                       Staff.
County Committee................  National Appeals    State Director and/
                                   Staff Hearing       or Director,
                                   Officer.            National Appeals
                                                       Staff.

[[Page 15]]

 
*District Director, *State        National Appeals    **State Director
 Program Chief, *District          Staff Hearing       and/or Director,
 Specialist.                       Officer.            National Appeals
                                                       Staff.
*State Director, *Regional        As appointed by     Director, National
 Director.                         Director,           Appeals Staff.
                                   National Appeals
                                   Staff.
Division Director or Assistant    As appointed by     Director, National
 Administrator.                    Director,           Appeals Staff.
                                   National Appeals
                                   Staff.
Assistant Administrator.........  As appointed by     Director, National
                                   Director,           Appeals Staff.
                                   National Appeals
                                   Staff.
Deputy or Associate               As appointed by     Director, National
 Administrator.                    Director,           Appeals Staff.
                                   National Appeals
                                   Staff.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Decisionmaker for Rural Development Administration or its successor
  agency under Public Law 103-354 (RDA or its successor agency under
  Public Law 103-354) cases for Regional Office Operations.
**Review officer will be the Regional Director and/or the Director,
  National Appeals Staff for RDA or its successor agency under Public
  Law 103-354 cases.

                                  Notes

    1. District Director also means Assistant District Director or 
District Loan Specialist.
    2. County Supervisor also means Assistant County Supervisor with 
loan approval authority.
    3. The Director of the National Appeals Staff may designate a staff 
member to conduct a hearing or review. When the hearing/review is 
completed, the designee will send the complete case file, hearing notes, 
tape recordings, and a recommended decision to the Director for a final 
decision. The Director may, for individual cases, delegate final 
decision authority to a designee.
    4. For decisions not directly covered above, advice should be sought 
from the Director of the National Appeals Staff.
    5. An appellant may elect to have an appeal reviewed by the State 
Director, or the Director of the National Appeals Staff. The decision of 
the State Director will be subject to further review by the Director of 
the National Appeals Staff upon request of the appellant.

[58 FR 4065, Jan. 13, 1993]


<R04>
                 Subpart C_Applicability of Federal Law


<R05>
Sec. 1900.101  General.

    This subpart provides Agency policy concerning:
    (a) The applicability of Federal rather than State Law in the 
conduct of Farmers Home Administration (FmHA) or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 operations, and
    (b) The liability of an auctioneer for conversion of personal 
property mortgaged to FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354.

[44 FR 10979, Feb. 26, 1979, as amended at 45 FR 8934, Feb. 11, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 1900.102  Applicable law.

    Loans made by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
are authorized and executed pursuant to Federal programs adopted by 
Congress to achieve national purposes of the U.S. Government.
    (a) Instruments evidencing or securing a loan payable to or held by 
the Farmers Home Administration or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354, such as promissory notes, bonds, guaranty agreements, 
mortgages, deeds of trust, financing statements, security agreements, 
and other evidences of debt or security shall be construed and enforced 
in accordance with applicable Federal law.
    (b) Instruments evidencing a guarantee, conditional commitment to 
guarantee, or a grant, such as contracts of guarantee, grant agreements 
or other evidences of an obligation to guarantee or make a grant, 
executed by the Farmers Home Administration or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354, shall be construed and enforced in accordance 
with applicable Federal law.
    (c) In order to implement and facilitate these Federal loan 
programs, the application of local procedures, especially for 
recordation and notification purposes, may be utilized to the fullest 
extent feasible and practicable. However, the use of local procedures 
shall not be deemed or construed to be any

[[Page 16]]

waiver by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 of 
Federal immunity from any local control, penalty, or liability, or to 
subject FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 to any 
State required acts or actions subsequent to the delivery by FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 officials of the instrument to 
the appropriate local or State official.
    (d) Any person, corporation, or organization that applies for and 
receives any benefit or assistance from FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 that offers any assurance or security upon 
which FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 relies for 
the granting of such benefit or assistance, shall not be entitled to 
claim or assert any local immunity, privilege, or exemption to defeat 
the obligation such party incurred in obtaining or assuring such Federal 
benefit or assistance.
    (e) The liability of an auctioneer for conversion of personal 
property mortgaged to FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 shall be determined and enforced in acceptance with the applicable 
Federal law. ``Auctioneer'' for the purposes of this subpart includes a 
commission merchant, market agency, factor or agent. In all cases in 
which there has been a disposition without authorization by FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 of personal property mortgaged 
to that agency, any auctioneer involved in said disposition shall be 
liable to the Government for conversion--notwithstanding any State 
statute or decisional rule to the contrary.

[44 FR 10979, Feb. 26, 1979]


<R04>
 Subpart D_Processing and Servicing FmHA or Its Successor Agency Under 
  Public Law 103	354 Assistance to Employees, Relatives, and Associates

    Source: 58 FR 224, Jan. 5, 1993, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1900.151  General.

    (a) Farmers Home Administration (FmHA) or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 Instruction 2045-BB (available in any FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 office) requires the 
maintenance of high standards of honesty, integrity, and impartiality by 
employees. To reduce the potential for employee conflict of interest, 
any processing, approval, servicing or review activity, including access 
through automated information systems, is conducted only by authorized 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 employees who:
    (1) Are not themselves the recipient.
    (2) Are not members of the family or known close relatives of the 
recipient.
    (3) Do not have an immediate working relationship with the 
recipient, the employee related to the recipient, or the employee who 
would normally conduct the activity.
    (4) Do not have a business or close personal association with the 
recipient.
    (b) No provision of this subpart takes precedence over individual 
program requirements or restrictions, especially those restrictions 
found in FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
Instruction 2045-BB (available in any FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 office) relating to eligibility for FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 assistance of FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 employees, members of families 
of employees, close relatives, or business or close personal associates 
of employees.
    (c) The determination of a case's need for special handling under 
the provisions of this subpart is not an adverse action and, therefore, 
is not subject to appeal.
    (d) The provisions of this subpart do not apply to the Farm Service 
Agency. The relevant regulations applicable to the Farm Service Agency 
can be found at 5 CFR parts 2635 and 8301.

[58 FR 224, Jan. 5, 1993, as amended at 71 FR 38979, July 11, 2006]


<R05>
Sec. 1900.152  Definitions.

    Applicant or borrower. All persons or organizations, individually or 
collectively, applying for or receiving insured or guaranteed loan or 
grant assistance from or through FmHA or its

[[Page 17]]

successor agency under Public Law 103-354. Referred to as recipient.
    Assistance. Loans or grants made, insured or guaranteed, or serviced 
by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354.
    Associates. All persons with whom an employee has a business or 
close personal association or immediate working relationship.
    Business association. Business relationship between those with an 
identity of financial interest; including but not limited to a business 
partnership, being an officer, director, trustee, partner or employee of 
an organization, or other long-term contractual relationship.
    Close personal association. Social relationship between unrelated 
residents of the same household.
    Close relatives. The spouse, relatives and step-relatives of an 
employee or the employee's spouse, including Grandmother, Grandfather, 
Mother, Father, Aunt, Uncle, Sister, Brother, Daughter, Son, Niece, 
Nephew, Granddaughter, Grandson, and First Cousin.
    Conflict of interest. A situation (or the appearance of one) in 
which one could reasonably conclude that an FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 employee's private interest conflicts with his 
or her Government duties and responsibilities, even though there may not 
actually be a conflict.
    Employee. All FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
personnel, including gratuitous employees and those negotiating for or 
having arrangements for prospective employment, except as otherwise 
specifically stated. For the purposes of this instruction only, the term 
also refers to county or area committee members, elected or appointed, 
and to closing agents who, although they are not employees, have a 
special relationship to FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 and therefore should be subject to these provisions.
    Immediate working relationship. A relationship between a subordinate 
and a supervisor in a direct line, or between co-workers in the same 
office. For the purposes of this subpart, the relationships among a 
County Supervisor and members of the local County Committee are 
immediate working relationships.
    Members of family. Blood and in-law relatives (such as by marriage 
or adoption) who are residents of the employee's household.
    Recipient. One who has applied for or received FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 financial assistance in the form of a 
loan or grant. See definition of applicant or borrower.


<R05>
Sec. 1900.153  Identifying and reporting an employee relationship.

    (a) Responsiblity of applicant. When an application for assistance 
is filed, the processing official asks if there is any known 
relationship or association with an FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 employee. The applicant is required to disclose the 
requested information under subpart A of part 1910 of this chapter and 
pertinent program regulations.
    (b) Responsibility of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 employee. An FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 employee who knows he or she is related to or associated with an 
applicant or recipient, regardless of whether the relationship or 
association is known to others, is required to notify the FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 official who is processing or 
servicing the assistance, in writing. FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 Guide Letter 1900-D-1 (available in any FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 office) may be used as the 
notice. If the appropriate official is not known, the State Director 
should be notified. Regardless of whether the relationship or 
association is defined in Sec. 1900.152 of this subpart, if the 
employee believes there may be a potential conflict of interest, the 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 official who is 
processing or servicing the assistance may be notified and special 
handling requested. An employee's request that the case receive special 
handling is usually honored.
    (c) Responsibility of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 official. When any relationship or association is identified, 
the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-

[[Page 18]]

354 official completes and submits FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 Guide Letter 1900-D-2 (available in any FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 office) to the State Director 
(or Administrator, under paragraph (e) of this section or Sec. 
1900.155(a) of this subpart). When completed FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 Guide Letter 1900-D-3 (available in any 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 office) is 
returned by the State Director, the processing official;
    (1)-(2) [Reserved]
    (3) Notifies the recipient in writing of the change in 
responsibility and any other pertinent information,
    (4) [Reserved]
    (d) Relationship or association established after application for 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 assistance. If a 
relationship or association is established after an application has been 
filed or assistance has been provided, both recipient and employee are 
required to notify the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 official who is processing or servicing the assistance. FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 Guide Letter 1900-D-1 
(available in any FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
office) may be used for the notice.
    (e) Relationship or association with a State Office, Finance Office 
or National Office employee. If an identified relationship or 
association is with an employee at a State Office (other than a State 
Director), Finance Office or National Office, the processing/servicing 
official completes and submits FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 Guide Letter 1900-D-2 (available in any FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 office) to the State Director 
in the normal manner. The State Director reviews the information, 
determines the need for special handling, designates the processing/
servicing official, completes and submits FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 Guide Letter 1900-D-3 (available in any FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 office) to the 
Administrator for written concurrence. When the Administrator's 
concurrence is received, the State Director returns completed FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 Guide Letter 1900-D-3 to 
the original official who completes the action described in paragraph 
(c) of this section.
    (f) Relationship or association with a State Director. If an 
identified relationship or association is with a State Director, the 
processing/servicing official completes and submits FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 Guide Letter 1900-D-2 
(available in any FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
office) to the Administrator. The Administrator reviews, determines the 
need for special handling, designates the processing/servicing official, 
completes and returns FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 Guide Letter 1900-D-3 (available in any FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 office) to the original official who completes 
the action described in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (g) Change in relationship or association, status of FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 assistance, or employee's duty 
station. If the relationship or association has changed, the application 
denied or the assistance otherwise terminated, or the FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 employee's duty station 
changed, the designated processing/servicing official completes FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 Guide Letter 1900-D-2 
(available in any FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
office) with the new information and submits it. The review process 
takes place as described in paragraphs (a) through (e) of this section 
to determine if processing/servicing activity may return to normal or 
requires another change. If the assistance is denied or otherwise 
terminated, the designated official notifies the original official.


<R05>
Sec. 1900.154  Determining the need for special handling.

    The State Director (or Administrator, under Sec. 1900.153(e) or 
Sec. 1900.155(a) of this subpart):
    (a) [Reserved]

[[Page 19]]

    (b) Determines whether the reported relationship or association is 
defined in Sec. 1900.152 of this subpart and would violate the 
provisions of Sec. 1900.151(a) of this subpart,
    (c)-(f) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1900.155  Designating the processing/servicing official.

    (a) Designating an official with equivalent authority. The State 
Director (or Administrator, under Sec. 1900.253(e) of this subpart or 
this paragraph) designates a nonrelated or nonassociated FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 official authorized to conduct 
the activity under program regulations, established delegation of 
authority and approval authority under subpart A of part 1901 of this 
chapter, and whose duty station is most convenient to the recipient and 
to the security property. A type and/or amount of assistance processed 
or serviced by a County Supervisor or at a County Office should be 
assigned only to another County Supervisor or County Office. A type and/
or amount of assistance processed or serviced by a District Director or 
at a District Office should be assigned only to another District 
Director or District Office.
    (b) County Committee. For processing or servicing decisions to be 
made by a County Committee, if the recipient is a member, a different 
County Committee is designated. If the recipient is related to or 
associated with the member, notwithstanding the provisions of Sec. 
1900.151(a)(3) of this subpart, the State Director may permit the 
decision to be made by the local committee, if the related/associated 
member abstains.
    (c) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1900.156  Special handling--processing.

    (a) [Reserved]
    (b) Eligibility determination. The designated processing official 
reviews the application and develops additional data as necessary. Upon 
determination of whether the assistance will be provided, the designated 
processing official notifies the applicant of the decision in writing 
under program regulations, subpart A of part 1910 of this chapter, and 
subpart B of part 1900. If the determination is favorable, unless 
otherwise designated, the complete application is returned to the 
original processing official for docket preparation. If the 
determination is unfavorable, the designated processing official as 
decisionmaker participates in the appeal process to its conclusion.
    (c)-(e) [Reserved]
    (f) Closing agent. Unless there is a clear or apparent conflict of 
interest, closing will be at a location and by a closing agent chosen by 
the recipient.
    (g) Supervised bank account. Unless there is a clear or apparent 
conflict of interest, any supervised bank account (or construction 
account) is established at a financial institution chosen by the 
recipient under supbart A of part 1902 of this chapter. Countersignature 
authority is delegated only to a nonrelated or nonassociated FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 official.
    (h) Construction inspection. Construction inspections are delegated 
to a nonrelated or nonassociated employee authorized to conduct 
inspections, whose duty station is nearest the construction site. The 
designated processing/servicing official notifies the builder (or 
architect/engineer) in writing of how and from whom to request 
inspections.


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 1900.157-1900.200  [Reserved]


<R03>
PART 1901_PROGRAM-RELATED INSTRUCTIONS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Subparts A-D [Reserved]

             Subpart E_Civil Rights Compliance Requirements

Sec.
1901.201 Purpose.
1901.202 Nondiscrimination in FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
          Law 103-354 programs.
1901.203 Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968.
1901.204 Compliance reviews.
1901.205 Nondiscrimination in construction financed with FmHA or its 
          successor agency under Public Law 103-354 loan or grant.

Exhibit A to Subpart E--Civil Rights Compliance Reviews
Exhibit B to Subpart E--Summary Report of Civil Rights Compliance 
          Reviews

[[Page 20]]

Exhibit C to Subpart E--FmHA or Its Successor Agency Under Public Law 
          103-354 Financed Contract
Exhibit D to Subpart E--Goals and Timetables for Minorities and Women
Exhibit E to Subpart E--List of Regional Offices, Office of Federal 
          Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP), U.S. Department of Labor 
          (USDL)

Subpart F_Procedures for the Protection of Historical and Archeological 
                               Properties

1901.251 Purpose.
1901.252 Policy.
1901.253 Definitions.
1901.254 Scope.
1901.255 Historical and archeological assessments.
1901.256-1901.258 [Reserved]
1901.259 Actions to be taken when archeological properties are 
          discovered during construction.
1901.260 Coordination with other agencies.
1901.261 [Reserved]
1901.262 State supplement.

Exhibit A to Subpart F--National Park Service, U.S. Department of the 
          Interior Regional Offices

Subparts G-J [Reserved]

    Subpart K_Certificates of Beneficial Ownership and Insured Notes

1901.501 Purpose.
1901.502 Policy.
1901.503 Definitions.
1901.504 Authorities and responsibilities.
1901.505 Certificates of beneficial ownership in FmHA or its successor 
          agency under Public Law 103-354 loans.
1901.506 Book-entry procedure for FmHA or its successor agency under 
          Public Law 103-354 securities--issuance and redemption of 
          certificate by Reserve bank.
1901.507 Certificates of beneficial ownership issued by the FmHA or its 
          successor agency under Public Law 103-354 Finance Office.
1901.508 Servicing of insured notes outstanding with investors.
1901.509 Loss, theft, destruction, mutilation, or defacement of insured 
          notes, insurance contracts, and certificates of beneficial 
          ownership.

Subparts L-N [Reserved]

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 301; 7 U.S.C. 1989; 42 U.S.C. 1480.

Subparts A-D [Reserved]


<R04>
             Subpart E_Civil Rights Compliance Requirements

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 301; 7 U.S.C. 1989; 40 U.S.C. 442; 42 U.S.C. 
1480, 2942.


<R05>
Sec. 1901.201  Purpose.

    This subpart contains policies and procedures for implementing the 
regulations of the Department of Agriculture issued pursuant to Title VI 
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 
1968, Executive Order 11246 and the Equal Credit Opportunity Act of 
1974, as they relate to the Farmers Home Administration (FmHA) or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354. Nothing herein shall be 
interpreted to prohibit preference to American Indians on Indian 
Reservations.

[41 FR 40112, Sept. 17, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 1901.202  Nondiscrimination in FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 programs.

    (a) Nondiscrimination by recipients of FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 assistance. (1) No recipient of FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 financial assistance will 
directly or through contractual or other arrangements subject any person 
or cause any person to be subjected to discrimination on the ground of 
race, color, or national origin, with respect to any program or 
facility. This prohibition applies but is not restricted to unequal 
treatment in priority, quality, quantity, methods, or charges for 
service, use, occupancy or benefit, participation in the service or 
benefit available, or in the use, occupancy or benefit of any structure, 
facility, or improvement provided with FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 financial assistance.
    (2) Specifically, and without limiting the general applicability of 
this subpart, such recipient will not on the grounds of race, color, or 
national origin:
    (i) Deny any person the use, occupancy, or enjoyment of the whole or 
any part of real or personal property or service, financial aid, or 
other benefit under any program or facility.

[[Page 21]]

    (ii) Provide any person with any service, use, occupancy, or other 
benefit different from that provided others by the program or facility.
    (iii) Subject any person to segregation or separate treatment in any 
matter related to his or her receipt of any service or other benefit.
    (iv) Restrict in any way any person's enjoyment of any right, 
privilege, or advantage enjoyed by others through the facility or 
activity.
    (v) Treat any person differently from others in determining whether 
he or she satisfies any requirements or conditions for any admission or 
membership in the recipient or in any other organization.
    (vi) Deny any person an opportunity or restrict opportunity to 
participate in a program or facility by:
    (A) Refusing or failing to provide notice or services provided 
others for the purpose of encouraging participation in the program or 
facility; or
    (B) Providing any person with such notice or services different from 
the notice or services provided others.
    (vii) Utilize criteria or methods of administration that have the 
effect of subjecting a person to discrimination with respect to any 
program or facility or defeating or substantially impairing the 
achievement of the objectives of a program or facility.
    (viii) Select sites or locate facilities with the purpose or effect 
of:
    (A) Excluding individuals from, denying them the benefits of, or 
subjecting them to discrimination under any programs to which the 
regulations in this subpart apply; or
    (B) Defeating or substantially impairing the achievement of the 
objectives of the regulations in this subpart.
    (ix) Continue any previous or existing discriminatory practices, but 
will take affirmative action to overcome the effects of such 
discrimination.
    (x) Deny any person the opportunity to participate as a member of a 
planning or advisory body which is an integral part of the program.
    (b) Nondiscrimination by FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 employees. (1) No. FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 employee will exclude from participation in, or deny the 
benefits of, any program or activity administered by FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354, or subject to discrimination 
any person in the United States on the ground of race, color, religion, 
sex, national origin, or marital status.
    (2) No FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
employee will:
    (i) Be limited in the discharge of his or her responsibilities to 
working with applicants solely on the basis of race, color, religion, 
sex, national origin, or marital status.
    (ii) Obstruct equal access to buildings, facilities, structures, or 
lands under the control of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354.
    (iii) Deny under any program or activity of FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 equal opportunity for employment; for 
participation in meetings, demonstrations, training activities or 
programs; for receiving awards; for receipt of information disseminated 
by publication, news, radio, and other media; for obtaining contracts, 
grants, loans or other financial assistance, or for selection to assist 
in the administration of programs or activities of FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354.
    (3) No FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
employee will, while conducting official business, participate in or 
attend any segregated meetings or meetings held in a segregated facility 
from which persons are excluded because of race, color, religion, sex, 
national origin, or marital status.
    (c) Intimidating or retaliatory acts. No recipient or other person 
will intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any person 
for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege under this 
subpart, or because a person has made a complaint or has testified, 
assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, 
or hearing related to a complaint. The identity of complainants will be 
kept confidential except to the extent necessary to carry out the 
purposes of this subpart.
    (d) Nondiscrimination Agreement. The County Supervisor will, at the 
time

[[Page 22]]

FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 assistance is 
requested, give all applicants for loans and grants listed in Sec. 
1901.204(a) a copy of Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 400-4, ``Nondiscrimination Agreement,'' and inform the applicant 
that assistance will be conditioned upon executing this form and 
complying with the requirements of this subpart.
    (e) Covenants. Each instrument of conveyance for loans subject to 
title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as outlined in Sec. 1901.204, 
must contain the following covenant: ``The property described herein was 
obtained or improved through Federal financial assistance. This property 
is subject to the provisions of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 
and the regulations issued pursuant thereto for so long as the property 
continues to be used for the same or similar purpose for which financial 
assistance was extended or for so long as the purchaser owns it, 
whichever is longer.''
    (f) Posters. The nondiscrimination poster, ``And Justice For All,'' 
will be displayed at the facilities and/or office of any borrower or 
grantee if the facilities have been financed by an FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 loan or grant and are subject to title 
VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. This poster also will be displayed 
in all FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 State and 
County Offices.
    (g) Racial and ethnic data. Recipients should maintain, for review 
by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 and other 
appropriate agencies, racial and ethnic data showing the extent to which 
members of minority groups are beneficiaries of FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354-assisted programs. The data should 
identify recipients as White, Negro or Black, American Indian, Spanish 
Surname, Oriental and Other.
    (h) Discrimination complaints. (1) Any person or any specific class 
of persons, if they believe they have been subject to discrimination 
prohibited by this subpart, may file a written complaint with any FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 office, or, if they 
prefer with the Secretary of Agriculture. Persons who complain of 
discrimination will be advised of their rights to file complaints. A 
complaint must be filed not later than 180 days after the date of the 
alleged discrimination, unless the time for filing is extended by the 
Secretary of Agriculture.
    (2) A complaint filed with the County Supervisor or the State 
Director will be referred promptly to the Administrator, Attention: 
Equal Opportunity Officer. Attached to the complaint should be a 
statement by the County Supervisor or State Director identifying the 
recipient and type of assistance provided by FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354, indicating whether a nondiscrimination 
agreement has been signed, and giving any other available pertinent 
information about the complaint.

[41 FR 40112, Sept. 17, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 1901.203  Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968.

    FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 employees, 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 borrowers, 
contractors, packagers, and others who provide housing for sale or rent, 
are obligated under the provisions of title VIII of the Civil Rights Act 
of 1968 to provide fair housing to all persons regardless of race, 
color, religion, sex, or national origin.
    (a) Coverage. The prohibitions against discrimination in the sale, 
rental, or financing of housing contained in title VIII apply to:
    (1) All dwellings financed by loans made by the Federal Government 
and, therefore, to all RH borrowers.
    (2) Any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings 
defined as:
    (i) The owner of a dwelling intended for occupancy by five or more 
families.
    (ii) Any person who has participated as principal in the sale or 
rental of three or more dwellings in the past year.
    (iii) Any person who has served as sale or rental agent in two or 
more transactions in the past year.
    (b) Discrimination acts prohibited. Title VIII prohibits FmHA or its 
successor

[[Page 23]]

agency under Public Law 103-354 employees, multiple housing borrowers, 
and those with whom FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 does business (contractors, realtors, packagers) from:
    (1) Refusing to sell or rent a particular dwelling because of a 
person's race, color, religion, or national origin. The following 
actions constitute violations of this provision:
    (i) Refusing to package an RH loan application.
    (ii) Refusing or failing to show a particular dwelling or home in a 
particular subdivision.
    (iii) Directing persons only to areas populated by those of similar 
race, color, religion, or national origin when housing is available in 
other areas.
    (iv) Representing unsold dwellings or sites as sold to prospective 
buyers.
    (2) Requiring applicants for services to meet different terms or 
conditions because of their race, color, religion, or national origin; 
for example, requiring larger rents or downpayments from minority 
applicants.
    (3) Including in any advertising either directly or through visual 
representation a preference for applicants of a particular race or 
ethnic origin.
    (i) Words indicative of the race or ethnic background of the 
dwelling or landlord such as ``White private home,'' or ``all Black 
subdivision,'' may not be used in advertising housing financed or to be 
financed by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354.
    (ii) Selection of advertising media and the areas to be covered by 
any advertising must be made to reach potential applicants of all races 
or ethnic origins.
    (c) FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
affirmative action. (1) It is the policy of the Farmers Home 
Administration or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 to 
administer its housing program affirmatively so individuals of similar 
income levels in the housing market area have housing choices available 
to them regardless of their race, color, religion, sex, or national 
origin. Each participant in FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 housing program shall pursue affirmative fair housing 
marketing policies in soliciting buyers and tenants, in determining 
their eligibility and in concluding sales and rental transactions.
    (2) Applicability. The affirmative fair housing marketing 
requirements shall apply as follows:
    (i) Participants in FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 housing programs who request approval for subdivision 
development involving five or more sites, multi-family projects with 
five or more units including self-help technical assistance grantees 
assisting five or more families or five or more conditional commitments 
for single family dwelling units during a 12-month period must submit an 
affirmative marketing plan.
    (ii) An Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing Plan is required to be 
prepared and submitted to FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 by the contractor when:
    (A) A real estate broker is offering five or more single-family 
dwellings located in the same subdivision for sale under an exclusive 
listing contract with FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354.
    (B) An auctioneer under contract with FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 is offering five or more single-family 
dwellings located in the same subdivision for sale by public auction.
    (C) A contractor under a contract with FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 is managing a multiple-family housing project 
of five or more units or five or more single-family dwellings located in 
the same subdivision.
    (3) Affirmative fair housing marketing plans will be submitted on 
form HUD 935.2(3-76) or the participant must be a signatory to a 
voluntary affirmative marketing agreement approved by the Department of 
Housing and Urban Development. The plan, if submitted on form HUD 
935.2(3-76) shall describe an affirmative program which will meet the 
following requirements:
    (i) Reaching those prospective buyers or tenants, regardless of sex, 
of majority and minority groups in the marketing area who traditionally 
would

[[Page 24]]

not be expected to apply for such housing without special outreach 
efforts because of existing racial or socio-economic patterns.
    (ii) Undertaking and/or maintaining a non-discriminatory hiring 
policy in recruiting from both majority and minority groups including 
both sexes, for staff engaged in the sale or rental of properties.
    (iii) Training and instructing employees engaged in the sale or 
rental properties in the policy and application of nondiscrimination and 
fair housing.
    (iv) Displaying in all sales and rental offices the ``Fair Housing'' 
poster.
    (v) Posting in a conspicuous position on each property and FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 construction site a sign 
displaying the equal opportunity logo or the following statement:

    We are pledged to the letter and spirit of U.S. policy for the 
achievement of equal housing opportunity throughout the nation. We 
encourage and support an affirmative advertising and marketing program 
in which there are no barriers to obtaining housing because of race, 
color, religion, sex, or national origin.

    (vi) Undertaking efforts to publicize the availability of housing 
opportunities to minority persons through the type of media customarily 
used by the applicant or participant, including minority publications 
and other minority outlets available in the housing market area. As part 
of these efforts all advertising must include either the equal housing 
opportunity logo or statement. When illustrations or persons are 
included they shall depict persons of both sexes and of majority and 
minority groups.
    (4) The affirmative fair housing marketing plans or evidence that 
the participant is covered by an approved voluntary affirmative 
marketing agreement must be submitted as follows:
    (i) For subdivisions with the preliminary submission of plans and 
specifications.
    (ii) For multi-family projects, including rural rental housing, 
labor housing, cooperative housing, technical assistance grants and site 
development loans with SF 424.1, ``Application for Federal Assistance 
(For Non-construction)'', or SF 424.2, ``Application for Federal 
Assistance (For Construction)'', or with the letter of application. 
Subsequent loans or grants extended to the participant will necessitate 
a new or updated plan.
    (iii) For conditional commitments for five or more individual 
dwelling units in a 12-month period with the application for the fifth 
conditional commitment.
    (iv) For real estate brokers listing housing properties on an 
exclusive basis, at any time more than 5 properties are listed for sale 
by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 in the same 
subdivision.
    (5) Affirmative fair housing marketing plans will cover the 
following time periods:
    (i) For subdivision, from time of application until all lots are 
sold.
    (ii) For multi-family projects from time of application until the 
loan is paid in full or for so long as the project is being used for the 
same or a similar purpose for which the funds were extended.
    (iii) For conditional commitments involving individual dwelling 
units, one year or until all units built through conditional commitments 
issued within the one year period have been sold.
    (iv) For real estate brokers who list acquired rural housing 
properties under an exclusive listing contract, one year or until all 
properties covered under the plan have been sold, whichever is later.
    (6) Affirmative fair housing marketing plans will be reviewed and 
approved by the official authorized to approve the assistance requested. 
The County Supervisor will review and submit with comments to the 
official authorized to approve the assistance requested, those fair 
housing marketing plans where the assistance requested exceeds his 
approval authority. Any participant covered by this section must have an 
approved affirmative fair housing marketing plan for any assistance 
approved 90 or more days after the issuance of these regulations.
    (7) Approved affirmative fair housing marketing plans will be made 
available by the participant for public inspection at the participant's 
place of business

[[Page 25]]

and at each sales or rental office. Participants who fulfill the 
requirements of this section by filing a Form HUD 9352(3-76) will 
maintain records to reflect their efforts in fulfilling the affirmative 
fair housing marketing plan. These records will be made available for 
review by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
personnel. Affirmative fair housing marketing plans will be reviewed by 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 personnel in 
accordance with section 2006-M of this chapter.
    (8) Applicants failing to comply with these requirements will be 
liable to sanctions authorized by regulations, rules or policies 
governing the program in which they are participating including but not 
limited to denial of further participation in FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 programs and referral to the Department 
of Justice for suit by the United States for injunctive or other 
appropriate relief.
    (d) Discrimination complaints. (1) Complaints against FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 employees or borrowers under 
title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 received by the County Office 
will be sent to the State Director. The State Director will forward the 
complaints to the Administrator, Attention: Equal Opportunity Officer.
    (2) Complaints of discrimination against packagers, contractors or 
others with whom FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
deals should be filed with the Department of Housing and Urban 
Development. However, these complaints may be accepted by FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 employees and routed through 
the State Director to the Administrator, Attention: Equal Opportunity 
Officer.
    (e) Relations to other regulations. Nothing in this section in any 
way interferes with the administration of the nondiscrimination 
requirements of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 or the ``Equal 
Opportunity in Housing Certification,'' signed by all packagers.

[41 FR 40112, Sept. 17, 1976, as amended at 42 FR 45894, Sept. 13, 1977; 
42 FR 58737, Nov. 11, 1977; 50 FR 23903, June 7, 1985; 53 FR 27825, July 
25, 1988; 55 FR 13503, Apr. 11, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 1901.204  Compliance reviews.

    (a) Recipients subject to reviews. Recipients of the following kinds 
of loans and/or grants who received their loans or advances of funds on 
or after January 3, 1965, will be reviewed for compliance in accordance 
with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Guaranteed loans are not 
covered by Title VI and, therefore, are not subject to compliance 
reviews.
    (1) Economic Opportunity loans to individuals for nonagricultural 
enterprises.
    (2) Loans for Water and Waste Disposal facilities, including 
Resource Conservation and Development loans for this purpose.
    (3) Community Facility loans.
    (4) Watershed loans and advances.
    (5) Recreation Association loans including those made from Resource 
Conservation and Development funds.
    (6) Economic Opportunity loans to incorporated cooperative 
associations (Compliance reviews on unincorporated Economic Opportunity 
cooperatives subject to title VI will be conducted only as the need 
arises or as directed by either the State Director or the 
Administrator).
    (7) Loans to Timber Development organizations.
    (8) Rural Renewal loans and advances.
    (9) Rural Rental Housing (formerly Senior Citizen rental) and Rural 
Cooperative Housing loans.
    (10) Labor Housing loans and/or grants.
    (11) Rural Housing Site loans.
    (12) Business and Industrial Insured loans or grants.
    (13) Technical Assistance grants.
    (14) Development grants for water and waste disposal.
    (15) Technical Assistance and Training grants in accordance with 
Title XIII of Pub. L. 99-198.
    (16) Rural Business Enterprise grants and Television Demonstration 
grants.
    (17) Section 601 Energy Impacted Area Development Assistance grants.
    (18) Nonprofit National Corporations grants.
    (19) System for Delivery of Certain Rural Development Programs Panel 
Grants.

[[Page 26]]

    (20) Emergency Community Water Assistance grants.
    (21) Section 306C WWD loans and grants.
    (22) Housing Application Packaging Grants.
    (23) Rural and Cooperative Development Grants in subpart F of part 
4284 of this title.
    (24) Community Facilities Grants in part 3570, subpart B, of this 
title.
    (b) Duration of obligation for conducting reviews. Compliance 
reviews will be conducted on recipients of loans and grants listed in 
paragraph (a) of this section:
    (1) Until the loan is paid in full or otherwise satisfied; or sold 
through the sale of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354's assets; or
    (2) Until the last advance of grant funds is made for the grants 
listed in paragraph (a) of this section.
    (c) Compliance reviews of loans and grants to individuals--(1) 
Compliance Review Officer. The County Supervisor will conduct compliance 
reviews of loans made to individuals.
    (2) Type of review. If the borrower is currently receiving loan 
supervision, the County Supervisor may complete the compliance review 
based on his knowledge of the borrower's operations from other visits. 
Otherwise the County Supervisor must visit the borrower's facilities. 
Before completing the compliance review, the County Supervisor should be 
aware of:
    (i) The borrower's operating regulations, for example, the grounds 
for eviction from a Rural Rental Housing Project.
    (ii) The borrower's method of advertising the facility to the 
public, if there is any advertising, including how well these methods 
reach the minority community.
    (iii) Any records of request for use of the borrower's facility.
    (3) Recording results of review. The County Supervisor's 
determination that the borrower is or is not in compliance with title 
VI, together with information such as that outlined in paragraph (b)(2) 
of this section, will be recorded in the running record. Review of 
individual Rural Rental Housing borrowers will be recorded on Form FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 400-8, ``Compliance 
Review (Nondiscrimination by Recipients of Financial Assistance Through 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354.)''
    (4) Reporting results of review. If the borrower is in compliance, 
the County Supervisor will report his findings to the State Director. 
Exhibit A is a sample report. In the case of Rural Rental Housing 
borrowers, a copy of Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 400-8 will be filed in the borrower's County Office loan docket, 
and the original will be sent to the State Director. If the borrower is 
not in compliance, the borrower's name, location, type of loan involved, 
and the reasons for the finding of noncompliance will be sent to the 
State Director.
    (5) Forwarding report of noncompliance. The State Director will see 
that all compliance review reports are complete. If the recipient was 
found in noncompliance, the State Director will immediately send a copy 
of the compliance review report to the Administrator, Attention: Equal 
Opportunity Officer, with recommended action to take to bring the 
recipient into compliance.
    (d) Review of loans or grants to organizations (any borrower or 
grantee other than an individual)--(1) Designation of compliance review 
officer. The State Director, except for Technical Assistance and 
Training grants (Pub. L. 99-198) and Nonprofit National Corporations 
grants, will designate the Compliance Review Officer for recipient 
organization. County Supervisors may be designated only if they have 
received approved compliance review training. Otherwise, the Compliance 
Review Officer must be a member of the State staff. For Technical 
Assistance and Training grants and Nonprofit National Corporations 
grants, the Assistant Administrator for Community and Business Programs 
will designate the Compliance Review Officer for recipient 
organizations.
    (2) Type of review. Compliance reviews may be completed in 
connection with regular supervision visits to organizations and must 
include an inspection of the FmHA or its successor

[[Page 27]]

agency under Public Law 103-354-financed facility. Before determining 
that the recipient is or is not complying with the provisions in Form 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 400-4, the 
Compliance Review Officer will:
    (i) Observe the recipient's records, including records on the 
present membership by race, the handling of applications for use of the 
facility, the user rates and membership fees or dues, and the facility's 
operating regulations.
    (ii) Determine if the recipient advertises for members or users. If 
so, observe the effectiveness of the recipient's methods of advertising 
the availability of the facility to the public, and especially the 
effectiveness of this advertising in reaching the minority community.
    (iii) Interview organization officials, members, and employees. In 
reviews of recipients of Technical Assistance grants, members of the 
self-help housing groups should be interviewed to determine the way in 
which they were recruited.
    (iv) Interview informed local community leaders, including minority 
leaders, if any to determine if the facility is operating without 
discrimination because of race, color, or national origin.
    (3) Recording results of reviews--(i) Association, Watershed, 
Resource Conservation and Development, and Rural Renewal loans involving 
recreation facilities. Reviews will be recorded on Form FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 400-7, ``Compliance Reviews 
for Recreational Loans to Associations (FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 Borrowers).'' If the organization is found in 
compliance with title VI, the original of the form will be sent to the 
State Director, and a copy will be filed in the borrower's County Office 
loan docket. If the organization is found in noncompliance, any 
additional information which led to the finding will be sent with the 
form.
    (ii) Loans and/or grants for Water and Waste Disposal systems, 
incorporated Economic Opportunity cooperatives, Grazing associations, 
Rural Rental Housing, Labor Housing, and Rural Housing Sites. Reviews 
will be completed on Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 400-8. The original of the form will be sent to the State 
Director and a copy filed in the borrower's County Office loan docket. 
If the organization is found in noncompliance, any additional 
information which led to the finding will be sent with the form.
    (iii) Timber Development organizations, Rural Cooperative Housing 
loans, and Technical Assistance grants. The information obtained during 
the compliance review as well as the Compliance Review Officer's 
determination of the borrower's compliance or noncompliance will be 
recorded in the running record. If the organization is found in 
compliance, a report (see exhibit A) will be sent to the State Director. 
If the organization is not in compliance, the organization's name, 
location, type of loan received, and all information which led to the 
finding will be sent to the State Director.
    (iv) Technical Assistance and Training grants (Pub. L. 99-198) and 
Nonprofit National Corporations grants. The Compliance Review Officer 
will record in the running record information obtained during the 
compliance review and the determination of recipient's compliance or 
noncompliance. A report will be prepared and sent to the Assistant 
Administrator, Community and Business Programs, for each recipient.
    (4) Mandatory hook-up ordinance. Compliance reviews of public entity 
borrowers or grantees for water and waste disposal facilities who are 
operating under the provisions of a mandatory hook-up ordinance will 
consist of a certification by the borrower or grantee that the ordinance 
is still in effect and is being enforced.
    (5) Forwarding noncompliance report. The State Director will see 
that the reports are complete. If the recipient was found in 
noncompliance, the State Director will immediately send a copy of the 
report to the Administrator, Attention: Equal Opportunity Officer, with 
action proposed to bring the recipient into compliance. For Technical 
Assistance and Training grants and Nonprofit National Corporations 
grants, the Assistant Administrator, Community and Business Programs, 
will send a copy of the report to the Equal Opportunity Officer.

[[Page 28]]

    (e) Timing of reviews--(1) Reporting year. The State Director will 
schedule Civil Rights compliance reviews from November 1 to October 31 
of each year. For example, compliance reviews scheduled during 1976 
should be conducted after November 1, 1975, but before October 31, 1976.
    (2) Initial reviews--(i) Water and Waste Disposal loan and/or grant. 
The initial compliance review will be conducted before loan or grant 
closing or before the construction begins, whichever occurs first.
    (ii) Technical Assistance grants, Technical Assistance and Training 
grants (Pub. L. 99-198) and Nonprofit National Corporations grants. The 
initial compliance review will be conducted before the grant is closed.
    (iii) Rural Housing Site loan. The initial compliance review will be 
conducted at the beginning of the sale of the sites developed with the 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 loan.
    (iv) Watershed loans for future water supply. The initial compliance 
review will be made when usage of the stored water begins.
    (v) All other loans and/or grants. The initial compliance review of 
loans and/or grants listed in paragraph (a) of this section will be 
conducted within the first reporting year after the loan or grant is 
closed or after Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 400-4 is signed.
    (3) Subsequent reviews. The State Director is responsible for 
requiring subsequent compliance reviews at intervals not less than 90 
days, or more than 3 years, after the previous compliance review.
    (i) For Water and Waste Disposal organizations with loans that have 
had at least two compliance reviews after loan closing covering a six-
year period, and where no discriminatory practices are indicated, the 
frequency of subsequent reviews may be reduced to six years.
    (ii) If Water and Waste Disposal organizations have merged to form a 
new organization, two reviews will be conducted at 3-year intervals 
after the merger and one every 6 years thereafter, provided no 
discriminatory practices are noted.
    (f) State Office summary reports. The State Director will keep a 
list of all compliance reviews conducted during the reporting year so as 
to schedule each year's reviews. The State Director will submit a copy 
of this list to the Administrator, Attention: Equal Opportunity Office, 
no later than July 31 of each year. Recipients found in noncompliance 
will also be listed on the summary report. Exhibit B is a sample report. 
For Technical Assistance and Training grants and Nonprofit National 
Corporations grants, the Assistant Administrator, Community and Business 
Programs, will submit a summary report, using exhibit B of this subpart 
as a guide, to the Equal Opportunity Officer by July 31 of each year.

[41 FR 40112, Sept. 17, 1976, as amended at 52 FR 41949, Nov. 2, 1987; 
53 FR 3860, Feb. 10, 1988; 55 FR 5962, Feb. 21, 1990; 57 FR 11559, Apr. 
6, 1992; 58 FR 5565, Jan. 22, 1993; 58 FR 58643, Nov. 3, 1993; 59 FR 
41389, Aug. 12, 1994; 61 FR 3781, Feb. 2, 1996; 62 FR 16468, Apr. 7, 
1997; 62 FR 33510, June 19, 1997; 62 FR 42387, Aug. 7, 1997; 68 FR 
69952, Dec. 16, 2003]


<R05>
Sec. 1901.205  Nondiscrimination in construction financed with FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 loan or grant.

    Executive Order 11246 provides for equal employment opportunity 
without regard to race, color, religion, sex, or national origin and the 
elimination of all facilities segregated on the basis of race, color, 
religion, or national origin on construction work financed by FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 involving a construction 
contract of more than $10,000.
    (a) Compliance. This section applies to Federal or federally 
assisted construction contracts or subcontracts in excess of $10,000 for 
on-site construction. It also applies to invitations for bids published 
for such construction. If construction work of over $10,000 is partially 
financed by another Federal Agency, the County Supervisor will try to 
reach an agreement as to which agency will administer the 
nondiscrimination requirements. If unable to reach an agreement, the 
County Supervisor will refer the case to the State Director.
    (b) Requirements of applicants, contractors, or subcontractors and 
responsible

[[Page 29]]

FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 officials--(1) 
Applicant. The applicant will be required to execute Form FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 400-1, ``Equal Opportunity 
Agreement,'' at the time the loan is closed or before construction is 
started, whichever occurs first. If the applicant is an incorporated 
association, a resolution of the governing body will authorize execution 
of the form. Municipalities or other public bodies will have to 
incorporate references to this form in the loan resolution before it is 
adopted. If the applicant wants to publish for bids, the applicant must 
obtain Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-
5, ``Invitation for Bid (Construction Contract)'' which is in compliance 
with Executive Order 11246, from the local FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 County Supervisor.
    (2) Contractor or Subcontractor. (i) The prospective contractor or 
subcontractor must submit Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 400-6, ``Compliance Statement,'' to the County Supervisor 
before contract bid negotiations, and comply with the requirements of 
Executive Order 11246, which are included with Form FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-6, ``Construction 
Contract,'' during the performance of the contract. The contract will 
contain the required ``Standard Federal Equal Employment Opportunity 
Construction Contract Specifications'' goals and timetables as set forth 
in exhibit D.
    (ii) The contractor or subcontractor will prepare and submit Form 
Contract Compliance (CC) 257, ``Monthly Employment Utilization Report'' 
to the appropriate regional office of the U.S. Department of Labor 
(USDL) (see exhibit E, ``List of Regional Offices'') by the fifth of 
each month through completion of the contract.
    (3) The County Supervisor or the responsible FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 official will: (i) Deliver to the 
contractor the following forms, as appropriate:
    (A) Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 400-
3, ``Notice to Contractors and Applicants,'' with an attached Equal 
Employment Opportunity Poster. Posters in Spanish will be provided when 
appropriate,
    (B) Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 400-
6, and
    (C) Form CC 257.
    (ii) Deliver to the applicant Form FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 1924-5 when contractors are to be invited to 
submit bids, and Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 1924-6 to contract for construction.
    (iii) Explain to applicant and contractor the requirements of 
Executive Order 11246, when needed. However, inquiries concerning 
compliance must be addressed to the appropriate regional office of USDL 
(see exhibit E).
    (iv) Submit a report similar in form and content to exhibit C 
(``FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 Financed 
Contract'') of this Instruction to the appropriate regional office of 
USDL (Exhibit E) within 10 calendar days of the date a contract or 
subcontract in excess of $10,000 is awarded.
    (c) Contractors with 100 or more employees and contract over 
$10,000. Contractors with 100 or more employees and contract over 
$10,000, will file the following with the Joint Reporting Committee, 
1800 G Street NW., Washington, DC 20006:
    (1) SF-100 ``Employer Information Report EEO-1,'' within 30 days of 
contract award unless the report has been submitted within the past 12 
months, and
    (2) An annual report by March 31, so long as the contractor holds 
any FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 financed 
contract in excess of $10,000.
    (d) Contractor with at least 50 employees and contract of $50,000 or 
more. Each contractor or subcontractor with at least 50 employees and 
contract of $50,000 or more, must develop a written affirmative action 
compliance program for each project. This must be on file in each 
contractor's or subcontractor's personnel file within 120 days after the 
beginning of the contract. Form AD-425 provides guidelines for 
developing compliance programs.

[[Page 30]]

    (e) Compliance during construction. The County Supervisor will:
    (1) Check to see that:
    (i) Required posters are displayed.
    (ii) There is no evidence of discrimination in employment.
    (2) Record findings on Form FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 1924-12, ``Inspection Report.''
    (3) If there is any evidence of noncompliance, the County Supervisor 
will report all the facts to the appropriate office of USDL (see exhibit 
E).
    (f) Hometown Plans. All construction contracts and subcontracts in 
excess of $10,000, financed by FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354, in areas which have Hometown Plans regarding affirmative 
action and equal employment, are subject to the conditions set forth in 
the applicable plan. Each State Director should seek the advice of the 
OGC as to compliance with any such plans in the State Director's 
jurisdiction.
    (g) Discrimination complaints. (1) Complaints alleging 
discriminatory acts may be filed directly with the appropriate regional 
office of USDL (see exhibit E) or with the County Supervisor or the 
State Director for subsequent forwarding to the above address, by any 
employee or applicant for employment with a contractor or subcontractor.
    (2) Each complaint must be in writing and signed by the complainant 
(The FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 official 
receiving the complaint will assist complainant when necessary). The 
complaint will include:
    (i) Name, address, and telephone number of complainant.
    (ii) Name and address of the person allegedly discriminating.
    (iii) Date and place of the discrimination.
    (iv) Description of the discrimination.
    (v) Any other information that will assist in investigating and 
resolving the complaint.
    (3) Complaints must be filed not later than 180 days after the 
alleged act unless the State Director extends the time, for good cause 
shown by the complainant.

[43 FR 58356, Dec. 14, 1978, as amended at 44 FR 24852, Apr. 27, 1979; 
52 FR 8002, Mar. 13, 1987]


<R05>
   Sec. Exhibit A to Subpart E of Part 1901--Civil Rights Compliance 
                                 Reviews

To: State Director, FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354.

    Civil Rights compliance reviews have been conducted, and each 
recipient listed below was found in compliance with title VI of the 
Civil Rights Act of 1964. Information which led to this finding and my 
determination that the recipient is in compliance are in the running 
record of the recipient's file.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Type of assistance
               Recipient                         Case No.                  \1\               Date of review
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sam H. Smith..........................  99-05-7031 (rec.)........  OL                   Jan. 3, 1975.
John A. Jones.........................  99-05-8764...............  RL                   Feb. 17, 1975.
Medina Housing Association............  99-05-9176 grant.........  TA                   Mar. 5, 1975.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Indicate only the loans or grants received which are subject to compliance reviews.

________________________________________________________________________
                                                       County Supervisor


<R05>
Sec. Exhibit B to Subpart E of Part 1901--Summary Report of Civil Rights 
                           Compliance Reviews

To: Administrator, FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354.
Attention: Director, Equal Opportunity Staff.

    I. Civil Rights Compliance Reviews have been conducted, and the 
following recipients were found in compliance with title VI of the Civil 
Rights Act of 1964.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                        Type of review
                                                    --------------------
                Loan type           Loan number        Pre-award* post-
                                                           award**
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.
2.
3.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
*A pre-award review is a compliance review conducted prior to loan or
  grant approval.
**A post-award review is a compliance review conducted after loan
  closing.


[[Page 31]]

    II. The following recipients were found in non-compliance:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Type of review
                                                                         --------------------   Date report of
        Name of borrower               Loan type          Loan number       Pre-award post-   noncompliance sent
                                                                                 award           to nat. ofc.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.
2.
3.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

________________________________________________________________________
State Director.

(7 U.S.C. 1989; 42 U.S.C. 1480; 7 CFR 2.23; 7 CFR 2.70)

[47 FR 39127, Sept. 7, 1982]


<R05>
 Sec. Exhibit C to Subpart E of Part 1901--FmHA or Its Successor Agency 
               Under Public Law 103-354 Financed Contract

To: Area Director, Office of Federal Contract Compliance Program, U.S. 
          Department of Labor (DOL) (Insert address for your DOL area, 
          from exhibit E, FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
          103-354 Instruction 1901-E)

    We submit the following information relative to a construction 
contract in excess of $10,000:

1. Contractor's name:___________________________________________________
Address:________________________________________________________________
Telephone Number:_______________________________________________________
Employer's Identification Number:_______________________________________

2. Contract for: ---- $----------

Starting Date:__________________________________________________________
Completion Date:________________________________________________________
Contract Number:________________________________________________________
City:___________________________________________________________________
DOL Region:_____________________________________________________________

[52 FR 8002, Mar. 13, 1987]


<R05>
   Sec. Exhibit D to Subpart E of Part 1901--Goals and Timetables for 
                          Minorities and Women

    The preamble to regulations establishing a new part 60-4 to 41 CFR 
chapter 60 published at 43 FR 14888-14894, April 7, 1978, states that 
OFCCP contemplates proposing standards and goals for minorities within 
the very near future. Until that notice has been proposed and final 
action taken, construction contractors and subcontractors will continue 
to be subject to the goals and timetables for minority utilization on 
Federal and federally assisted construction existing now under Executive 
order 11246. Such goals are published in appendix B.
    Now, therefore, based on the foregoing and 41 CFR part 60-4, each 
contracting agency, each applicant, and each contractor shall include 
the appropriate goal set forth in appendix A and appendix B in all 
invitations for bids or other solicitations for federally involved 
construction contracts in excess of $10,000. The goals in appendix A 
hereby are established on a nationwide basis as the standards for female 
utilization for all trades.
    Appendix B established the goals for minority utilization which 
shall be applicable for the respective areas set forth in appendix B.
    Appendix A and appendix B shall be effective with respect to 
transactions for which the invitations for bids or other solicitations 
or amendments thereto are sent, on or after May 8, 1978.
                                                      Weldon J. Rougeau,
                                                        Director, OFCCP.
    March 28, 1978.

<R05>
                  Sec. Appendix A

    The following goals and timetables for female utilization shall be 
included in all Federal and federally assisted construction contracts 
and subcontracts in excess of $10,000. The goals are applicable to the 
contractor's aggregate on-site construction workforce whether or not 
part of that workforce is performing work on a Federal or federally 
assisted construction contract or subcontract.

                              area covered

    Goals for Women apply nationwide.

                          Goals and Timetables
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Goals
                          Timetable                            (percent)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
From Apr. 1, 1978 until Mar. 31, 1979........................        3.1
From Apr. 1, 1979 until Mar. 31, 1980........................        5.1
From Apr. 1, 1980 until Mar. 31, 1981........................        6.9
------------------------------------------------------------------------

<R05>
                  Sec. Appendix B

    Until further notice, the following goals and timetables for 
minority utilization shall be included in all Federal or federally 
assisted construction contracts and subcontracts in excess of $10,000 to 
be performed in the respective covered areas. The goals are applicable 
to the contractor's aggregate on-site construction workforce whether or

[[Page 32]]

not part of that workforce is performing work on a Federal or federally 
assisted construction contract or subcontract.

                               Region \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Region refers to the 10 regions in which the U.S. Department of 
Labor has offices. These Regions are headquartered in Boston, New York, 
Philadelphia, Atlanta, Chicago, Dallas, Kansas City, Denver, San 
Francisco, and Seattle, which are numbered I through X respectively.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           boston, mass. area

    Area covered--Arlington, Boston, Belmont, Brookline, Burlington, 
Cambridge, Canton, Chelsea, Dedham, Everett, Malden, Medford, Wakefield, 
Westwood, Winthrop, Winchester, Woburn, and the Islands of Boston 
Harbor, Mass.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  Asbestos workers............  10.8-10.12
                                Boilermakers................    9.6-12.0
                                Bricklayers.................    8.0-10.0
                                Carpenters..................   11.6-14.5
                                Cement masons...............   25.5-27.5
                                Electricians................     6.0-7.0
                                Elevator constructors.......    9.5-11.4
                                Glaziers....................    8.8-11.0
                                Ironworkers.................     5.9-6.9
                                Lathers.....................     6.9-8.9
                                Operating engineers.........   14.1-15.0
                                Painters....................    9.1-11.1
                                Pipefitters.................   11.0-12.1
                                Plasterers..................   20.5-22.5
                                Plumbers....................    9.8-11.8
                                Roofers.....................    8.4-10.5
                                Sheetmetal workers..........   10.1-12.1
                                Sprinkler fitters...........   12.3-15.6
                                All other trades............   10.3-12.3
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                       state of rhode island area

    Area covered--Statewide.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................         5.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                Region II

                            buffalo, ny area

    Area covered--Erie County and Buffalo, NY.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Timetable                        Trade             Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice................  All...................   10.6-13.2
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                             camden, nj area

    Area covered--Camden, NJ, area of Camden, Salem, and Gloucester 
Counties.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  Asbestos workers............   11.6-14.5
                                Boilermakers................   10.8-13.5
                                Bricklayers.................   17.8-20.0
                                Carpenters..................   11.2-13.0
                                Cement masons...............   12.0-15.0
                                Electricians................   14.9-17.8
                                Elevator constructors.......   10.8-13.5
                                Glaziers....................   16.0-20.0
                                Lathers.....................   10.8-13.5
                                Operating engineers.........   10.0-12.5
                                Painters/decorators/            8.8-12.8
                                 paperhangers.
                                Plasterers..................   17.0-19.0
                                Plumbers/pipefitters/           8.4-10.5
                                 steamfitters.
                                Roofers.....................    8.4-10.5
                                Sheetmetal workers..........   11.2-14.0
                                Sprinkler fitters...........   10.8-13.5
                                Structural metal workers....   12.9-15.3
                                Wharf 7 dock builders.......   10.8-13.5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                             elmira, ny area

    Area covered--Chemung, Steuben, Schuyler, Tioga, and Yates Counties, 
NY.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................     4.0-5.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          long island, ny area

    Area covered--Nassau and Suffolk Counties, NY.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................     6.0-8.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          westchester, ny area

    Area covered--Westchester County, NY.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................       11-13
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               Region III

                         state of delaware area

    Area covered--State of Delaware.

[[Page 33]]



                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................       11-13
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                         philadelphia, pa, area

    Area covered--Bucks, Chester, Delaware, Montgomery, and Philadelphia 
Counties, PA.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  Ironworkers.................       22-26
                                Plumbers and pipefitters....       20-24
                                Steamfitters................       20-24
                                Sheetmetal workers..........       19-23
                                Electrical workers..........       19-23
                                Elevator construction              19-23
                                 workers.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          pittsburgh, pa, area

    Area covered--Allegheny County, PA.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  Asbestos workers............   24.3-27.8
                                Boilermakers................   33.8-37.7
                                Bricklayers.................   11.9-13.0
                                Carpenters..................   11.8-12.9
                                Cement masons...............   16.3-18.1
                                Electricians................   17.0-20.3
                                Glaziers....................   26.9-30.4
                                Ironworkers.................   25.5-29.9
                                Lathers.....................   12.7-13.8
                                Operating engineers.........   44.2-48.3
                                Painters....................   16.4-17.9
                                Plasterers..................   34.3-38.0
                                Plumbers....................     7.8-9.2
                                Roofers.....................   47.1-50.1
                                Sheetmetal workers..........   26.0-26.9
                                Steamfitters................   10.1-12.9
                                Tile setters................   13.6-16.0
                                All other...................   27.6-31.5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          washington, dc, area

    Area covered--District of Columbia; the Virginia cities of 
Alexandria, Fairfax, and Falls Church; the Virginia counties of 
Arlington, Fairfax, Loudoun, and Prince William; and the Maryland 
counties of Montgomery and Prince Georges.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  Electricians................   28.0-34.0
                                Painters and paperhangers...   35.0-42.0
                                Plumbers, pipefitters and      25.0-30.0
                                 steamfitters.
                                Iron workers................   35.0-43.0
                                Sheetmetal workers..........   25.0-31.0
                                Elevator constructors.......   34.0-40.0
                                Asbestos workers............   26.0-32.0
                                Lathers.....................   34.0-40.0
                                Boilermakers................   24.0-30.0
                                Tile and terrazzo workers...   28.0-34.0
                                Glaziers....................   28.0-34.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                Region IV

                            atlanta, ga, area

    Area covered--Atlanta, GA, Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area 
which includes Fulton, DeKalb, Cobb, Clayton, and Gwinnett Counties.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  Asbestos workers............    8.6-10.3
                                Bricklayers.................   16.3-18.2
                                Carpenters..................   11.0-12.8
                                Electricians................   10.9-12.2
                                Glaziers....................   10.2-12.2
                                Ironworkers.................   14.0-16.0
                                Metal lathers...............   10.0-12.0
                                Painters....................   10.3-12.0
                                Plumbers....................    9.4-10.9
                                Pipefitters.................    9.4-10.9
                                Plasterers..................   24.4-25.8
                                Roofers.....................   18.0-20.0
                                Sheetmetal workers..........    9.5-11.3
                                Sprinkler fitters...........     8.3-9.9
                                Operating engineers.........   24.0-27.7
                                Elevator installers.........    9.6-11.5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          birmingham, al, area

    Area covered--Jefferson, Shelby, and Walker Counties, AL.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................       20-24
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           charlotte, nc, area

    Area covered--Mecklenburg and Union Counties, NC.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................       24-30
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                         jacksonville, fl, area

    Area covered--Drival County, FL.

[[Page 34]]



                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................       20-23
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          louisville, ky, area

    Area covered--Adair, Barren, Bullitt, Carrol, Edmundson, Grayson, 
Green, Hardin, Hart, Henry, Jefferson, Larue, Meade, Nelson, Oldham, 
Shelby, Spencer, Taylor, Trimble, Warren, and Washington Counties, KY; 
and Clark, Floyd and Harrison Counties, IN.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   12.0-16.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                             miami, fl, area

    Area covered--Dade County, FL.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   20.0-40.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           nashville, tn, area

    Area covered--City of Nashville, TN.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   16.0-20.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                Region V

                             akron, oh, area

    Area covered--Summit, Portage, and Medina Counties, OH.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   10.0-12.5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            canton, oh, area

    Area covered--Carroll, Holmes, Stark, Tuscarawas, and Wayne 
Counties, OH.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................     7.0-8.4
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            chicago, il, area

    Area covered--Cook, DuPage, Kane, Lake, McHenry, and Will Counties.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  Asbestos workers............    8.6-10.3
                                Bricklayers.................    16.3-8.2
                                Carpenters..................   11.0-12.8
                                Electricians................   10.9-12.2
                                Elevator installers.........    9.6-11.5
                                Glaziers....................   10.2-12.2
                                Ironworkers.................   14.0-16.0
                                Metal lathers...............   10.0-12.0
                                Painters....................   10.3-12.1
                                Plumbers....................    9.4-10.9
                                Pipe fitters................    9.4-10.9
                                Plasterers..................   24.4-25.8
                                Roofers.....................   18.0-20.0
                                Sheetmetal workers..........    9.5-11.3
                                Sprinkler fitters...........     8.3-9.9
                                Operating engineers.........       (\1\)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 15.7 and above.

                          cincinnati, oh, area

    Area covered. Ohio counties of Clermont, Hamilton, and Warren and in 
the Kentucky counties of Boone, Campbell, and Kenton, and in the Indiana 
county of Dearborn.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  Asbestos workers............    9.3-12.2
                                Boilermakers................     8.0-8.4
                                Carpenters..................    9.0-10.7
                                Elevator constructors.......   10.2-12.7
                                Engineers (stationary)......   26.9-28.4
                                Floor layers................    9.0-10.5
                                Glaziers....................    9.1-11.1
                                Lathers.....................    9.3-10.6
                                Marble, tile and terrazzo        8.3-9.9
                                 workers and helpers.
                                Millwrights.................    9.1-10.3
                                Painters....................   11.0-13.5
                                Pipefitters.................   10.0-12.0
                                Plasterers..................  8.7 to 9.6
                                Plumbers....................   10.0-12.7
                                Sheetmetal workers..........   10.1-11.3
                                All other...................   11.0-11.8
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           cleveland, oh, area

    Area covered--Ashland, Ashtabula, Crawford, Cuyahoga, Erie, Geauga, 
Huron, Lake, Lorain, Sandusky, and Seneca Counties, OH.

[[Page 35]]



                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  Art glass workers...........   25.4-28.6
                                Asbestos workers............   20.9-23.9
                                Boilermakers................   16.3-18.9
                                Bricklayers.................   28.8-29.5
                                Carpenters..................     8.0-8.6
                                Cement masons...............   41.1-42.2
                                Electricians................   15.1-18.1
                                Elevator constructors.......   28.9-32.5
                                Glaziers....................   35.8-40.0
                                Ironworkers.................   11.4-13.2
                                Painters....................   17.7-18.4
                                Pipefitters.................   15.7-17.9
                                Plasterers..................   21.6-23.2
                                Plumbers....................   20.8-23.4
                                Roofers.....................   28.9-31.8
                                All other...................   17.0-18.8
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            dayton, oh, area

    Area covered--Greene, Miami, Montgomery, and Preble Counties, OH.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   10.6-11.8
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           detroit, mi., area

    Area covered--Wayne, Oakland, and Macomb Counties, MI.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  Electricians................   17.0-19.0
                                Operating engineers.........   16.9-18.0
                                Lathers.....................   18.6-19.6
                                Painters....................   15.0-17.7
                                Riggers.....................   16.8-17.7
                                Roofers.....................   15.3-16.6
                                Tile, terrazzo marble          15.0-17.8
                                 workers.
                                Tile and marble helpers.....   16.0-18.5
                                Terrazzo helpers............   17.8-19.5
                                All other...................   18.6-20.4
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          evansville, in, area

    Area covered--Vanderburgh County, IN.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................     6.3-7.6
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          fort wayne, in, area

    Area covered--Adams, Allen, DeKalb, Huntington, LaGrange, Noble, 
Steuben, Wells, and Whitley Counties, IN.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  Plumbers....................     5.2-5.5
                                Steamfitters................     5.2-5.5
                                Carpenters..................     5.7-5.2
                                Bricklayers.................    9.3-10.4
                                Electricians................     5.2-5.9
                                Sheetmetal workers..........     4.4-5.2
                                Ironworkers.................     7.3-8.4
                                Operating engineers.........     5.2-6.0
                                Painters....................   11.0-12.0
                                All other...................     7.1-8.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                         indianapolis, in, area

    Area covered--Marion County, IN.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  Asbestos workers............   32.2-37.7
                                Bricklayers.................   17.4-19.5
                                Electricians................     6.6-7.8
                                Elevator constructors.......   15.5-18.0
                                Glaziers....................   25.2-28.6
                                Ironworkers.................   11.6-14.0
                                Lathers.....................   21.1-22.0
                                Operating engineers.........     7.7-8.8
                                Painters....................   22.4-25.0
                                Plasterers..................   27.5-30.4
                                Plumbers....................   25.5-30.0
                                Roofers.....................   15.9-18.1
                                Sheetmetal workers..........    9.3-10.9
                                Steamfitters................   14.9-17.1
                                All other...................   14.1-16.2
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            peoria, il, area

    Area covered--Peoria, Fulton, Tazewell, Woodford, Knox, Stark, 
Marshall, Hancock, Mason, McLean, McDonough, Henderson, Warren, 
Livingston, Bureau, Henry, and Putnam Counties, IL.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................     5.0-6.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           rockford, il, area

    Area covered--Boone, Winnebago, Stephenson, De Kalb, Ogle, Lee, and 
Jo Daviess Counties; Cherry Grove, Shannon, Rock Creek, Lima, Wysox, and 
Elkhorn Townships in Carroll County; Genesee, Jordan, Hopkins, Sterling, 
Hume, Montmorency, Tampico, and Hahnaman Townships in Whiteside County, 
IL.

[[Page 36]]



                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   10.0-12.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          south bend, in, area

    Area covered--St. Joseph, County, IN.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................    8.0-10.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            toledo, oh, area

    Area covered--Defiance, Fulton, Hancock, Henry, Lusas, Ottawa, 
Williams, and Wood Counties, OH.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   10.7-12.3
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           youngstown, oh area

    Area covered--Columbiana, Mahoning, and Trumbull Counties, OH; and 
Lawrence and Mercer Counties, PA.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................     6.0-7.1
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                Region VI

                            el paso, tx, area

    Area covered--El Paso County, TX.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   55.1-66.2
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            lawton, ok, area

    Area covered--Commanche County, OK.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   15.8-16.8
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          little rock, ar, area

    Area covered--Pulaski County, AR.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   25.6-30.6
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            new orleans, la.

    Area covered--Parishes of Orleans, Jefferson, St. Bernard, St. 
Tammany, St. Charles, St. John, Lafourche, Plaquemines, Washington, 
Terrebonne, Tangipahoa,\1\ Livingston,\2\ and St. James.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Area covered is east of the Illinois Central RR.
    \2\ Area covered is southeast of the line from a point off the 
Livingston and Tangipahoa Parish line adjacent from New Orleans and 
Baton Rouge.
    \3\ Area covered is southeast of a line drawn from the town of 
Gramercy to the point of intersection of St. James, Lafourche, and 
Assumption Parishes.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................       20-23
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                tulsa, ok

    Area covered--Tulsa, Creek, Mayes, Rogers, Okfuskee, Washington, 
Nowata, Craig, Ottawa, Delaware, Okmulgee (northern half), dividing line 
Highway 16; Osage (eastern half), dividing line Highway 18; Pawnee 
(eastern half), and Payne (eastern half) Counties, OK.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  Bricklayers.................   24.0-25.0
                                Carpenters..................   17.0-18.0
                                Cement masons...............   21.5-22.5
                                Floor covers................   12.0-14.0
                                Glaziers, glass workers.....   14.7-17.3
                                Operating engineers.........   22.0-24.0
                                Painters....................   18.0-20.0
                                Pipefitters.................   10.0-12.0
                                Plumbers....................   11.6-13.2
                                Roofers.....................   12.0-14.0
                                Sheetmetal workers..........    8.0-10.0
                                All other trades............   12.0-14.4
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               Region VII

                        kansas city (ks) and (mo)

    Area covered--Clay, Platte, Jackson, Bates, Carroll, Lafayette, Ray, 
Johnson, Henry, and Cass Counties, Mo., and Wyandotte, Johnson, and 
Miami Counties, KS.

[[Page 37]]



                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  Asbestos workers............   10.3-11.7
                                Boilermakers................     5.9-6.4
                                Bricklayers.................   19.4-20.7
                                Carpenters..................     5.9-6.9
                                Carpet, linoleum and             5.5-6.4
                                 resilient floor decorators.
                                Cement masons...............   25.5-26.5
                                Elevator constructors.......    9.2-10.7
                                Electricians................     8.0-9.4
                                Glaziers....................      9.8 to
                                                                    10.5
                                Lathers.....................   14.5-15.6
                                Marble masons, tile layers       7.5-9.0
                                 and terrazzo workers.
                                Marble and tile helpers.....     4.8-5.6
                                Operating engineers.........    9.0-10.9
                                Painters....................   14.3-15.0
                                Pipefitters.................     6.9-7.7
                                Plasterers..................   19.0-20.4
                                Plumbers....................     8.3-9.3
                                Roofers.....................   14.0-15.0
                                Sheetmetal workers..........     7.0-8.0
                                Teamsters...................   25.0-26.0
                                All other trades............   11.4-12.5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                omaha, ne

    Area covered--Sharpy and Douglas Counties, NE, Council Bluffs, IA 
(city limits only).

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................    9.0-10.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                              st. louis, mo

    Area covered--City of St. Louis, Mo., and St. Louis, MO.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  Asbestos workers............     5.2-5.7
                                Boilermakers................   34.0-37.7
                                Bricklayers.................   12.6-14.2
                                Carpenters..................     8.2-8.9
                                Cement and concrete            13.3-16.6
                                 finishers.
                                Electricians................   13.6-16.1
                                Elevator constructors.......     8.7-9.3
                                Glaziers....................   28.7-34.5
                                Ironworkers.................    9.0-10.4
                                Lathers and plasterers......   24.2-29.7
                                Operating engineers.........   13.2-15.7
                                Painters and paperhangers...   25.1-29.3
                                Plumbers and pipefitters....   13.2-15.4
                                Roofers and slaters.........   17.1-19.6
                                Sheetmetal workers..........   22.5-27.0
                                Tilesetters and terrazzo        8.8-10.4
                                 workers.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               topeka, ks

    Area covered--Shawnee County, KS.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................    8.8-10.5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               Region VIII

                                colorado

    Area covered--State of Colorado

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................       13-14
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                Region IX

                        alameda county, ca, area

    Area covered--Alameda County, CA.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   28.5-33.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                 arizona

    Area covered--State of Arizona.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   25.0-30.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                         contra costa county, ca

    Area covered: Contra Costa County, CA.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   17.0-19.5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            fresno county, ca

    Area covered. Fresno, Madera, Kings, and Tulare Counties, CA.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   20.0-27.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                              las vegas, nv

    Area covered. Area of jurisdiction of the Building & Construction 
Trades Council of

[[Page 38]]

Clark, Lincoln, Nye and Esmeralda Counties, NV.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  Asbestos workers............   17.7-20.2
                                Bricklayers.................   18.8-21.3
                                Carpenters..................   16.2-17.5
                                Glaziers, floorcoverers,       16.3-17.7
                                 painters, tapers and
                                 wallcoverers.
                                Plasterers..................   24.6-27.2
                                Plumbers and pipefitters....   15.2-16.2
                                Sheet metal workers.........   16.2-17.7
                                Wood, wire and metal lathers   18.1-19.3
                                All other trades............   18.0-19.5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                         los angeles county, ca

    Area covered. Area of jurisdiction of the Los Angeles Building & 
Construction Trades Council.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   21.7-25.1
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                              monterey, ca

    Area covered. Monterey County, CA, and within the jurisdiction of 
the Monterey County Building & Construction Trades Council, AFL-CIO.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   27.0-29.8
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                              north bay, ca

    Area covered. Solano, Napa, Lake, Marin, Mendocino, and Sonoma 
Counties.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   10.5-12.6
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                             sacramento, ca

    Area covered. Sacramento, Yolo, Amador, Placer, El Dorado, Nevada, 
and Sierra Counties, CA.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   17.5-20.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          san diego county, ca

    Area covered. San Diego County, CA.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   24.0-30.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                    san francisco city and county, ca

    Area covered. City and County of San Francisco, CA.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  Electricians................        17.0
                                Plumbers, pipefitters and           14.0
                                 steamfitters.
                                Structural metal workers....        20.0
                                Sheet metal workers.........        19.0
                                Asbestos workers............        40.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          san mateo county, ca

    Area covered. San Mateo County, CA.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   12.0-14.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                         santa clara county, ca

    Area covered. Santa Clara County, CA.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   18.0-21.7
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          santa cruz county, ca

    Area covered. Santa Cruz County, CA.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   17.0-20.4
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 39]]

                                Region X

                                 alaska

    Area covered. State of Alaska.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  Asbestos workers............   26.4-28.0
                                Carpenters..................   25.7-28.0
                                Electricians................   25.7-28.0
                                Ironworkers.................   25.7-28.0
                                Operating engineers.........   26.1-28.0
                                Painters....................   25.8-28.0
                                Pile drivers................   25.1-28.0
                                Plumbers and steamfitters...   25.4-28.0
                                Roofers.....................   27.6-28.0
                                Sheetmetal workers..........   25.6-28.0
                                Teamsters...................   25.6-28.0
                                All other...................   26.1-28.1
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                pasco, wa

    Area covered. The area of jurisdiction of the Southeastern 
Washington Building & Construction Trades Council as follows: all of 
Benton, Franklin, and Walla Walla Counties, Grant County to Highway 2 
and the southwest corner of Adams County, WA.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  Boilermakers................   12.5-15.0
                                Bricklayers.................   11.0-13.5
                                Carpenters..................    9.8-12.3
                                Cement finishers............   11.5-14.0
                                Electricians................   10.0-12.5
                                Ironworkers.................   10.0-12.5
                                Operating engineers.........   10.2-12.7
                                Painters....................   10.0-12.5
                                Plumbers and fitters........     .9-12.4
                                Sheetmetal workers..........   10.8-13.3
                                Laborers....................    9.5-13.3
                                All other...................   10.0-12.5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                              portland, or

    Area covered--Multnomah, Clackamas, and Washington Counties, OR.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................     5.5-6.5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               seattle, wa

    Area covered--King County, WA.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................    8.8-11.5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               spokane, wa

    Area covered--Washington Counties: Spokane, Whitman, Lincoln, Adams, 
Stevens, Pend Oreille, Columbia, Garfield, Asotin, Ferry, Okanogan, 
Chelan, Douglas and Grant (north of Highway 2), and in connection with 
Indian employment, parts of any other counties included in reservations 
incorporating portions of the above area; Idaho: Boundary, Bonner, 
Kootenai, Shoshone, Benewah, Latah, Clearwater, Nez Perce, Lewis, and 
Idaho, and in connection with Indian employment, any other territory 
included in reservations, part of which are in the above counties.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................       (\1\)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 2.0 and above.

                               tacoma, wa

    Area covered--Pierce, Thurston, Mason, Lewis, Grays Harbor, and 
Pacific Counties, WA.

                          Goals and Timetables
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Timetable                        Trade                Goal
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until further notice..........  All.........................   12.2-15.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[43 FR 58357, Dec. 14, 1978]


<R05>
  Sec. Exhibit E to Subpart E of Part 1901--List of Regional Offices, 

Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP), U.S. Department 
                             of Labor (USDL)

Region I (ME, NH, VT, MA, RI, CT)
    Associate Regional Administrator, USDL/OFCCP, JFK Building, Room 
1612-C, Government Center, Boston, MA 12203, (617) 223-4232.

Region II (NY, NJ, PR, VI)
    Associate Regional Administrator, USDL/OFCCP, 1515 Broadway, Room 
3306, New York, NY 10036, (212) 662-5563.

Region III (PA, MD, DE, VA, WV, DC)
    Associate Regional Administrator, USDL/OFCCP, Gateway Building, Room 
15434, 3535 Market Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, (215) 596-1213.


[[Page 40]]


Region IV (NC, SC, KY, TN, MS, AL, GA, FL)
    Associate Regional Administrator, USDL/OFCCP, 1371 Peachtree Street, 
NE, Room 729, Atlanta, GA 30309, (402) 881-4211).

Region V (OH, IN, MI, IL, WI, MN)
    Associate Regional Administrator, USDL/OFCCP, New Federal Building, 
16th Floor, 2340 South Dearborn Street, Chicago, IL 60604, (312) 353-
8887.

Region VI (LA, AR, OK, TX, NM)
    Associate Regional Administrator, USDL/OFCCP), 555 Griffin Square 
Building, Room 506, Dallas, TX 75202, (214) 767-4771.

Region VII (MO, IA, NE, KS)
    Associate Regional Administrator, USDL/OFCCP Regional Administrator, 
Federal Office Building, Room 2000, 911 Walnut Street, Kansas City, MO 
64106, (816) 374-5384.

Region VIII (ND, SD, MT, WY, CO, UT)
    Associate Regional Administrator, USDL/OFCCP, 14431 Federal Office 
Building, 1961 Stout Street, Denver, CO 80202, (303) 837-5011.

Region IX (CA, NV, AZ, HI, GU)
    Associate Regional Administrator, USDL/OFCCP, Federal Office 
Building, Room 10341, 450 Golden Gate, San Francisco, CA 94102, (415) 
556-3597.

Region X (WA, OR, ID)
    Associate Regional Administrator, USDL/OFCCP, Federal Office 
Building, 909 First Avenue, Room 4095, Seattle, WA 98174, (206) 442-
4508.

[44 FR 24852, Apr. 27, 1979]


<R04>
Subpart F_Procedures for the Protection of Historical and Archeological 
                               Properties

    Authority: 16 U.S.C. 470; 7 U.S.C. 1989; 42 U.S.C. 1480; 42 U.S.C. 
2942; 5 U.S.C. 301; sec. 10, Pub. L. 93-357, 88 Stat. 392; delegation of 
authority by Sec. of Agri., 7 CFR 2.23; delegation of authority by the 
Asst. Sec. for Rural Development, 7 CFR 2.70; delegations of authority 
by Dir., OEO, 29 FR 14764, 33 FR 9850.

    Source: 42 FR 62141, Dec. 9, 1977, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1901.251  Purpose.

    This subpart prescribes Farmers Home Administration (FmHA) or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 policies, procedures, and 
guidelines for compliance with section 106 of the National Historic 
Preservation Act of 1966 (Pub. L. 89-665), the Reservoir Salvage Act of 
1960 (Pub. L. 86-523), as amended May 24, 1974, by the Archeologic and 
Historic Preservation Act (Pub. L. 93-291), and section 1(3) of 
Executive Order 11593. This subpart is inapplicable to Farm Service 
Agency, Farm Loan Programs.

[42 FR 62141, Dec. 9, 1977, as amended at 72 FR 64121, Nov. 15, 2007]


<R05>
Sec. 1901.252  Policy.

    (a) The FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
recognizes that significant scientific, prehistorical, historical and 
archeological (HA) resources are an important part of our National 
Heritage.
    (b) The FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 will 
consult with appropriate Federal, State, and local Agencies; other 
organizations; the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) and 
individuals to assess the impact of any proposed FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 undertaking on properties having 
historical or archeological significance in order to avoid or mitigate 
any adverse effects on the properties.
    (c) The procedures in this subpart have been developed in accordance 
with section 1(3) of Executive Order 111593.


<R05>
Sec. 1901.253  Definitions.

    (a) Undertaking means any new or continuing projects or program 
activities supported in whole or in part through FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 contracts, grants, subsidies, loans, or 
other forms of funding assistance. This does not include any actual 
construction by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354.
    (b) National Historic Preservation Act. The National Register means 
the National Register of Historic Places, which is a register of 
districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects, significant in 
American history, architecture, archeology, and culture maintained by 
the Secretary of the Interior under the authority of section 2(b) of the 
Historic Sites Act of 1935 and section 101(a)(1) of the National 
Preservation Act. The National Register is published in its entirety in 
the Federal Register each year in February. Addenda are published on the 
first Tuesday of each month.

[[Page 41]]

    (c) National Register Property means a district, site, building, 
structure, or object included in the National Register.
    (d) Property eligible for inclusion in the National Register means 
any district, site, building, structure, or object which the Secretary 
of the Interior determines is likely to meet the National Register 
criteria.
    (e) State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) means the official 
within each State, designated by the Governor at the request of the 
Secretary of the Interior, to administer the National Register and 
historic preservation grants program and to coordinate preservation 
planning within the State.
    (f) Criteria of effect means when any condition of an undertaking 
causes or may cause any change, beneficial or adverse, in the 
scientific, historical, architectural, archeological, or cultural 
character of a National Register property that qualifies the property 
under the National Register criteria.
    (g) Historical and archeological assessment means a determination by 
the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 State Director 
using the criteria of effect as a guide, as to whether a proposed 
undertaking may have an effect upon any properties located within the 
project area which are included or eligible for inclusion in the 
National Register.
    (h) National Register criteria means the following criteria 
established by the Secretary of the Interior for use in evaluating and 
determining the eligibility of properties for listing in the National 
Register: The quality of significance in American History, Architecture, 
Archeology, and the culture is present in districts, sites, buildings, 
structures, and objects of State and local importance, that possess 
integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, 
and association; and
    (1) That are associated with events that have made a significant 
contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or
    (2) That are associated with the lives of persons significant in our 
past; or
    (3) That embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, 
or method of construction, or that represent the work of a master, or 
that possess high artistic values, or that represent a significant and 
distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; 
or
    (4) That have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information 
important in prehistory or history.
    (i) FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 official 
means the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 County 
Supervisor, the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
State Director or his designated representative.
    (j) Project area means those geographical or legally defined areas 
directly under or to be under the applicants control that are affected 
by the undertaking such as building sites, easements, rights-of-way, 
leasehold interests and those areas which are directly and significantly 
impacted by the undertaking.
    (k) Advisory council means the Advisory Council on Historic 
Preservation, Suite 430, 1522 K Street NW., Washington, DC 20005, 
created by title II of Pub. L. 89-665 and charged with the 
responsibility of advising the President, Congress, and others on 
matters relating to historic preservation.
    (l) HA as used in this regulation is an abbreviation of the term 
``scientific, prehistorical, historical, and archeological.''


<R05>
Sec. 1901.254  Scope.

    FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 will evaluate 
all undertakings for possible HA significance. This subpart covers the 
following types of undertakings:
    (a) Undertakings requiring a historical and archeological 
assessment. Although the following undertakings are presumed to involve 
nonfederally owned lands, they may have an effect on properties having 
HA significance and, therefore, will require a historical and 
archeological assessment:
    (1) Loans and grants for the development of business and industry 
including guaranteed loans.
    (2) Loans and grants for multiple family housing projects of 25 or 
more dwelling units.
    (3) Subdivision plans submitted for approval having 25 or more 
building sites.

[[Page 42]]

    (4) Loans and grants in rural areas to construct, enlarge, extend, 
or otherwise improve:
    (i) Community water, sanitary sewage, solid waste disposal, and 
storm waste water disposal systems.
    (ii) Other essential community facilities such as fire and rescue, 
health, safety, public buildings, schools, transportation, traffic, and 
law enforcement.
    (5) Loans to develop community irrigation, drainage, and other soil 
and water conservation and use facilities.
    (6) Loans to acquire and develop grazing land for livestock of an 
association of members.
    (7) Loans in areas designated by the Soil Conservation Service 
(SCS), U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), to conserve and develop 
natural resources and to contribute to economic improvement of the area.
    (8) Loans to protect and develop land and water resources in small 
watersheds.
    (9) Loans to permit Indian tribes to buy land within their 
reservations.
    (b) Undertakings presumed not to require a historical and 
archeological assessment. The following undertakings are generally 
presumed to involve nonfederally owned lands and not to have an effect 
on properties of historical and archeological value and will therefore 
not usually require a historical and archeological assessment. However, 
when the State Director or County Supervisor finds or has had 
communication or obtains information from a recognized historical and 
archeological authority that a specific undertaking may have an effect 
on a property included or eligible for inclusion in the National 
Register, a historical and archeological assessment will be made.
    (1) Loans to farmers and ranchers in rural areas for the purchase, 
development, and operation of farms and ranches.
    (2) Loans to individual families in rural areas for the purchase, 
construction, or improvement of single family residences.
    (3) Loans and grants for multiple family housing projects of not 
more than 24 family dwelling units.
    (4) Subdivision plans submitted for approval having 24 or less 
building sites.
    (5) Loans to farmers, ranchers, and other rural residents to develop 
land, water, and other related resources for increased production of 
food and other crops, improved pastures, feed crops, water facilities 
for livestock, and improved habitats for fish and wildlife.
    (6) Emergency and disaster loans to farmers, ranchers and other 
rural residents in declared or designated areas as a result of a major 
or national disaster.


<R05>
Sec. 1901.255  Historical and archeological assessments.

    (a) The FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
official, normally the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 County Supervisor, who receives a preapplication or application 
for loan or grant assistance on an undertaking that may have an effect 
on HA properties will, as part of the process, take the following 
actions:
    (1) Carefully review the State supplements issued by the State 
Director pursuant to Sec. 1901.262(a) to determine whether there are 
any properties within the project area that appear in the National 
Register.
    (2) Document the following:
    (i) A brief narrative report of the findings and conclusions of an 
on-site reconnaissance of the project area.
    (ii) Any ``in-house'' knowledge of known or suspected HA sites in 
the project area.
    (3) Submit the information outlined in paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section to the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
State Director as part of the preapplication or application.
    (b) Upon receipt of the preapplication/application the FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 State Director will, as a 
concurrent part of the preapplication/application review, prepare a 
historical and archeological assessment of the undertaking. In making 
the assessment the State Director will consider information from the 
following sources:
    (1) State and Regional Clearinghouse comments.

[[Page 43]]

    (2) Information submitted by the County Supervisor pursuant to 
paragraph (a)(2) of this section.
    (3) Factual comments or recommendations of the SHPO or other 
responsible Federal, State, or local officials.
    (4) Any other reliable information concerning properties in the 
project area having HA significance.
    (c) Upon completion of the preapplication or application review, the 
State Director will take the following actions:
    (1) When his assessment indicates that no properties of HA 
significance will be effected by the proposed undertaking, he will 
proceed with processing of the preapplication or application.
    (2) When his assessment indicates that there are properties included 
in the National Register that may be effected by the proposed 
undertaking, he will in consultation with the SHPO, the applicant and 
its representatives, and other appropriate historical and archeological 
authorities plan appropriate measures to avoid or mitigate any adverse 
effects. He will also notify the Advisory Council and Secretary of the 
Interior of the proposed undertaking, and of its possible effect on the 
National Register properties and provide them with a copy of the 
proposed plan in order to afford them a reasonable opportunity for 
comment. Comments that are received with 45 calendar days of 
notification in accordance with the requirements for comment as outlined 
in section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, will 
be considered in further development of the undertaking.
    (3) When his assessment indicates that there are properties thay may 
be eligible for inclusion in the National Register, based on his 
application of the National Register criteria, he will request the 
Regional Director of the National Park Service, U.S. Department of the 
Interior, Attention: Interagency Archeological Services, in writing, to 
cause a survey of the project area to be made to determine the 
significance of the properties in accordance with section 3(b) of Pub. 
L. 93-291. The State Director's letter to the Regional Director should 
request a response within 45 calendar days as to whether the National 
Park Service intends to cause a survey to be made, declines to undertake 
a survey, or that a survey is not warranted based on available data. The 
addresses of the Regional Offices of the National Park Service are 
listed in exhibit A of this subpart. If no response is received within 
the 45-day period, the State Director will proceed as outlined in 
paragraph (c)(7) of this section.
    (4) The State Director will cooperate fully with the National Park 
Service in the conduct of a survey should one be undertaken to assure 
that:
    (i) The professional archeologist/historian conducting the survey 
provides his written opinion as to the eligibility of any identified 
properties for inclusion in the National Register.
    (ii) When the professional archeologist/historian recommends 
recovery, protection, or preservation of identified properties, the 
National Park Service is requested to undertake this project.
    (5) When the survey made in paragraph (c)(3) of this section does 
not identify any historical and archeological properties that may be 
eligible for inclusion in the National Register, or the National Park 
Service is not going to undertake activity pursuant to paragraph 
(c)(4)(ii) of this section, the State Director, after consultation with 
the SHPO and the National Park Service, will document the findings and 
proceed with processing of the application.
    (6) When the survey identifies properties that may be eligible for 
inclusion in the National Register, the State Director will request the 
SHPO to proceed with the nomination of such properties. The State 
Director will then proceed as outlined in paragraph (c)(2) of this 
section for any properties accepted for inclusion in the National 
Register.
    (7) When the National Park Service declines to cause a survey to be 
made or determines that one is not warranted, the State Director will 
document such facts and proceed with processing of the application.

[[Page 44]]


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 1901.256-1901.258  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1901.259  Actions to be taken when archeological properties are discovered during construction.

    (a) When properties of significant HA value are discovered during 
construction, the State Director will immediately consult with the 
applicant, the SHPO and the Regional Director of the National Park 
Service to determine whether there is sufficient factual evidence to 
warrant a decision to stop construction and undertake detailed survey 
and recovery.
    (b) When the consultations in paragraph (a) of this section result 
in a determination by the National Park Service to request the applicant 
to stop construction, such stop action should be taken so that the Park 
Service can initiate measures for immediate recovery within 60 days 
after notification of a discovery.
    (c) When the consultations in paragraph (a) of this section do not 
result in a determination by the National Park Service to stop 
construction and to undertake a survey and recovery, construction should 
be permitted to proceed with caution. In the event that the National 
Park Service determines that recovery is necessary, the FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 applicant/borrower and the 
Park Service should determine that the consent of all persons, 
associations, or public entities having legal interests in the property 
involved has been secured. Also, the applicant should be informed that 
the Secretary of the Interior is authorized to compensate any person, 
association, or public entity damaged as a result of delay in 
construction or as a result of the temporary loss of the use of public 
or any nonfederally owned land.
    (d) No survey or recovery work will be required which in the 
determination of the State Director would seriously impede FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 actions in providing 
assistance where the State Director determines that immediate action is 
required to avoid loss or damage of life or property. Nevertheless, 
appropriate measures will be taken to the extent practical to preserve, 
protect, or mitigate any damage to properties having HA significance.


<R05>
Sec. 1901.260  Coordination with other agencies.

    (a) When other Agencies are directly involved in any undertaking 
that requires a historical and archeological assessment, the State 
Director will contact the Agencies concerned to determine if a joint 
assessment will be prepared and whether a single lead Agency will assume 
primary responsibility for preparing the assessment.
    (b) When a lead Agency is agreed upon other than FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354, FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 will provide that Agency with information about 
its respective areas of responsibility. Assessments will indicate Agency 
participation and concurrence.
    (c) When FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
program activities are planned that primarily supplement those of the 
SCS, USDA, such as watershed projects, resource conservation and 
development measures, and irrigation and drainage projects, the SCS will 
be designated as the lead Agency.


<R05>
Sec. 1901.261  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1901.262  State supplement.

    (a) The State Director shall be responsible for preparing a list of 
all properties included in the National Register in his area of 
jurisdiction and issuing such list as a part of a State supplement. Such 
a list will be updated as needed to reflect changes in the National 
Register.
    (b) State Directors may also supplement this subpart and its exhibit 
as appropriate to meet State and local laws and regulations.


<R05>
 Sec. Exhibit A to Subpart F of Part 1901--National Park Service, U.S. 
               Department of the Interior Regional Offices

    Contact should be made to: Chief, Interagency Archeological Services 
Division, Office of Archeological and Historic Preservation, National 
Park Service.
    The three Regional Offices are:


[[Page 45]]


San Francisco Office: Old Post Office Building, Mission and 7th Streets, 
Post Office Box 5700, San Francisco, Calif. 94104.
    States covered: Arizona, Utah, Idaho, and West, including Hawaii and 
Alaska. Attention: Mr. Garland Gordon. Telephone: 415-556-7711.
Denver Office: 1978 South Garrison Street, Denver, Colo. 80225.
    States covered: Wisconsin, Iowa, Missouri, Oklahoma, Texas and West 
to San Francisco area. Attention: Mr. Jack R. Rudy. Telephone: 303-234-
2560.
Atlanta Office: 730 Peachtree Street, Atlanta, Ga. 30308.
    States covered: All others East of Denver area. Attention: Mr. 
Wilford Susted. Telephone: 404-526-2611.

Subparts G-J [Reserved]


<R04>
    Subpart K_Certificates of Beneficial Ownership and Insured Notes

    Authority: 7 U.S.C. 1989; 42 U.S.C. 1480; delegation of authority by 
the Secretary of Agriculture, 7 CFR 2.23; delegation of authority by the 
Assistant Secretary for Rural Development, 7 CFR 2.70.

    Source: 41 FR 51799, Nov. 24, 1976, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1901.501  Purpose.

    This subpart prescribes policies and procedures for Farmers Home 
Administration (FmHA) or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
certificates of beneficial ownership and insured notes. This subpart is 
inapplicable to Farm Service Agency, Farm Loan Programs.

[41 FR 51799, Nov. 24, 1976, as amended at 72 FR 64121, Nov. 15, 2007]


<R05>
Sec. 1901.502  Policy.

    It is the current policy to sell all certificates of beneficial 
ownership to the Federal Financing Bank for financing activities from 
the Agricultural Credit Insurance Fund and the Rural Development 
Insurance Fund. Sales from the Rural Housing Insurance Fund will be made 
to the Federal Financing Bank to the extent necessary to service 
certificates of beneficial ownership held by the Federal Financing Bank. 
Sales in excess of those needed for servicing requirements will be made 
to the public. In addition to sales, this subpart provides policy for 
the servicing of outstanding certificates of beneficial ownership, 
insurance contracts, and insured notes held by investors.

[51 FR 24301, July 3, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 1901.503  Definitions.

    (a) As used in Sec. Sec. 1901.505, 1901.507, 1901.508 and 1901.509 
the following definitions will apply:
    (1) Announcement of sale. Any notice of terms and conditions 
respecting a sale of certificates.
    (2) Certificate. A certificate of beneficial ownership issued by 
Farmers Home Administration (FmHA) or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 under this subpart.
    (3) Director, Finance Office. The Director or the Insured Loan 
Officer of the Finance Office of FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354.
    (4) FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354. The 
United States acting through the Farmers Home Administration or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354.
    (5) Finance Office. The office which maintains the FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 finance records. It is located 
at 1520 Market Street, St. Louis, Missouri 63103. (Phone: 314-425-4400)
    (6) Fixed period. Any time interval (preceding an option period) 
during which the insured holder is not entitled to require FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 to purchase the insured note, 
as specified in the insurance agreement.
    (7) Insurance agreement. The entire contract evidencing and setting 
forth the terms and conditions of FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 insurance of the payment for the insured note. The 
insurance agreement with respect to any particular loan may be evidenced 
by Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 440-5, 
``Insurance Endorsement (Insured Loan),'' FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 440-30, ``Insurance Endorsement (Insured 
Loans),'' or any other form or forms prescribed by the National Office 
and executed by an authorized official of FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354. It may include such

[[Page 46]]

provisions as, for example, an agreement of FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 to purchase or repurchase the loan, or to make 
supplementary payments from the insurance fund.
    (8) Insurance fund. The Agricultural Credit Insurance Fund 
authorized by section 309 of the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development 
Act, the Rural Development Insurance Fund authorized by section 309A of 
the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act, or the Rural Housing 
Insurance Fund authorized by section 517 of title V of the Housing Act 
of 1949.
    (9) Insured holder. The current owner of an insured note other than 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354, according to the 
records of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 is 
insurer of the note.
    (10) Insured note. Any promissory note or bond evidencing an insured 
loan regardless of whether it is held by FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 in the insurance fund, by a private holder, or 
by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 as trustee.
    (11) Loan. Loans made and held in the Agricultural Credit Insurance 
Fund, Rural Development Insurance Fund, or the Rural Housing Insurance 
Fund.
    (12) National Office. The Administrator or other authorized officer 
of the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 in 
Washington, DC.
    (13) Option period. Any period during which the insured holder has 
the optional right to require the FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 to purchase the insured note, as specified in the 
insurance agreement.
    (14) Par value. The total amount to which the insured holder is 
entitled under the terms of the insurance agreement.
    (15) Private buyer. A buyer of an insured note other than FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354.
    (16) Private holder. An insured holder other than FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354.
    (17) Repurchase agreement. A provision in the insurance agreement 
obligating FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 to buy 
the insured note at the option of the holders.
    (18) Sale, or seller, and buyer. The transfer of ownership 
(including possession or the right of possession), the transferor, and 
the transferee respectively.
    (19) State Director. The State Director of FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 for the State in which is located the 
real estate improved, purchased, or refinanced with the loan evidenced 
by the insured note.
    (b) As used in Sec. 1901.506 the following definitions will apply:
    (1) Reserve bank. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York (and any 
other Federal Reserve Bank which agrees to issue securities in book-
entry form) as fiscal agent of the United States acting on behalf of 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 and, when 
indicated, acting in its individual capacity.
    (2) FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 security. 
A certificate representing beneficial ownership of notes, bonds, 
debentures, or other similar obligations held by FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 under the Consolidated Farm and Rural 
Development Act and title V of the Housing Act of 1949, issued in the 
form of a definitive FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 security or a book-entry FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 security.
    (3) Definitive FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
security. An FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
security in engraved on printed form.
    (4) Book-entry FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
security. An FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
security in the form of an entry made as prescribed in this subpart on 
the records of a Reserve bank.
    (5) Pledge. A pledge of, or any other security interest in, FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 securities as collateral 
for loans or advances, or to secure deposits of public moneys or the 
performance of an obligation.
    (6) Date of call. The date fixed in the official notice of call 
published in the

[[Page 47]]

Federal Register on which FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 will make payment of the security before maturity in accordance 
with its terms.
    (7) Member bank. Any national bank, state bank, or bank or trust 
company which is a member of a Reserve bank.


<R05>
Sec. 1901.504  Authorities and responsibilities.

    The Administrator will approve all methods of FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 financing and major changes in existing 
methods. The Director, Finance Office, is responsible for servicing of 
all certificates of beneficial ownership and insured notes issued by the 
Finance Office, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for the servicing 
of insurance contracts, and the Federal Reserve banks for certificates 
of beneficial ownership for which the Reserve banks are FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354's fiscal agents.


<R05>
Sec. 1901.505  Certificates of beneficial ownership in FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 loans.

    (a) Special trust of loans--(1) Establishment of special trusts. 
From time to time FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
will place in special trusts unmature loans evidenced by notes or other 
instruments. Loans may be placed into or removed from a special trust, 
but there will always be maintained in such trusts loans on which the 
unpaid amount is at least equal to the face value of the outstanding 
unmature certificates evidencing beneficial ownership in such special 
trust as provided in paragraph (a)(2) of this section.
    (2) Beneficial ownership of special trusts. To permit interested 
persons to acquire a beneficial ownership of loans comprising a special 
trust established under paragraph (a)(1) of this section, FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 will sell certificates which 
will evidence beneficial ownership of an interest in the special trust 
to the extent of the face value of such certificates. FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 will own an interest in 
special trusts equal to the amount by which the unpaid principal amount 
of loans comprising the trusts exceeds the face value of all outstanding 
certificates evidencing beneficial ownership in such trusts.
    (b) Sale of certificates. FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 will offer certificates for sale from time to time on such 
terms and conditions it may deem appropriate. Sales made by the Finance 
Office shall be made by its Director. No sale in excess of $1 million 
will be made to any one investor without prior approval of the Associate 
Administrator or his designee. The terms and limitations of sales are 
subject to change from time to time, and may be obtained from the 
Finance Office.
    (1) Form of certificates. The certificates may be interest-bearing 
or non-interest-bearing. The certificates may be made payable to the 
bearer or registered holder thereof, and will be negotiable. The 
certificates will be issued in denominations specified in the 
invitations for bid or other announcement of sale.
    (2) Issue date and maturity date of certificates. The certificates 
will be issued on such dates and mature on such dates as specified in 
the invitation for bids or other announcement of sale. Such dates will 
appear on the face of the certificates.


<R05>
Sec. 1901.506  Book-entry procedure for FmHA or its successor agency under 

Public Law 103-354 securities--issuance and redemption of certificate by Reserve 
          bank.

    (a) Authority of Reserve bank. Each Reserve bank is hereby 
authorized in accordance with the provisions of this subpart to:
    (1) Issue book-entry FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 securities by means of entries on its records which shall 
include the name of the depositor, the amount, the securities title (or 
series) and maturity date.
    (2) Effect conversions between book-entry FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 securities and definitive FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 securities.
    (3) Otherwise service and maintain book-entry FmHA or its successor

[[Page 48]]

agency under Public Law 103-354 securities.
    (4) Issue a confirmation of transaction in the form of a written 
advice (serially numbered or otherwise) which specifies the amount and 
description of any securities (that is, the securities title (or series) 
and the maturity date) sold or transferred and the date of the 
transaction.
    (b) Scope and effect of book-entry procedure. (1) A Reserve bank as 
fiscal agent of the United States acting on behalf of FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 may apply the book-entry 
procedure provided for in this subpart to any FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 securities which have been or are 
hereafter deposited for any purpose in accounts with it in its 
individual capacity under terms and conditions which indicate that the 
Reserve bank will continue to maintain such deposit accounts in its 
individual capacity, notwithstanding application of the book-entry 
procedure to such securities. This paragraph shall be applicable but not 
limited to FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
securities deposited:
    (i) As collateral pledged to a Reserve bank (in its individual 
capacity) for advances by it.
    (ii) By a member bank for its sole account.
    (iii) By a member bank held for the account of its customers.
    (iv) In connection with deposits in a member bank of funds of 
States, Municipalities, or other political subdivisions.
    (v) In connection with the performance of an obligation or duty 
under Federal, State, Municipal, or local law, or judgments or decrees 
of courts.
    (2) The application of the book-entry procedure under paragraph 
(b)(1) of this section shall not detract from or adversely affect the 
relationships that would otherwise exist between a Reserve bank in its 
individual capacity and its depositors concerning any deposit under this 
paragraph. Whenever the book-entry procedure is applied to such FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 securities, the Reserve 
bank is authorized to take all action necessary in respect of the book-
entry procedure to enable such Reserve bank in its individual capacity 
to perform its obligation as depositary with respect to such FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 securities.
    (3) A Reserve bank as fiscal agent of the United States acting on 
behalf of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 may 
apply the book-entry procedure to FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 securities deposited as collateral pledged to the 
United States under Treasury Department Circular Nos. 92 and 176, both 
as revised and amended, and may apply the book-entry procedure, with the 
approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, to any other FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 securities deposited with a 
Reserve bank as fiscal agent of the United States.
    (4) Any person having an interest in FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 securities which are deposited with a Reserve 
bank (in either its individual capacity or as fiscal agent of the United 
States) for any purpose shall be deemed to have consented to their 
conversion to book-entry FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 securities pursuant to the provisions of this subpart and in the 
manner and under the procedure prescribed by the Reserve bank.
    (5) No deposits shall be accepted under this section on or after the 
date of maturity or call of FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 securities.
    (c) Transfer or pledge. (1) A transfer or pledge of book-entry FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 securities to a Reserve 
bank (in its individual capacity or as fiscal agent of the United 
States), or to the United States, or to any transferee or pledgee 
eligible to maintain an appropriate book-entry account in its name with 
a Reserve bank under this subpart is effected and perfected, 
notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, by a Reserve bank 
making an appropriate entry in its records of the securities transferred 
or pledged. The making of such an entry in the records of a Reserve bank 
shall:

[[Page 49]]

    (i) Have the effect of a delivery in bearer form of definitive FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 securities.
    (ii) Have the effect of a taking of delivery by the transferee or 
pledgee.
    (iii) Constitute the transferee or pledgee a holder.
    (iv) If a pledge, effect a perfected security interest therein in 
favor of the pledgee. A transfer or pledge of book-entry FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 securities effected under this 
paragraph shall have priority over any transfer, pledge, or other 
interest, theretofore or thereafter effected or perfected under 
paragraph (c)(2) of this section or any other manner.
    (2) A transfer or pledge of transferable FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 securities, or any interest therein, 
which is maintained by a Reserve bank (in its individual capacity or as 
fiscal agent of the United States) in a book-entry account under this 
subpart, including securities in book-entry form under Sec. 
1901.506(b)(1)(iii) is effected, and a pledge is perfected by any means 
that would be effective under applicable law to effect a transfer or to 
effect and perfect a pledge of FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 securities, or any interest therein, if the securities were 
maintained by the Reserve bank in bearer definitive form. For purposes 
of transfer or pledge hereunder, book-entry FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 securities maintained by a Reserve bank shall, 
notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, be deemed to be 
maintained in bearer definitive form. A Reserve bank maintaining book-
entry FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 securities, 
either in its individual capacity or as fiscal agent of the United 
States, is not a bailee for the purposes of notification of pledges of 
these securities under this paragraph, or a third person in possession 
for the purposes of acknowledgment of transfers thereof under this 
paragraph. Where transferable FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 securities are recorded on the books of a depositary (a 
bank, banking institution, financial firm, or similar party, which 
regularly accepts in the course of its business FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 securities as a custodial service for 
customers, and maintains accounts in the names of such customers 
reflecting ownership of or interest in such securities) for account of 
the pledgor or transferor thereof and such securities are on deposit 
with a Reserve bank in a book-entry account hereunder, such depositary 
shall, for purposes of perfecting a pledge of such securities or 
effecting delivery of such securities to a purchaser under applicable 
provisions of law, be the bailee to which notification of the pledge of 
the securities may be given or the third person in possession from which 
acknowledgment of the holding of the securities for the purchaser may be 
obtained. A Reserve bank will not accept notice or advice of a transfer 
or pledge effected or perfected under this paragraph and any such notice 
or advice shall have no effect. A Reserve bank may continue to deal with 
its depositor in accordance with the provisions of this subpart, 
notwithstanding any transfer or pledge effected or perfected under this 
paragraph.
    (3) No filing or recording with a public recording office or officer 
shall be necessary or effective with respect to any transfer or pledge 
of book-entry FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
securities or any interest therein.
    (4) A Reserve bank shall, upon receipt of appropriate instructions, 
convert book-entry FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
securities into definitive FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 securities and deliver them in accordance with such 
instructions. No such conversion shall affect existing interest in such 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 securities.
    (5) A transfer of book-entry FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 securities within a Federal Reserve Bank shall be 
made in accordance with procedures established by the Reserve bank not 
inconsistent with this subpart. The transfer of book-entry FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 securities by

[[Page 50]]

a Reserve bank may be made through a telegraphic transfer procedure.
    (6) All requests for transfer or withdrawal must be made prior to 
the maturity or date of call of the securities.
    (d) Withdrawal of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 securities. (1) A depositor of book-entry FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 securities may withdraw them from a 
Reserve bank by requesting delivery of like definitive FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 securities to itself or on its 
order to a transferee.
    (2) FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 securities 
which are actually to be delivered upon withdrawal may be issued in 
bearer or registered form.
    (e) Delivery of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 securities. A Reserve bank which has received FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 securities and effected pledges, made 
entries regarding them, or transferred or delivered them according to 
the instructions of its depositor is not liable for conversion or for 
participation in breach of fiduciary duty even though the depositor had 
no right to dispose of or take other action in respect of the 
securities. A Reserve bank shall be fully discharged of its obligations 
under this subpart by the delivery of FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 securities in definitive form to its depositor or 
upon the order of such depositor. Customers of a member bank or other 
depositary (other than a Reserve bank) may obtain FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 securities in definitive form only by 
causing the depositor of the Reserve bank to order the withdrawal 
thereof from the Reserve bank.
    (f) Registered securities. (1) No formal assignment shall be 
required for the conversion to book-entry FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 securities of registered FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 securities held by a Reserve bank (in 
either its individual capacity or as fiscal agent of the United States) 
on the effective date of this subpart for any purpose specified in Sec. 
1901.506(b)(1). Registered FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 securities deposited thereafter with a Reserve bank for any 
purpose specified in Sec. 1901.506(b) shall be assigned for conversion 
to book-entry FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
securities.
    (2) The assignment which shall be executed in accordance with the 
provisions of subpart F of 31 CFR part 306, so far as applicable, shall 
be to Federal Reserve Bank of --------, as fiscal agent of the United 
States acting on behalf of the Farmers Home Administration or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354, United States Department of 
Agriculture, for conversion to book-entry Farmers Home Administration or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 securities.
    (g) Servicing book-entry FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 securities, payment of interest, payment at maturity or upon 
call. Interest becoming due on book-entry FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 securities shall be charged to the general 
account of the Treasurer of the United States on the interest due date 
and remitted or credited in accordance with the depositor's 
instructions. Such securities shall be redeemed and charged to the same 
account on the date of maturity or call, and the redemption proceeds, 
principal, and interest shall be disposed of in accordance with the 
depositor's instructions.
    (h) Issuance and redemption. (1) In those instances where the 
Reserve bank is acting as fiscal agent of the United States acting on 
behalf of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354, the 
following subparts of Treasury Department Circular No. 300 (31 CFR part 
306), so far as applicable, shall apply to such certificates.
    (i) Subpart B, Registration.
    (ii) Subpart C, Transfers, Exchanges and Reissues.
    (iii) Subpart D, Redemption or Payment.
    (iv) Subpart E, Interest.
    (v) Subpart G, Assignments of Registered Securities--General.
    (vi) Subpart F, Assignments by or in Behalf of Individuals.

[[Page 51]]

    (vii) Subpart H, Assignments in Behalf of Estates of Deceased 
Owners.
    (viii) Subpart I, Assignments by or in Behalf of Trustees and 
Similar Fiduciaries.
    (ix) Subpart J, Assignments in Behalf of Private or Public 
Organizations.
    (x) Subpart K, Attorneys in Fact.
    (xi) Subpart L, Transfer Through Judicial Proceedings.
    (xii) Subpart M, Requests for Suspension of Transactions.
    (xiii) Subpart N, Relief for Loss, Theft, Destruction, Mutilation, 
or Defacement of Securities.


<R05>
Sec. 1901.507  Certificates of beneficial ownership issued by the FmHA or its 

successor agency under Public Law 103-354 Finance Office.

    (a) Orders and payment. Orders for investment in certificates may be 
placed with the Finance Office by mail, telephone, or in person. Payment 
for purchase of certificates may be made by a wire transfer to the 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis for credit to the Farmers Home 
Administration or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354, by a 
certified check or bank draft payable to the Farmers Home Administration 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354. The rate of interest 
paid on the certificate will be the rate in effect on the date the 
Finance Office receives the payment.
    (b) Registration. (1) The registration used must express the actual 
ownership of a certificate and may not restrict the authority of the 
owner to dispose of it in any manner. FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 reserves the right to treat the registration as 
conclusive ownership. Request for registration must be clear, accurate, 
and complete, and include the appropriate taxpayer identifying number or 
social security number.
    (2) The registration of all certificates owned by the same person, 
organization, or fiduciary should be uniform with respect to the name of 
the owner and, in case of fiduciary, the description of the fiduciary 
capacity. Individual owners should be designated by the names by which 
they are ordinarily known or under which they do business, preferably 
including at least one full given name. The name of an individual may be 
preceded by an applicable title, as, for example ``Mrs.'', ``Mr.'', 
``Miss'', ``Ms.'', ``Dr.'', or ``Rev.'', or followed by a designation 
such as ``M.D.'', ``D.D.'', ``Sr.'', or ``Jr.'', Any other similar 
suffix should be included when ordinarily used or when necessary to 
distinguish the owner from another member of his family. The address 
should include, where appropriate, the name and street, route, or any 
other location feature, and zip code.
    (3) If an erroneously inscribed certificate is received, it should 
not be altered in any respect. FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 should be given full particulars about the error and asked 
to furnish instructions.
    (c) Transfers and exchanges--closed periods--(1) General. Transfer 
of registered certificates should be made by assignment in accordance 
with this section. Registered securities are eligible for denominational 
exchange. Specific instructions for issuance and delivery of new 
certificates signed by the owner or the owner's authorized 
representative must accompany the certificates presented. Certificates 
presented for transfer must be received by FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 not less than 1 full month before the date on 
which they mature. Any certificates so presented which are received too 
late to comply with this provision will be accepted for payment only.
    (2) Closing of transfer books. The transfer books are closed for 1 
full month preceding interest payment dates. If the date set for closing 
falls on Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday, the books will be closed 
as of the close of business on the last business day preceding that 
date. The books are reopened on the first business day following the 
date on which interest falls due. Registered certificates which have not 
matured, or have been submitted for transfer and are received when the 
books are closed for that certificate, will be processed on or after the 
date such books are reopened. If certificates are received for transfer 
when the books are closed for payment of final

[[Page 52]]

interest at maturity, the following action will be taken in the absence 
of different instructions:
    (i) Payment of final interest will be made to the registered owner 
of record on the date the books were closed.
    (ii) Payment of principal will be made to the assignee under a 
proper assignment of the certificate.
    (d) Redemption or payment--(1) General. Certificates are payable in 
regular course of business at maturity. FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 may provide for the exchange of maturing 
certificates. The registered certificates should be presented and 
surrendered for redemption at the FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 Finance Office. No assignments or evidence in support 
of them will be required by or on behalf of the registered owner or 
assignee for redemption for his or its account, or for redemption-
exchange if the new certificates are to be registered in exactly the 
same names and forms as in the registrations or assignments of the 
certificates surrendered.
    (2) Redemption at maturity. Registered certificates presented and 
surrendered for redemption at maturity need not be assigned unless the 
owner desires that payment be made to some other person. Should the 
owner so desire assignments should be made to the ``Farmers Home 
Administration or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 for 
redemption for the account of (inserting name and address of person to 
whom payment is to be made).'' Specific instructions for the issuance 
and delivery of the redemption check signed by the owner or the owner's 
authorized representative must accompany the certificates unless 
included in the assignment. Payment of the principal and interest will 
be made by a check drawn on the Treasurer of the United States to the 
order of the person entitled and mailed in accordance with the 
instructions received. If instructions are not received concerning 
interest, interest will be paid to the registered owner.
    (3) Interest. The interest on FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 certificates accrues and is payable annually. A full 
interest period does not include the day on which the last preceding 
interest became due, but does include the day on which the next 
succeeding interest payment is due. Certificates will cease to bear 
interest on the date of their maturity. The interest on registered 
certificates is payable by checks drawn on the Treasurer of the United 
States to the order of the registered owners, except as otherwise 
provided in this section. FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 prepares the interest checks in advance of the interest payment 
date and ordinarily mails them in time to reach the addressees on that 
date. Interest on a registered certificate which has not matured and 
which is presented for any transaction when the books for that 
certificate are closed will be paid by check drawn to the order of the 
registered owner of record. On receipt of notice of the death or 
incompetency of an individual named as registered owner, a change in the 
name or in the status of a partnership, corporation, or unincorporated 
association, the removal, resignation, succession, or death of a 
fiduciary or trustee, delivery of interest checks will be withheld 
pending receipt and approval of evidence showing who is entitled to 
receive the interest checks. If the inscriptions on certificates do not 
clearly identify the owners, delivery of interest checks may be withheld 
pending reissue of the certificates in the correct registration, except 
as provided in this section. The final installment of interest will be 
paid by check drawn to the order of the registered owner of record on 
presentation and surrender of the certificate for redemption. To assure 
timely delivery of interest checks, owners should promptly notify FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 of any change of 
address.
    (e) Assignments. Assignments of certificates should be executed by 
the owner or the owner's authorized representative in the presence of an 
officer authorized to certify assignments. Assignments shall be made on 
the back of the certificate. Registered certificates may be assigned to 
a specified transferee or to FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 for redemption or for exchange for other certificates 
offered at maturity. Assignments to ``United States, Farmers Home 
Administration or its successor

[[Page 53]]

agency under Public Law 103-354,'' ``Farmers Home Administration or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 for Transfer,'' or ``Farmers 
Home Administration or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 for 
Exchange'' will not be accepted unless supplemented by specific 
instructions by or in behalf of the owner. If an alteration or erasure 
has been made in an assignment, a new assignment from the assignor 
should be obtained. Otherwise, an affidavit or explanation by the person 
responsible for the alteration or erasure should be submitted for 
consideration.
    (f) Death of certificate holder. The Finance Office should be 
notified of the death of the registered owner of a certificate. The 
following documents should be forwarded with the notice if available.
    (1) A certified copy of the death certificate.
    (2) A certified copy of the court order appointing the Administrator 
or Executor (include the mailing address of the Administrator or 
Executor). The Finance Office will notify the person submitting such 
notice and/or documentation if any other records or documents are 
needed. Legal opinions and advice will be obtained by the Finance Office 
as needed from the Regional Attorney. After all legal requirements are 
met, the certificate should be reissued in the name of the current 
owner.
    (g) Replacement. Lost, stolen, destroyed, or mutilated certificates 
will be replaced by the Finance Office on the registered owner's 
compliance with the requirements of Sec. 1901.509.


<R05>
Sec. 1901.508  Servicing of insured notes outstanding with investors.

    The Director, or the insured loan officer of the Finance Office, is 
authorized in connection with the sale of any insured note to execute 
required documents on behalf of FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 and to take other appropriate action, including, but 
not limited to, acknowledging notice of sale of an insured note, or 
requiring an insured holder to sell an insured note to FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 in connection with any 
voluntary conveyance or foreclosure, or transfer related to liquidation 
of the borrower's account or any other servicing action so related. Upon 
recommendation by the State Director that purchase of an insured note is 
necessary for any servicing action not related to liquidation of the 
borrower's account, authorization may be given by the National Office to 
request the Director, Finance Office, to require a holder to sell an 
insured note to FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354.
    (a) Assignments--(1) Effective date of assignment. When an insured 
note is sold by a private holder to a private buyer, notice of such sale 
executed by the seller must be given to and acknowledged by FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 in order for the sale to be 
binding on FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354, as to 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354, the effective 
date of the sale will be the acknowledgment date specified in the 
acknowledgement of notice executed by FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354.
    (2) Assignment to FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 at request of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354. 
At any time FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
considers it necessary for proper servicing of the loan, FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 may require, in writing, a 
private holder to sell an insured note to FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354.
    (3) Assignment to FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 at option of holder. A private holder at any time during the option 
period may require, in writing, FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 to purchase an insured note.
    (4) Price. If FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
is the buyer of an insured note, the price will be the par value as of 
the effective date of the sale. In other cases, the price will be 
determined by an agreement between the parties.
    (b) Sale of insured notes by private holders to private buyers. (1) 
On receipt of notice from a private holder of intention to assign an 
insured note, the

[[Page 54]]

Director, Finance Office, will send the holder:
    (i) Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 471-7 
``Notice and Acknowledgment of Sale of Insured or Guaranteed Loan.''
    (ii) A statement of the unpaid principal. If requested the Director, 
Finance Office, will furnish a statement of account instead of or in 
addition to a statement of the unpaid principal.
    (iii) Appropriate information on how to complete the assignment.
    (2) If the Director, Finance Office, is informed that an insured 
note has been assigned and FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 is requested to recognize the assignment, the Director, Finance 
Office, will send the assignor Form FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 471-7, with directions for its execution.
    (3) On receipt of Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 471-7 properly executed by the assignor, the Director, Finance 
Office, will complete and execute the acknowledgment section of the 
form. The Director, Finance Office, will retain the original of the 
form, have two facsimile copies made and send one to the assignor, and 
one to the assignee. For any correction or other change to be made in 
the record of the name or address of a private holder, or of a 
designated agent of a private holder, a request will be made to FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 in writing.
    (4) As of the date of the acknowledgment, executed by the Director, 
Finance Office, on Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 471-7 the Director, Finance Office, will transfer the insured 
note from the assignor to the assignee as the insured holder on the 
records of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354. The 
name and address of the assignee will be recorded by FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 exactly as they appear on Form 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 471-7.
    (5) Payments transmitted by FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 on or after the acknowledgment date shown on Form 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 471-7 will be 
transmitted to the assignee. The Director, Finance Office, will give 
notice to the assignor and the assignee of any payments transmitted by 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 to the assignor 
before the acknowledgment date and after either the date of sale, or the 
date of the statement of account, whichever is earlier. However, FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 will not be liable for any 
failure to give such notice.
    (c) Assignment of insured notes to FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354--(1) Assignment at the request of the holder. 
For assignment of an insured note to FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 during the option period at the request of the 
holder, the following procedure will apply:
    (i) The holder will endorse the insured note as follows: ``Pay to 
the order of the United States of America. Without recourse.'' The 
holder will then deliver the endorsed note, together with the insurance 
agreement, to the Director, Finance Office.
    (ii) On receipt of the endorsed note with the accompanying insurance 
agreement, the Director, Finance Office, will acknowledge receipt of the 
note and process payment to the assignor of the par value of the note as 
of the date of the Treasury check.
    (2) Assignment at the request of FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354. The procedure for assigning an insured note at the 
request of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 will be 
the same as that prescribed in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, except 
that the Director, Finance Office, will send a written request to the 
holder requiring that the insured note be assigned to FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 and delivered to the Director, 
Finance Office, with the accompanying insurance agreement. The Director, 
Finance Office, will explain that the assignment is necessary to enable 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 to service the 
account properly and will give the holder all necessary information as 
to the manner of making the assignment and the amount to

[[Page 55]]

be paid by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354.
    (d) Replacement of called or fully paid notes. Certain insurance 
endorsements contain a clause or rider providing for a replacement note 
when the original note is paid in full, or is called by FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354. This provision applies to 
loans sold for a fixed period of 10 years or longer for loans sold on or 
after December 1, 1969, and a fixed period of 15 years or longer for 
loans sold before December 1, 1969. If a note is paid in full or called 
by the Government and the lender is entitled to a replacement note, the 
lender may obtain a certificate of beneficial ownership in lieu of the 
replacement note. The certificate will carry the rates and terms 
applicable to the replacement note.
    (e) Death of a noteholder. The Finance Office should be notified of 
the death of a holder of an insured note. The following documents should 
be forwarded with the notice if available:
    (1) A certified copy of the death certificate.
    (2) A certified copy of the court order appointing the Administrator 
or Executor (include the mailing address of the Administrator or 
Executor). The Finance Office will notify the person submitting the 
notice and/or documentation if any other records or documents are 
needed, and will provide any additional instructions that are needed. 
Legal opinions and advice will be obtained by the Finance Office as 
needed from the Regional Attorney.


<R05>
Sec. 1901.509  Loss, theft, destruction, mutilation, or defacement of insured

notes, insurance contracts, and certificates of beneficial ownership.

    (a) Block sale insurance contracts. The Associate Administrator is 
authorized in connection with block sale insurance contracts to 
authorize the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354's 
fiscal agent to establish requirements for issuance of a replacement 
insurance contract when the original issued by the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York (FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354's 
fiscal agent) is lost, stolen, destroyed, mutilated, or defaced. When a 
block sale insurance contract is lost, stolen, or destroyed, a duplicate 
may be issued to the registered holder upon receipt of an acceptable 
certificate of loss and an indemnity bond without surety. The 
certificate of loss should include the legal name and present address of 
the owner and address when issued, if different from the present 
address; the capacity of person certifying, if other than owner; the 
identity of the insurance contract, including series number, contract 
number, denomination, issue date, and form of inscription of registry, 
and the full statement of circumstances of loss. All available portions 
of an insurance contract that is mutilated, defaced, or partially 
destroyed should be submitted to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
(FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354's fiscal agent) 
for determination as to whether a duplicate insurance contract can be 
issued without a certificate of loss and posting of an indemnity bond. 
In the event the holder of a block sales insurance contract obtains 
possession of the underlying notes, the requirements of paragraph (b) of 
this section apply.
    (b) Notes and certificates of beneficial ownership sold by County 
Office and Finance Office. The Director, or the insured loan officer of 
the Finance Office, is authorized on behalf of the Government, in 
connection with insured notes or certificates of beneficial ownership 
sold through the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
Finance Office to require indemnity bonds from a noteholder when a note 
or certificate is lost, stolen, destroyed, mutilated, or defaced while 
in the custody of the holder or his designee. When a note or certificate 
of beneficial ownership is lost, stolen, or destroyed while in the 
custody of the holder or his designee, the following will apply:
    (1) A certificate of loss should be filed with FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 Finance Office. The certificate should 
include:
    (i) Legal name and present address of owner when issued, if 
different from present address.
    (ii) Capacity of person certifying, if other than the owner.
    (iii) Identity of the note or certificate of beneficial ownership, 
including the name and FmHA or its successor

[[Page 56]]

agency under Public Law 103-354 case number of the maker thereof, issue 
date, interest rate of obligation, face amount of note or certificate of 
beneficial ownership, and a full description of any assignment, 
endorsement, or any other writing.
    (iv) A full statement of circumstances of the loss, theft, or 
destruction of the note.
    (2) An indemnity bond in the amount of the unpaid principal and 
interest will be required except in the following instances:
    (i) Substantially the entire note or certificate of beneficial 
ownership is presented and surrendered by the owner or holder, and the 
Director, Finance Office, is satisfied as to the identity of the 
instruments and that any missing portions are not sufficient to form the 
basis of a valid claim against the United States or the borrower; or
    (ii) The owner or holder is the United States, a Federal Reserve 
Bank, a Federal Government Corporation, a State or territory, or the 
District of Columbia.
    (3) An indemnity bond without surety will be provided in the 
following cases:
    (i) Cases involving registered unassigned obligations held by banks, 
trust companies, savings and loan associations, or companies holding 
certificates of authority from Secretary of the Treasury as acceptable 
sureties on Federal Bonds (companies listed on Treasury Department 
Circular 570) where the financial responsibilities of such claimants are 
well known or readily ascertainable.
    (ii) Cases involving registered unassigned obligations where the 
evidence reasonably justifies a conclusion that the obligations were 
destroyed and the unpaid principal and interest amount does not exceed 
$1,000.
    (4) An indemnity posted with a qualified surety is required in all 
cases involving registered unassigned obligations other than those cited 
in paragraphs (b)(2)(i), (b)(2)(ii), (b)(3)(i) and (b)(3)(ii) of this 
section. A qualified surety is a company holding a certificate of 
authority from the Secretary of the Treasury as acceptable sureties on 
Federal Bonds, and listed in Treasury Department Circular 570.
    (5) All indemnity bonds for notes must be payable to both the 
borrower and FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354. All 
indemnity bonds for certificates of beneficial ownership must be payable 
to FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354. The bond may 
be posted at the time the note or certificate of beneficial ownership 
becomes eligible for repurchase by FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354. If the holder desires to continue to hold the note 
for the life of the note, an indemnity bond will not be required.
    (6) An assignment of the note or certificate of beneficial ownership 
shall be made to the United States of America, acting through the 
Farmers Home Administration or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354, United States Department of Agriculture. An acceptable form of 
assignment is available from the Director, Finance Office.
    (c) Other cases. Cases involving bearer obligations and other cases 
not discussed in this section will be forwarded to the Director, Finance 
Office, for requirements.
    (d) Replacement of notes. FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 will not attempt to obtain replacement notes from borrowers.

Subparts L-N [Reserved]


<R03>
PART 1902_SUPERVISED BANK ACCOUNTS--Table of Contents

<R05>


   Subpart A_Supervised Bank Accounts of Loan, Grant, and Other Funds

Sec.
1902.1 General.
1902.2 Policies concerning disbursement of funds.
1902.3 Procedures to follow in fund disbursement.
1902.4 Establishing MFH reserve accounts in a supervised bank account.
1902.5 [Reserved]
1902.6 Establishing supervised bank accounts.
1902.7 Pledging collateral for deposit of funds in supervised bank 
          accounts.
1902.8 Authority to establish and administer supervised bank accounts.
1902.9 Deposits.
1902.10 Withdrawals.
1902.11 Servicing Office records.
1902.12-1902.13 [Reserved]

[[Page 57]]

1902.14 Reconciliation of accounts.
1902.15 Closing accounts.
1902.16 Request for withdrawals by State Director.
1902.17-1902.49 [Reserved]
1902.50 OMB control number.

Exhibit A to Subpart A [Reserved]
Exhibit B to Subpart A--United States Department of Agriculture, Farmers 
          Home Administration or Its Successor Agency Under Public Law 
          103-354--Interest-Bearing Deposit Agreement

Subparts B-C [Reserved]

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 301; 7 U.S.C. 1989; 7 U.S.C. 6991, et seq.; 42 
U.S.C. 1480; Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1953 (5 U.S.C. App.).


<R04>
   Subpart A_Supervised Bank Accounts of Loan, Grant, and Other Funds

    Source: 46 FR 36106, July 14, 1981, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1902.1  General.

    This subpart prescribes the policies and procedures in establishing 
and using supervised bank accounts, and in placing Multi-Family Housing 
(MFH) reserve accounts in supervised bank accounts. 7 CFR part 2018, 
subpart D, provides the procedures Servicing Officials should follow in 
ordering loan and grant disbursements.
    (a) Borrowers referred to in this subpart include both loan and 
grant recipients. They are referred to as ``depositors'' in the deposit 
agreements hereinafter described. References herein and in deposit 
agreements to ``other lenders'' include lenders and grantors other than 
Rural Development.
    (b) Banks and savings associations referred to in this subpart are 
those in which deposits are insured by the FDIC.
    (c) Credit unions referred to in this subpart are those in which 
deposits are insured by the NCUA.
    (d) Financial institutions as referred to in this subpart include 
banks, savings associations, and credit unions which are covered by the 
proper insurance coverage cited in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this 
section.
    (e) Supervised bank accounts referred to in this subpart are bank, 
savings association, or credit union accounts established through 
deposit agreements entered into between the borrower, the United States 
of America acting through Rural Development, and the Financial 
Institution on Form RD 402-1, ``Deposit Agreement''.
    (f) Form RD 402-1 provides for the deposit of funds in a supervised 
bank account to ensure the performance of the borrower's obligation to 
Rural Development in connection with a loan and/or grant.
    (g) ``Interest-Bearing Deposit Agreement'' (Exhibit B of this 
subpart), provides for the deposit of loan or grant funds that are not 
required for immediate disbursement in specified interest-bearing 
deposits, and it is executed in conjunction with Form RD 402-1.
    (h) Servicing officials referred to in this instruction include 
county supervisors, district directors, local supervisors, area 
supervisors, and National Office grant program managers.
    (i) Automated systems referred to in this instruction refers to the 
loan accounting systems; e.g., Program Loan Accounting System, Automated 
Multi-Housing Accounting System, and Dedicated Loan Origination System, 
from which loan and grant disbursements are ordered.
    (j) This subpart includes the National Office directly servicing a 
grant recipient or recipient of cooperative agreement funds.

[70 FR 59225, Oct. 12, 2005]


<R05>
Sec. 1902.2  Policies concerning disbursement of funds.

    (a) Generally, loan and grant disbursements may be requested on an 
as needed basis, thereby reducing the need for supervised bank accounts. 
For all construction loans and those loans using multiple advances, only 
the actual amount to be disbursed at loan closing will be requested 
through the automated systems. Subsequent disbursements will be ordered 
as needed. However, supervised bank accounts may be used in certain 
circumstances. For example:
    (1) When a construction loan is made and the construction is 
substantially completed, but a small amount is being withheld pending 
completion of landscaping or some similar item. In this case, funds not 
disbursed may be placed

[[Page 58]]

in a supervised bank account for future disbursement as appropriate.
    (2) When a large number of checks will be issued in the construction 
of a dwelling or other development. In such cases, loan and grant 
disbursements will be requested in accordance with 7 CFR part 2018, 
subpart D as necessary, deposited in a supervised bank account, and 
disbursed as necessary to suppliers, sub-contractors, etc.
    (3) Association loan and grant funds made on a multiple advance 
basis may be deposited in a supervised bank account when required by 
State statutes or when determined necessary by the loan approval 
official.
    (4) Supervised bank accounts may be used when needed as defined in 
paragraph (a)(5) of this section to ensure the correct expenditures of 
all or a part of loan and grant funds, borrower contributions, and 
borrower income. Such accounts will be limited in amount and duration to 
the extent feasible through the prudent disbursement of funds and the 
prompt termination of the interests of Rural Development and other 
lenders when the accounts are no longer required.
    (5) When it is determined by the Servicing Official that special 
supervision is needed in the management of the borrower's finances, 
funds may be deposited in a supervised bank account. This supervisory 
technique will be used for a temporary period to help the borrower learn 
to properly manage his/her finances. Such a period will not exceed 1 
year unless extended by the Servicing Official.
    (b) Program instructions provide information as to the type of note 
to be utilized and the method of handling advances and the interest 
accrued.
    (c) The debt instruments executed at the time of loan closing 
constitute an obligation on the part of the Government to disburse all 
funds at one time or in multiple advances, provided the funds are for 
purposes authorized by the Government at the time of loan closing. This 
obligatory commitment takes priority over any intervening liens or 
advances by other creditors, regardless of the provisions of the State 
laws involved.

[70 FR 59225, Oct. 12, 2005]


<R05>
Sec. 1902.3  Procedures to follow in fund disbursement.

    (a) The Servicing Official will determine during loan approval the 
amount(s) of loan or grant disbursement(s)--full or partial--and will 
process the request to the appropriate automated system in accordance 
with 7 CFR part 2018, subpart D.
    (b) When Treasury check(s) are delivered to the Servicing Official, 
the Servicing Official will make sure that the name of the borrower and 
the amount(s) of check(s) coincide with the request on file. The 
Servicing Official should be sure that the check is properly endorsed to 
ensure payment to the intended recipient. Examples of such restrictive 
endorsements are:
    (1) ``For Deposit only to Account No. (Number of Construction 
Account) of (Name of Borrower) in (Name of Financial Institution).''
    (2) ``Pay to the order of (3rd party payee)''--(Contractor, 
Developer, Sub-Contractor, Building Supply House, etc.) for the purpose 
of ----------.
    (c) When necessary, and only under the circumstances listed in Sec. 
1902.2, the Servicing Official will establish, or cause to be 
established, a supervised bank account. Funds deposited in a supervised 
bank account are to be recorded and accounted for on Form RD 402-2, 
``Statement of Deposits and Withdrawals''.

[46 FR 36106, July 14, 1981, as amended at 53 FR 26588, July 14, 1988; 
53 FR 35670, Sept. 14, 1988; 54 FR 39727, Sept. 28, 1989; 70 FR 59226, 
Oct. 12, 2005]


<R05>
Sec. 1902.4  Establishing MFH reserve accounts in a supervised bank account.

    (a) General requirements. All MFH borrowers required to maintain 
reserve accounts must place the reserve accounts in a supervised bank 
account(s) which meets the following requirements:
    (1) Countersignature requirements. The reserve account must require 
that any funds withdrawn be countersigned by an authorized FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 official.
    (2) Restrictions on collateral. The financial institution holding 
the reserve account must ensure that the funds are

[[Page 59]]

not pledged or taken as security without the Agency's prior consent.
    (3) Interest bearing. The reserve account funds are encouraged to be 
maintained in an interest-bearing account. The ``Interest-Bearing 
Deposit Agreement'' set out in Exhibit B of this subpart is not required 
to be used for reserve accounts.
    (4) Restricted investments. Reserve funds must be placed in 
investments authorized in 7 CFR part 3560, subpart G. The authorized 
investments are deemed to be of acceptable risk such that the potential 
for any loss is minimal.
    (5) Financial institutions. The reserve account must be maintained 
in authorized financial institutions set out in 7 CFR part 3560, subpart 
G; e.g., banks, savings associations, credit unions, brokerage firms, 
mutual funds. Generally, any financial institution may be used provided 
invested or deposited funds are insured to protect against theft and 
dishonesty. The reserve account funds need not be Federally insured, but 
must be otherwise covered by non-Federal insurance against theft and 
dishonesty.
    (6) Rules where multiple projects are involved. A reserve account(s) 
must be maintained for each borrower. When a borrower owns multiple 
projects, reserve accounts may be established for each project. A single 
reserve account may also be established by a borrower owning multiple 
projects, provided the conditions set out in 7 CFR part 3560. subpart G 
are met.
    (7) Term. Reserve accounts are expected to be kept for the full term 
of the loan.
    (b) Deposits and account activity statements--(1) Deposits. 
Generally, Rural Development will not require the review or approval of 
deposits or the use of Form RD 402-1 or 402-2.
    (2) Account activity statements. Generally, the FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 will not monitor or reconcile 
the reserve account activity statements issued periodically by the 
financial institutions holding the funds. FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 will monitor reserve account levels through 
budget reports, audits, and Agency reserve tracking systems. If disputes 
arise or the borrower is in violation of Agency regulations, the Agency 
may require account activity statements. When account activity 
statements are sought, it will normally be sufficient to obtain the 
statement which reflects balances as of the last activity statement 
ending period. Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 402-2 is not required to be used.

[59 FR 3778, Jan. 27, 1994, as amended at 69 FR 69104, Nov. 26, 2004; 70 
FR 59226, Oct. 12, 2005; 70 FR 73347, Dec. 12, 2005]


<R05>
Sec. 1902.5  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1902.6  Establishing supervised bank accounts.

    (a) Each borrower will be given an opportunity to choose the 
financial institution in which the supervised bank account will be 
established, provided the financial institution is a member of the FDIC 
or NCUA, as applicable.
    (b) When accounts are established, it should be determined that:
    (1) The financial institution is fully informed concerning the 
provisions of the applicable deposit agreement,
    (2) Agreements are reached with respect to the services to be 
provided by the financial institution including the frequency and method 
of transmittal of checking account statements, and
    (3) An agreement is reached with the financial institution regarding 
the place where the counter-signature will be on the checks.
    (c) When possible, Servicing Officials will make arrangements with 
financial institutions to waive service charges in connection with 
supervised bank accounts. However, there is no objection to the payment 
by the borrower of a reasonable charge for such service.
    (d) For each borrower, if the amount of any loan and grant funds, 
plus any borrower contributions and funds from other sources to be 
deposited in the supervised bank account will exceed $100,000, the 
financial institution will be required to pledge collateral for the 
excess over $100,000 before the deposit is made (see Sec. 1902.7 of 
this subpart). If the supervised bank account is a joint account, any 
amount over the FDIC- or NCUA-insured limit must be collateralized.

[[Page 60]]

    (e) Only one supervised bank account will be established for any 
borrower regardless of the amount or source of funds, except for Rural 
Rental Housing loans where separate accounts will be established for 
each project.
    (f) When a supervised bank account is established, an original and 
two copies of the applicable Deposit Agreement and the Interest-Bearing 
Deposit Agreement (Exhibit B of this subpart), when applicable, will be 
executed by the borrower, the financial institution, and a Servicing 
Office employee. The original will be retained in the borrower's case 
file, one executed copy will be delivered to the financial institution 
and one executed copy to the borrower. An extra copy of the Interest-
Bearing Deposit Agreement, when applicable, will be prepared and 
attached to the certificate, passbook, or other evidence of deposit 
representing the interest-bearing deposit.

[46 FR 36106, July 14, 1981, as amended at 53 FR 231, Jan. 6, 1988; 70 
FR 59227, Oct. 12, 2005]


<R05>
Sec. 1902.7  Pledging collateral for deposit of funds in supervised bank accounts.

    (a) Funds in excess of $100,000 per financial institution, deposited 
for borrowers in supervised bank accounts, must be secured by pledging 
acceptable collateral with the Federal Reserve Bank (FRB) in an amount 
not less than the excess. If the supervised bank account is a joint 
account, any amount over the FDIC- or NCUA-insured limit must be 
collateralized.
    (b) As soon as it is determined that the loan will be approved and 
the applicant has selected or tentatively selected a financial 
institution for the supervised bank account, the Servicing Official will 
contact the financial institution to determine:
    (1) That the financial institution selected is insured by the FDIC 
(banks and savings associations) or NCUA (credit unions).
    (2) Whether the financial institution is willing to pledge 
collateral with the FRB under 31 CFR part 202 (Treasury Circular 176) to 
the extent necessary to secure the amount of funds being deposited in 
excess of the FDIC or NCUA insurance limit.
    (3) If the financial institution is not a member of the Federal 
Reserve System, it will be necessary for the financial institution to 
pledge the securities with a correspondent bank who is a member of the 
System. The correspondent bank should contact the FRB informing them 
they are holding securities pledged for the supervised bank account 
under 31 CFR part 202 (Treasury Circular 176).
    (c) If the financial institution agrees to pledge collateral, the 
Servicing Official should complete RD Form Letter 1902-A-2, ``Designated 
Financial Institution--Collateral Pledge'', in an original and two 
copies: The original for the National Office, Policy and Analysis 
Division; the first copy for the State Office; and the second copy for 
the Servicing Official. The Rural Development Form Letter 1902-A-2 
should be forwarded to the National Office, Policy and Analysis 
Division, at least 30 days before the date of loan closing.
    (d) The National Office, Policy and Analysis Division, will arrange 
for the financial institution under its designation as a depository and 
financial agent of the U.S. Government to pledge the requested 
collateral.
    (e) If, two days before loan closing, the local Rural Development 
office which requested the collateral has not received notification from 
the National Office, Policy and Analysis Division, that collateral has 
been pledged, contact should be made with the financial institution to 
ascertain whether they have pledged collateral with their local FRB 
under 31 CFR part 202 (Treasury Circular 176). If the financial 
institution has pledged collateral, the local Rural Development office 
should contact the National Office, Policy and Analysis Division, who 
will follow-up with the local FRB concerning the collateral.
    (f) When the amount of deposit in the supervised bank account has 
been reduced to a point where the financial institution desires part or 
all of the collateral released, it should contact the National Office, 
Policy and Analysis Division. The local Rural Development office will be 
contacted for release authorization. The authorization release will be 
made through the local FRB,

[[Page 61]]

with notification to the financial institution. The local Rural 
Development office may also request release through the National Office, 
Policy and Analysis Division.

[46 FR 36106, July 14, 1981, as amended at 53 FR 231, Jan. 6, 1988; 53 
FR 24437, June 29, 1988; 56 FR 50648, Oct. 8, 1991; 70 FR 59227, Oct. 
12, 2005]


<R05>
Sec. 1902.8  Authority to establish and administer supervised bank accounts.

    Servicing Officials are authorized to establish supervised bank 
accounts, deposit loan checks and other funds, countersign checks, close 
accounts, and execute all forms in connection with supervised bank 
account transactions and redelegate this authority to a person under 
their supervision who is considered capable of exercising such 
authority. State Directors will make written demand upon the bank for 
withdrawals outlined in Sec. 1902.16.

[70 FR 59227, Oct. 12, 2005]


<R05>
Sec. 1902.9  Deposits.

    (a) Deposit by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
personnel. (1) Checks made payable solely to the Federal Government or 
any Agency thereof, and a joint check when the Treasurer of the United 
States is a joint payee, may not be deposited in a supervised bank 
account.
    (2) Rural Development personnel will accept funds for deposit in a 
borrower's supervised bank account ONLY in the form of: A check or money 
order endorsed by the borrower ``For Deposit Only;'' a check drawn to 
the order of the financial institution in which the funds are to be 
deposited; a loan check drawn on the U.S. Treasury; or a Rural 
Development electronic funds transfer disbursement.
    (i) A joint check that is payable to the borrower and Rural 
Development will be endorsed by the Servicing Official as provided in 7 
CFR part 1951, subpart B, Exhibit B, section 4.
    (ii) Ordinarily, when deposits are made from funds which are 
received as the result of consent or subordination agreements or 
assignments of income, the check should be drawn to the order of the 
financial institution in which the supervised bank account is 
established or jointly to the order of the borrower and Rural 
Development. All such checks should be delivered or mailed to the 
Servicing Office.
    (3) If direct or insured loan funds or borrower contributions are to 
be deposited in a supervised bank account, such funds will be deposited 
on the date of loan closing after it has been determined that the loan 
can be closed. However, if it is impossible to deposit the funds on the 
day the loan is closed due to reasons such as distance from the 
financial institution or banking hours, the funds will be deposited on 
the first banking day following the date of loan closing.
    (4) Grant funds will be deposited when such funds are delivered.
    (5) When funds from any source in the form of cash, check, or money 
order are deposited by Rural Development personnel in a supervised bank 
account, a deposit slip will be prepared in an original and two copies 
with distribution as follows: Original to the financial institution, one 
copy to the borrower, and one copy for the borrower's case folder. The 
name of the borrower, the sources of funds, ``Subject to Rural 
Development Countersignature'' and, if applicable, the account number, 
will be entered on each deposit slip.
    (6) A loan or grant check drawn on the U.S. Treasury may be 
deposited in a supervised bank account without endorsement by the 
borrower when it will facilitate delivery of the check and is acceptable 
to the financial institution. The borrower will be notified immediately 
of any deposit made and will be furnished a copy of the deposit slip. 
When a deposit of this nature is made, the following endorsement will be 
used:

    For deposit only in the supervised bank account of (name of 
borrower) in the (name of financial institution and address when 
necessary for identification) pursuant to Deposit Agreement dated ------
--.

    (7) Accounts established through the use of Interest-Bearing Deposit 
Agreement will be in the name of the depositor and the Government.
    (b) Deposits by borrowers. Funds in the form of cash, check, or 
money order may be deposited in the supervised bank account by the 
borrower if authorized by Rural Development, provided the financial 
institution has

[[Page 62]]

agreed that when a deposit is made to the account by other than Rural 
Development personnel, the financial institution will promptly deliver 
or mail a copy of the deposit slip to the Rural Development Servicing 
Office.
    (1) A loan or grant check drawn on the U.S. Treasury may be 
deposited in a supervised bank account by a borrower, provided the 
following endorsement is used and is inserted thereon prior to delivery 
to the borrower for signature:

    For deposit only in my supervised bank account in the (name of 
financial institution and address when necessary for identification) 
pursuant to Deposit Agreement dated --------.

    (2) Funds other than loan or grant funds may be deposited by the 
borrower in those exceptional instances where an agreement is reached 
between the Servicing Official and the borrower, whereby the borrower 
will make deposits of income from any source directly into the 
supervised bank account. In such instances the borrower will be 
instructed to prepare the deposit slip in the manner described in Sec. 
1902.9 (a)(5) of this subpart.

[46 FR 36106, July 14, 1981, as amended at 70 FR 59227, Oct. 12, 2005]


<R05>
Sec. 1902.10  Withdrawals.

    (a) The Servicing Official will not countersign checks on the 
supervised bank account for the use of funds unless the funds deposited 
by the borrower from other sources were cash deposits, checks which the 
Servicing Official knows to be good, or deposited checks which have 
cleared.
    (b) Withdrawals of funds deposited under the applicable deposit 
agreement are permitted only by order of the borrower and 
countersignature of authorized FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 personnel, or upon written demand on the financial 
institution by the State Director.
    (c) Upon withdrawal or maturity of interest-bearing accounts 
established through the use of an Interest-Bearing Deposit Agreement, 
such funds will be credited to the supervised bank account established 
through the use of Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 402-1.
    (d) The issuance of checks on the supervised bank account will be 
kept to the minimum possible without defeating the purpose of such 
accounts. When major items of capital goods are being purchased, or a 
limited number of relatively costly items of operating expenses are 
being paid, or when debts are being refinanced, the checks will be drawn 
to the vendors or creditors. If minor capital items are being purchased 
or numerous items of operating and family living expenses are involved 
as in connection with a monthly budget, a check may be drawn to the 
borrower to provide the funds to meet such costs.
    (1) A check will be issued payable to the appropriate payee but will 
never be issued to ``cash.'' The purpose of the expenditure will be 
clearly shown on Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 402-2 and indicated on the fact of the check. When checks are drawn 
in favor of the borrower to cover items too numerous to identify, the 
expenditure will be identified on the check, as ``miscellaneous.''
    (2) Ordinarily, a check will be countersigned before it is delivered 
to the payee. However, in justifiable circumstances, such as when 
excessive travel on the part of the borrower or Servicing Official would 
be involved, or purchase would be prevented, and the borrower can be 
relied upon to select goods and services in accordance with the plans, a 
check may be delivered to the payee by the borrower before being 
countersigned.
    (i) When a check is to be delivered to the payee before being 
countersigned, the Servicing Official must make it clear to the borrower 
and to the payee, if possible, that the check will be countersigned only 
if the quantity and quality of items purchased are in accordance with 
approved plans.
    (ii) Checks delivered to the payee before counter-signature will 
bear the following legend in addition to the legend for 
countersignature: Valid only upon countersignature of Rural 
Development.''
    (iii) The check must be presented by the payee or a representative 
to the Rural Development Servicing Office for the required 
countersignature.

[[Page 63]]

    (iv) Such check must be accompanied by a bill of sale, invoice, or 
receipt signed by the borrower identifying the nature and cost of goods 
or services purchased, or similar information must be indicated on the 
check.
    (3) For real estate loans or grants, whether the check is delivered 
to the payee before or after countersignature, the number and date of 
the check will be inserted on all bills of sale, invoices, receipts, and 
itemized statements for materials, equipment, and services.
    (4) Bills of sale, invoices, receipts, or itemized statements may be 
returned to the borrower with the canceled check for the payment of the 
bill.
    (5) Checks to be drawn on a supervised bank account will bear the 
legend:


<bullet<ls-thn-eq> ``Countersigned,'' not as co-maker or endorser.






(Title)

Rural Development

[46 FR 36106, July 14, 1981, as amended at 54 FR 47959, Nov. 20, 1989; 
70 FR 59227, Oct. 12, 2005]


<R05>
Sec. 1902.11  Servicing Office records.

    A record of funds deposited in a supervised bank account will be 
maintained on Form RD 402-2 in accordance with the Forms Manual Insert. 
The record of funds provided for operating purposes by another creditor 
or grantor will be on a separate Form RD 402-2 so that they can be 
clearly identified.

[70 FR 59228, Oct. 12, 2005]


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 1902.12-1902.13  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1902.14  Reconciliation of accounts.

    (a) A checking account statement will be obtained periodically in 
accordance with established practices in the area. If the checking 
statement does not include sufficient information to reconcile the 
account (the name of the payee or the check number and the amount of 
each check; i.e., a negotiable demand draft drawn on a financial 
institution), the original cancelled check or either a copy or other 
reasonable facsimile of the cancelled check must be provided to the 
Servicing Office with the statement. Checking account statements will be 
reconciled promptly with Servicing Office records. The person making the 
reconciliation will initial the record and indicate the date of the 
action.
    (b) All checking account statements and, if necessary, original 
cancelled checks or either a copy or other reasonable facsimile of the 
cancelled checks will be forwarded immediately to the borrower when bank 
statements and Servicing Office records are in agreement. If a 
transmittal is used, Form RD 140-4, ``Transmittal of Documents'', is 
prescribed for that purpose.
    (c) If the financial institution did not return the original 
cancelled check(s) to the Agency with the statements, and Rural 
Development has a need for the original cancelled check(s), the 
financial institution, upon request by the Agency, will furnish to the 
Agency the requested original cancelled check(s) or a certified copy or 
other reasonable certified facsimile of the cancelled check(s) and will 
provide this service to Rural Development with no fees being assessed 
the Agency or the Depositor's account for the service.

[70 FR 59228, Oct. 12, 2005]


<R05>
Sec. 1902.15  Closing accounts.

    When FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 loan or 
grant funds and those of any other lender or grantor have all been 
properly expended or withdrawn, Form FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 402-6 may be used to give FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354's consent (and of another lender or 
grantor, if involved) to close the supervised bank account in the 
following situations:
    (a) When FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 loan 
funds in the supervised bank account of a borrower have been reduced to 
$100 or less, and a check for the unexpended balance has been issued to 
the borrower to be used for authorized purposes.
    (b) For all loan accounts, after completion of authorized loan funds 
expenditures, and after promptly refunding any remaining unexpended loan 
funds on the borrower's loan account

[[Page 64]]

with Rural Development or another lender, as appropriate.
    (c) Promptly upon death of a borrower, except when the loan is being 
continued with a joint debtor, when a borrower is in default and it is 
determined that no further assistance will be given, or when a borrower 
is no longer classified as ``active.''
    (1) Deceased borrowers. (i) Ordinarily, upon notice of the death of 
a borrower, the District Director or the County Supervisor will request 
the State Director to make demand upon the bank for the balance on 
deposit and apply all the balance after payment of any bank charges to 
the borrower's FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
indebtedness. When the State Director approves continuation with a 
survivor, the supervised bank account of deceased borrower may be 
continued with a remaining joint debtor who is liable for the loan and 
agrees to use the unexpended funds as planned, provided:
    (i) Ordinarily, upon notice of the death of a borrower, the 
Servicing Official will request the State Director to make demand upon 
the bank for the balance on deposit and apply all the balance after 
payment of any bank charges to the borrower's Rural Development 
indebtedness. When the State Director approves continuation with a 
survivor, the supervised bank account of a deceased borrower may be 
continued with a remaining joint debtor who is liable for the loan and 
agrees to use the unexpended funds as planned, provided:
    (A) The account is a joint survivorship supervised bank account, or
    (B) If not a joint survivorship account, the financial institution 
will agree to permit the addition of the surviving joint debtor's name 
to the existing signature card and the appropriate Deposit Agreement and 
continue to disburse checks out of the existing account upon FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354's countersignature and the 
joint debtor's signature in place of the deceased borrower, or
    (C) The financial institution will permit the State Director to 
withdraw the balance from the existing supervised bank account with a 
check jointly payable to the FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 and the surviving joint debtor and deposit the money in a 
new supervised bank account with a surviving joint debtor, and will 
disburse checks from this new account upon the signature of such 
survivor and the countersignature of an authorized FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 official.
    (ii) The State Director, before applying the balance remaining in 
the supervised bank account to the FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 indebtedness, is authorized upon approval by the 
Office of the General Counsel (OGC) to refund any unobligated balances 
of funds from other lenders to the FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 borrower for specific operating purposes in 
accordance with subordination agreements or other arrangements between 
the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354, the lender 
and the borrower.
    (iii) The State Director, upon the recommendation of an authorized 
representative of the estate of the deceased borrower and the approval 
of the OGC, is authorized to approve the use of deposited funds for the 
payment of commitments for goods delivered or services performed in 
accordance with the deceased borrower's plans approved by FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354.
    (2) Borrowers in default. Whenever it is impossible or impractical 
to obtain a signed check from a borrower whose supervised bank account 
is to be closed, the Servicing Official will request the State Director 
to make demand upon the financial institution for the balance on deposit 
in the borrower's supervised bank account for application as 
appropriate:
    (i) To the borrower's FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 indebtedness, or
    (ii) As refunds of any unobligated advance provided by other lenders 
which were deposited in the account, or
    (iii) For the return of Rural Development grant funds in accordance 
with 7 CFR part 1951, subpart B or
    (iv) For the return of grant funds to other grantors.

[[Page 65]]

    (3) Inactive borrowers. An inactive borrower is one whose loan has 
not been paid in full, but is no longer classified as ``active.''
    (4) Paid up borrowers. A paid-up borrower is one who has a balance 
remaining in the supervised bank account and has repaid the entire 
indebtedness to Rural Development and has properly expended all funds 
advanced by other lenders. In such cases the Servicing Official will:
    (i) Notify the borrower in writing that the interests in the account 
of Rural Development have been terminated, and
    (ii) Inform the borrower of the balance remaining in the supervised 
bank account.

[46 FR 36106, July 14, 1981, as amended at 53 FR 231, Jan. 6, 1988; 54 
FR 47196, Nov. 13, 1989; 66 FR 1569, Jan. 9, 2001; 70 FR 59228, Oct. 12, 
2005]


<R05>
Sec. 1902.16  Request for withdrawals by State Director.

    When the State Director is requested to make written demand upon the 
financial institution for the balance on deposit in the supervised bank 
account, or any part thereof, the request will be accompanied by the 
following information.
    (a) Name of borrower as it appears on the applicable Deposit 
Agreement.
    (b) Name and location of financial institution.
    (c) Amount to be withdrawn for refund to another lender of any 
balance that may remain of funds received by the borrower from such 
lender as a loan or grant, or under a subordination agreement or other 
arrangement between the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354, the other lender, and the borrower.
    (d) Amount to be withdrawn, excluding any service charges, for a 
refund of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354's.
    (e) Other pertinent information including reasons for the 
withdrawal.


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 1902.17-1902.49  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1902.50  OMB control number.

    The reporting and recordkeeping requirements contained in this 
regulation have been approved by the OMB and have been assigned OMB 
Control Number 0575-0158.

[70 FR 59228, Oct. 12, 2005]


<R05>
           Sec. Exhibit A to Subpart A of Part 1902 [Reserved]


<R05>
 Sec. Exhibit B to Subpart A of Part 1902--United States Department of 

 Agriculture, Farmers Home Administration or Its Sucessor Agency Under 
         Public Law 103-354--Interest-Bearing Deposit Agreement

    BECAUSE certain funds of ---------- referred to as the 
``Depositor,'' are now on deposit with the ----------, referred to as 
the ``Financial Institution,'' under a Deposit Agreement, dated --------
--------------, 20----, providing for supervision by the United States 
of America, acting through the Farmers Home Administration or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354, referred to as the 
``Government,'' which Deposit Agreement grants to the Government 
security and/or other interest in the funds covered by that Deposit 
Agreement, and
    BECAUSE certain of these funds are not now required for immediate 
disbursement and it is the desire of the Depositor to place these funds 
in interest-bearing deposits with the Financial Institution:
    THEREFORE, the Depositor and the Government authorize and direct the 
Financial Institution to place -------- Dollars ($--------) of the funds 
subject to that Deposit Agreement in interest-bearing deposits as 
follows:

    $ -------- for a period of ---------- months at ---------- % 
interest.
    $ -------- for a period of ---------- months at ---------- % 
interest.
    $ -------- for a period of ---------- months at ---------- % 
interest.

    These interest-bearing deposits and the income earned on them at all 
times shall be considered a part of the account covered by said Deposit 
Agreement except that the right of the Depositor and the Government to 
jointly withdraw all or a portion of the funds in the account covered by 
the Deposit Agreement by an order of the Depositor countersigned by a 
representative of the Government, and the right of the Government to 
make written demand for the balance or any portion of the balance, is 
modified by the above time deposit maturity schedule. The evidence of 
such time deposits shall be issued in the names of the Depositor and the 
Farmers Home Administration or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354.
    A copy of this Agreement shall be attached to and become a part of 
each certificate, passbook, or other evidence of deposit that

[[Page 66]]

may be issued to represent such interest-bearing deposits.
    Executed this -------------- day of --------------, 20----.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
By:_____________________________________________________________________

County Supervisor
Farmers Home Administration or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354
U.S. Department of Agriculture

________________________________________________________________________
(Depositor)

By:_____________________________________________________________________

Title:__________________________________________________________________
    Accepted on the above terms and conditions this ------------ day of 
----------------, 20----.

________________________________________________________________________

(Financial Institution)

________________________________________________________________________

(Office or Branch)

By:_____________________________________________________________________

Title:__________________________________________________________________

[53 FR 35671, Sept. 14, 1988, as amended at 55 FR 21524, May 25, 1990; 
70 FR 59228, Oct. 12, 2005]

Subparts B-C [Reserved]

        PART 1904_LOAN AND GRANT PROGRAMS (INDIVIDUAL) [RESERVED]


<R03>
PART 1910_GENERAL--Table of Contents

<R05>


Subpart A [Reserved]

                  Subpart B_Credit Reports (Individual)

Sec.
1910.51 Purpose.
1910.52 [Reserved]
1910.53 Policy.
1910.54-1910.100 [Reserved]

                   Subpart C_Commercial Credit Reports

1910.101 Preface.
1910.102-1910.150 [Reserved]

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 301; 7 U.S.C. 1989; 42 U.S.C. 1480.

    Source: 43 FR 56643, Dec. 4, 1978, unless otherwise noted.

Subpart A [Reserved]


<R04>
                  Subpart B_Credit Reports (Individual)

    Source: 49 FR 40790, Oct. 18, 1984, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.51  Purpose.

    This subpart prescribes the policies and procedures of the Farmers 
Home Administration (FmHA) or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 for individual and joint type credit reports. Credit reports will be 
ordered to determine the eligibility of applicants requesting Farmers 
Home Administration (FmHA) or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 loans. A nonrefundable fee will be charged the applicant. This 
subpart is inapplicable to Farm Service Agency, Farm Loan Programs.

[55 FR 46188, Nov. 2, 1990, as amended at 72 FR 64122, Nov. 18, 2007]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.52  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1910.53  Policy.

    The County Supervisor will be responsible for ordering individual 
credit reports. These will be obtained on initial and rescheduled Farmer 
Program loans and on all initial Single Family Housing applications, 
except for those situations outlined in paragraph (c) of this section, 
to help determine the eligibility of the loan applicant, and when it 
appears the credit report will not have to be updated before loan 
closing.

[55 FR 46188, Nov. 2, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 1910.54-1910.100  [Reserved]


<R04>
                   Subpart C_Commercial Credit Reports

    Source: 52 FR 6498, Mar. 4, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1910.101  Preface.

    FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 Instruction 
1910-C (available in any Farmers Home Administration (FmHA) or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 office) describes the 
procedure to be used by FMHA in obtaining commercial credit reports. A 
nonrefundable fee, set forth in Sec. 1910.106(d) of this Instruction 
will

[[Page 67]]

be collected from the applicant, general contractor or dealer contractor 
who is the subject of the report. This subpart is inapplicable to Farm 
Service Agency, Farm Loan Programs.

[52 FR 6498, Mar. 4, 1987, as amended at 72 FR 64122, Nov. 15, 2007]


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 1910.102-1910.150  [Reserved]

                          PART 1922 [RESERVED]


<R03>
PART 1924_CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR--Table of Contents

<R05>


  Subpart A_Planning and Performing Construction and Other Development

Sec.
1924.1 Purpose.
1924.2 [Reserved]
1924.3 Authorities and responsibilities.
1924.4 Definitions.
1924.5 Planning development work.
1924.6 Performing development work.
1924.7 [Reserved]
1924.8 Development work for modular/panelized housing units.
1924.9 Inspection of development work.
1924.10 Making changes in the planned development.
1924.11 District Director's review of incomplete development.
1924.12 Warranty of development work.
1924.13 Supplemental requirements for more complex construction.
1924.14-1924.48 [Reserved]
1924.49 State supplements.
1924.50 OMB control number.

Exhibit A to Subpart A--Estimated Breakdown of Dwelling Costs for 
          Estimating Partial Payments
Exhibit B to Subpart A--Requirements for Modular/Panelized Housing Units
Exhibit C to Subpart A--Guide for Drawings and Specifications
Exhibit D to Subpart A--Thermal Performance Construction Standards
Exhibit E to Subpart A--Voluntary National Model Building Codes
Exhibit F to Subpart A--Payment Bond
Exhibit G to Subpart A--Performance Bond
Exhibit H to Subpart A--Prohibition of Lead-Based Paints
Exhibit I to Subpart A--Guidelines for Seasonal Farm Labor Housing
Exhibit J to Subpart A--Manufactured Home Sites, Rental Projects and 
          Subdivisions: Development, Installation and Set-Up
Exhibit K to Subpart A--Classifications for Multi-Family Residential 
          Rehabilitation Work
Exhibit L to Subpart A--Insured 10-Year Home Warranty Plan Requirements

Subpart B [Reserved]

         Subpart C_Planning and Performing Site Development Work

1924.101 Purpose.
1924.102 General policy.
1924.103 Scope.
1924.104 Definitions.
1924.105 Planning/performing development.
1924.106 Location.
1924.107 Utilities.
1924.108 Grading and drainage.
1924.109-1924.114 [Reserved]
1924.115 Single Family Housing site evaluation.
1924.116-1924.118 [Reserved]
1924.119 Site Loans.
1924.120-1924.121 [Reserved]
1924.122 Exception authority.
1924.123-1924.149 [Reserved]
1924.150 OMB Control Number.

Exhibit A to Subpart C [Reserved]
Exhibit B to Subpart C--Site Development Design Requirements
Exhibit C to Subpart C--Checklist of Visual Exhibits and Documentation 
          for RRH, RCH, and LH Proposals

Subparts D-E [Reserved]

     Subpart F_Complaints and Compensation for Construction Defects

1924.251 Purpose.
1924.252 Policy.
1924.253 Definitions.
1924.254-1924.257 [Reserved]
1924.258 Notification of borrowers.
1924.259 Handling dwelling construction complaints.
1924.260 Handling manufactured housing (unit) construction complaints.
1924.261 Handling complaints involving dwellings covered by an 
          independent or insured home warranty plan.
1924.262 Handling complaints involving dwellings constructed by the 
          self-help method.
1924.263-1924.264 [Reserved]
1924.265 Eligibility for compensation for construction defects.
1924.266 Purposes for which claims may be approved.
1924.267-1924.270 [Reserved]
1924.271 Processing applications.
1924.272 [Reserved]
1924.273 Approval or disapproval.
1924.274 Final inspection.
1924.275 [Reserved]
1924.276 Action against contractor.
1924.277-1924.299 [Reserved]
1924.300 OMB control number.


[[Page 68]]


    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 301; 7 U.S.C 1989; 42 U.S.C 1480.


<R04>
  Subpart A_Planning and Performing Construction and Other Development

    Source: 52 FR 8002, Mar. 13, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1924.1  Purpose.

    This subpart prescribes the basic Farmers Home Administration (FmHA) 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 policies, methods, and 
responsibilities in the planning and performing of construction and 
other development work for insured Rural Housing (RH), single unit Labor 
Housing (LH). It also provides supplemental requirements for Rural 
Rental Housing (RRH) loans, Rural Cooperative Housing (RCH) loans, 
multi-unit (LH) loans and grants, and Rural Housing Site (RHS) loans. 
This subpart is inapplicable to Farm Service Agency, Farm Loan Programs.

[53 FR 35679, Sept. 14, 1988, as amended at 72 FR 64122, Nov. 15, 2007]


<R05>
Sec. 1924.2  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1924.3  Authorities and responsibilities.

    The County Supervisor and District Director are authorized to 
redelegate, in writing, any authority delegated to them in this subpart 
to the Assistant County Supervisor and Assistant District Director, 
respectively, when determined to be qualified. FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 Construction Inspectors, District Loan 
Assistants, and County Office Assistants are authorized to perform 
duties under this subpart as authorized in their job descriptions.


<R05>
Sec. 1924.4  Definitions.

    (a) Construction. Such work as erecting, repairing, remodeling, 
relocating, adding to or salvaging any building or structure, and the 
installation or repair of, or addition to, heating and electrical 
systems, water systems, sewage disposal systems, walks, steps, 
driveways, and landscaping.
    (b) Contract documents. The borrower-contractor agreement, the 
conditions of the contract (general, supplementary, and other), the 
drawings, specifications, warranty information, all addenda issued 
before executing the contract, all approved modifications thereto, and 
any other items stipulated as being included in the contract documents.
    (c) Contractor. The individual or organization with whom the 
borrower enters into a contract for construction or land development, or 
both.
    (d) County Supervisor and District Director. In Alaska, for the 
purpose of this subpart, ``County Supervisor'' and ``District Director'' 
also mean ``Assistant Area Loan Specialist'' and ``Area Loan 
Specialist,'' respectively. The terms also include other qualified staff 
who may be delegated responsibilities under this subpart in accordance 
with the provisions of subpart F of part 2006 (available in any FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 office).
    (e) Date of commencement of work. The date established in a ``Notice 
to Proceed'' or, in the absence of such notice, the date of the contract 
or other date as may be established in it or by the parties to it.
    (f) Date of substantial completion. The date certified by the 
Project Architect/Engineer or County Supervisor when it is possible, in 
accordance with any contract documents and applicable State or local 
codes and ordinances, and the FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 approved drawings and specifications, to permit safe and 
convenient occupancy and/or use of the buildings or other development.
    (g) Development. Construction and land development.
    (h) Development standards. Any of the following codes and standards:
    (1) A standard adopted by FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 for each state in accordance with Sec. 1924.5(d)(1)(i)(E) 
of this subpart.
    (2) Voluntary national model building codes (model codes). 
Comprehensive documents created, referenced or published by nationally 
recognized associations of building officials that regulate the 
construction, alteration and repair of building, plumbing, mechanical 
and electrical systems. These

[[Page 69]]

codes are listed in exhibit E of this subpart.
    (3) Minimum Property Standards (MPS). The Department of Housing and 
Urban Development (HUD) Minimum Property Standards for Housing, Handbook 
4910.1, 1984 Edition with Changes. (For One and Two Family Dwellings and 
Multi-Family Housing).
    (i) Identity of interest. Identity of interest will be construed as 
existing between the applicant (the party of the first part) and general 
contractors, architects, engineers, attorneys, subcontractors, material 
suppliers, or equipment lessors (parties of the second part) under any 
of the following conditions:
    (1) When there is any financial interest of the party of the first 
part in the party of the second part. The providing of normal 
professional services by architects, engineers, attorneys or accountants 
with a client-professional relationship shall not constitute an identity 
of interest.
    (2) When one or more of the officers, directors, stockholders or 
partners of the party of the first part is also an officer, director, 
stockholder, or partner of the party of the second part.
    (3) When any officer, director, stockholder or partner of the party 
of the first part has any financial interest whatsoever in the party of 
the second part.
    (4) Between the spouse, significant other, relatives, and step-
relatives of the principal owners of the party of the first part and its 
management, such as Grandmother, Aunt, Daughter, Granddaughter, 
Grandfather, Uncle, Son, Grandson, Mother, Sister, Niece, Cousin, 
Father, Brother, Nephew;
    (5) When the party of the second part advances any funds to the 
party of the first part.
    (6) When the party of the second part provides and pays on behalf of 
the party of the first part the cost of any legal services, 
architectural services or engineering services other than those of a 
surveyor, general superintendent, or engineer employed by a general 
contractor in connection with obligations under the construction 
contract.
    (7) When the party of the second part takes stock or any interest in 
the party of the first part as part of the consideration to be paid 
them.
    (8) When there exist or come into being any side deals, agreements, 
contracts or undertakings entered into thereby altering, amending, or 
cancelling any of the required closing documents except as approved by 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354.
    (9) An identity of interest will also exist when another party can 
significantly influence the management or operating policies of the 
transacting parties or if it has an ownership interest in one of the 
transacting parties and can significantly influence the other to an 
extent that one or more of the transacting parties might be prevented 
from fully pursuing its own separate interests.
    (j) Land development. Includes items such as terracing, clearing, 
leveling, fencing, drainage and irrigation systems, ponds, forestation, 
permanent pastures, perennial hay crops, basic soil amendments, 
pollution abatement and control measures, and other items of land 
improvement which conserve or permanently enhance productivity. Also, 
land development for structures includes the applicable items above, and 
items such as rough and finish grading, retaining walls, water supply 
and waste disposal facilities, streets, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, 
entrancewalks, driveways, parking areas, landscaping and other related 
structures.
    (k) Manufactured housing. Housing, constructed of one or more 
factory-built sections, which includes the plumbing, heating and 
electrical systems contained therein, which is built to comply with the 
Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards (FMHCSS), 
and which is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation. 
Specific requirements for manufactured homes sites, rental projects and 
subdivisions are in exhibit J of this subpart.
    (l) Mechanic's and materialmen's liens. A lien on real property in 
favor of persons supplying labor and/or materials for the construction 
for the value of labor and/or materials supplied by

[[Page 70]]

them. In some jurisdictions, a mechanic's lien also exists for the value 
of professional services.
    (m) Modular/panelized housing. Housing, constructed of one or more 
factory-built sections, which, when completed, meets or exceeds the 
requirements of one or more of the recognized development standards for 
site-built housing, and which is designed to be permanently connected to 
a site-built foundation.
    (n) Project representative. The architect's or owner's 
representative at the construction site who assists in the 
administration of the construction contract. When required by FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354, a full-time project 
representative shall be employed.
    (o) Technical services. Applicants are responsible for obtaining the 
services necessary to plan projects including analysis of project design 
requirements, creation and development of the project design, 
preparation of drawings, specifications and bidding requirements, and 
general administration of the construction contract.
    (1) Architectural services. The services of a professionally 
qualified person or organization, duly licensed and qualified in 
accordance with state law to perform architectural services.
    (2) Engineering services. The services of a professionally qualified 
person or organization, duly licensed and qualified in accordance with 
State law to perform engineering services.
    (p) Warranty. A legally enforceable assurance provided by the 
builder (warrantor) to the owner and the FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 indicating that the work done and materials 
supplied conform to those specified in the contract documents and 
applicable regulations. For the period of the warranty, the warrantor 
agrees to repair defective workmanship and repair or replace any 
defective materials at the expense of the warrantor.

[52 FR 8002, Mar. 13, 1987, as amended at 59 FR 6882, Feb. 14, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1924.5  Planning development work.

    (a) Extent of development. For an FO loan, the plans for development 
will include the items necessary to put the farm in a livable and 
operable condition consistent with the planned farm and home operations. 
For other types of loans, the plans will include those items essential 
to achieve the objectives of the loan or grant as specified in the 
applicable regulation.
    (b) Funds for development work. The total cash cost of all planned 
development will be shown on Form FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 1924-1, ``Development Plan,'' except Form FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-1 may be omitted when: 
(1) All development is to be done by the contract method, (2) adequate 
cost estimates are included in the docket, and (3) the work, including 
all landscaping, repairs, and site development work, is completely 
described on the drawings, in the specifications, or in the contract 
documents. Sufficient funds to pay for the total cash cost of all 
planned development must be provided at or before loan closing. Funds to 
be provided may include loan proceeds, any cash to be furnished by the 
borrower, proceeds from cost sharing programs such as Agricultural 
Stabilization and Conservation Service (ASCS) and Great Plains programs 
or proceeds from the sale of property in accordance with paragraph (g) 
of this section.
    (c) Scheduling of development work. (1) All construction work 
included in the development plan for RH loans will be scheduled for 
completion as quickly as practicable and no later than 9 months from the 
date of loan closing, except for mutual self-help housing where work may 
be scheduled for completion within a period of 15 months.
    (2) Development for farm program loans will be scheduled for 
completion as quickly as practicable and no later than 15 months from 
the date of loan closing unless more time is needed to establish land 
developnent practices in the area.
    (d) Construction. (1) All new buildings to be constructed and all 
alterations and repairs to buildings will be planned to conform with 
good construction practices. The FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 Manual of Acceptable Practices (MAP) Vol. 4930.1 
(available in any FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-

[[Page 71]]

354 office), provides suggestions and illustrative clarifications of 
design and construction methods which are generally satisfactory in most 
areas. All improvements to the property will conform to applicable laws, 
ordinances, codes, and regulations related to the safety and sanitation 
of buildings; standards referenced in Appendices C through F of HUD 
Handbook 4910.1, Minimum Property Standards for Housing; Thermal 
Performance Construction Standards contained in exhibit D of this 
subpart and, when required, to certain other development standards 
described below.
    (i) The development standard applicable to a proposal will be 
selected by the loan applicant or recipient of an RH Conditional 
Commitment in accordance with the following. The standard selected must:
    (A) Relate to the type(s) of building proposed.
    (B) Meet or exceed any applicable local or state laws, ordinances, 
codes and regulations.
    (C) Include all referenced codes and standards.
    (D) Exclude inapplicable administrative requirements.
    (E) Be the current edition(s) of either paragraph (d)(1)(i)(E)(1) or 
(2) of this section:
    (1) The development standard, consisting of building, plumbing, 
mechanical and electrical codes, adopted by FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 for use in the state (identified in a State 
Supplement to this section) in which the development is proposed, in 
accordance with the following:
    (i) The adopted development standard shall include any building, 
plumbing, mechanical or electrical code adopted by the State, if 
determined by the State Director to be based on one of the model codes 
listed in exhibit E to this subpart, or, if not available,
    (ii) The adopted development standard shall include any building, 
plumbing, mechanical or electrical code adopted by the state, if 
determined by the Administrator to be acceptable, or, if not available,
    (iii) The adopted development standard shall include the model 
building, plumbing, mechanical or electrical code listed in exhibit E to 
this subpart that is determined by the State Director to be most 
prevalent and appropriate for the state.
    (2) Any of the model building, plumbing, mechanical and electrical 
codes listed in exhibit E to this subpart or the standards defined in 
Sec. 1924.4(h)(3) of this subpart.
    (ii) Guide 2, ``FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 Design Guide,'' of this subpart (available in any FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 office), includes guidelines 
for the evaluation of the design features which are not fully addressed 
in the development standards.
    (iii) In new housing, all design, materials and construction will 
meet or exceed the applicable development standard as provided in 
paragraph (d)(1)(i) of this section.
    (iv) For multi-family residential rehabilitation, as defined in 
exhibit K of this subpart, all substantial rehabilitation work on 
existing buildings will meet or exceed the applicable development 
standard. All moderate rehabilitation work should comply with Guide 3, 
``Quality and Performance Criteria for Moderate Rehabilitation,'' of 
this subpart (available in any FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 office).
    (v) The design and construction of housing repairs made with FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 loan or grant funds will, 
as near as possible, comply with the applicable development standard.
    (vi) Farm LH design and construction will comply with the following:
    (A) Family projects, where the length of occupancy will be:
    (1) Year-round, will meet or exceed the applicable development 
standard.
    (2) Less than 12 months, but more than 6 months, will be in 
substantial conformance with the applicable development standard and 
constructed to facilitate conversion to year-round occupancy standards.
    (3) Six months or less, may be less than the applicable development 
standard but should be constructed in accordance with exhibit I of this 
subpart.

[[Page 72]]

    (B) Dormitory and other nonfamily type projects, where the length of 
occupancy will be:
    (1) More than 6 months, will be in substantial conformance with the 
applicable development standard and will at least meet or exceed the 
requirements of the Department of Labor, Bureau of Employment Security 
(29 CFR 1910.140).
    (2) Six months or less, will comply with Sec. 
1924.5(d)(1)(vi)(A)(3).
    (vii) Farm service buildings should be designed and constructed for 
adaptation to the local area. In designing and locating farm service 
buildings, consideration will be given to practices recommended by 
agriculture colleges, the Extension Service (ES), Soil Conservation 
Service (SCS) and other reliable sources.
    (2) Drawings, specifications, and estimates will fully describe the 
work. Technical data, tests, or engineering evaluations may be required 
to support the design of the development. The ``Guide for Drawings and 
Specifications,'' exhibit C of this subpart, describes the drawings and 
specifications that are to be included in the application for building 
construction, and subpart C of part 1924 of this chapter describes the 
drawings that should be included for development of building sites. The 
specific development standard being used, if required under paragraph 
(d)(1) of this section will be identified on all drawings and 
specifications.
    (3) Materials acceptance shall be the same as described in paragraph 
X of exhibit B to this subpart.
    (4) Except as provided in paragraphs (d)(4)(i) through (iii) of this 
section, new building construction and additions shall be designed and 
constructed in accordance with the earthquake (seismic) requirements of 
the applicable Agency's development standard (building code). The 
analysis and design of structural systems and components shall be in 
accordance with applicable requirements of an acceptable model building 
code.
    (i) Agricultural buildings that are not intended for human 
habitation are exempt from these earthquake (seismic) requirements.
    (ii) Single family conventional light wood frame dwellings of two 
stories or 35 feet in height maximum shall be designed and constructed 
in accordance with the 1992 Council of American Building Officials 
(CABO) One and Two Family Dwelling Code or the latest edition.
    (iii) Single family housing of masonry design and townhouses of wood 
frame construction and additions financed (either directly or through a 
guarantee) under title V of the Housing Act of 1949 are recommended to 
be designed and constructed in accordance with the earthquake (seismic) 
requirements of one of the building codes that provides an equivalent 
level of safety to that contained in the latest edition of the National 
Earthquake Hazard Reduction Program's (NEHRP) Recommended Provisions for 
the Development of Seismic Regulations for New Building (NEHRP 
Provisions).
    (iv) Acknowledgment of compliance with the applicable seismic safety 
requirements for new construction will be contained in the certification 
of final plans and specification on the appropriate Agency Form.
    (e) Land development. (1) In planning land development, 
consideration will be given to practices, including energy conservation 
measures, recommended by agricultural colleges, ES, SCS or other 
reliable sources. All land and water development will conform to 
applicable laws, ordinances, zoning and other applicable regulations 
including those related to soil and water conservation and pollution 
abatement. The County Supervisor or District Director also will 
encourage the applicant to use any cost-sharing and planning assistance 
that may be available through agricultural conservation programs.
    (2) Site and subdivision planning and development must meet the 
requirements of subpart C of part 1924 of this chapter.
    (3) Plans and descriptive material will fully describe the work.
    (4) The site planning design, development, installation and set-up 
of manufactured home sites, rental projects and subdivisions shall meet 
the requirements of exhibit J of this subpart

[[Page 73]]

and subpart C of part 1924 of this chapter.
    (i) Plans for land leveling, irrigation, or drainage should include 
a map of the area to be improved showing the existing conditions with 
respect to soil, topography, elevations, depth of topsoil, kind of 
subsoil, and natural drainage, together with the proposed land 
development.
    (ii) When land development consists of, or includes, the 
conservation and use of water for irrigation or domestic purposes, the 
information submitted to the County Supervisor will include a statement 
as to the source of the water supply, right to the use of the water, and 
the adequacy and quality of the supply.
    (f) Responsibilities for planning development. Planning construction 
and land development and obtaining technical services in connection with 
drawings, specifications and cost estimates are the sole responsibility 
of the applicant, with such assistance from the County Supervisor or 
District Director (whichever is the appropriate loan processing and 
servicing officer for the type of loan involved), as may be necessary to 
be sure that the development is properly planned in order to protect 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354's security.
    (1) Responsibility of the applicant. (i) The applicant will arrange 
for obtaining any required technical services from qualified 
technicians, tradespeople, and recognized plan services, and the 
applicant will furnish the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 sufficient information to describe fully the planned development 
and the manner in which it will be accomplished.
    (ii) When items of construction or land development require drawings 
and specifications, they will be sufficiently complete to avoid any 
misunderstanding as to extent, kind, and quality of work to be 
performed. The applicant will provide FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 with one copy of the drawings and specifications. 
Approval will be indicated by the applicant and acceptance for the 
purposes of the loan indicated by the County Supervisor or District 
Director on all sheets of the drawings and at the end of the 
specifications, and both instruments will be a part of the loan docket. 
After the loan is closed, the borrower will retain a conformed copy of 
the approved drawings and specifications, and provide another conformed 
copy to the contractor. Items not requiring drawings and specifications 
may be described in narrative form.
    (iii) FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 will 
accept final drawings and specifications and any modifications thereof 
only after the documents have been certified in writing as being in 
conformance with the applicable development standard if required under 
paragraph (d)(1) of this section. Certification is required for all 
Single Family Housing (SFH) thermal designs (plans, specifications, and 
calculations).
    (A) Certifications may be accepted from individuals or organizations 
who are trained and experienced in the compliance, interpretation or 
enforcement of the applicable development standards for drawings and 
specifications. Plan certifiers may be any of the following:
    (1) Licensed architects,
    (2) Professional engineers,
    (3) Plan reviewers certified by a national model code organization 
listed in exhibit E to this subpart,
    (4) Local building officials authorized to review and approve 
building plans and specifications, or
    (5) National codes organizations listed in exhibit E to this 
subpart.
    (B) The license or authorization of the individual must be current 
at the time of the certification statement. A building permit (except as 
noted in paragraph (f)(1)(iii)(C)(2) of this section) or professional's 
stamp is not an acceptable substitute for the certification statement. 
However, a code compliance review conducted by one of the National 
recognized code organizations indicating no deficiencies or the noted 
deficiencies have been corrected is an acceptable substitute for the 
certification statement.
    (C) For Single Family Housing (one to four family dwelling units) 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 may also accept 
drawings and

[[Page 74]]

specifications that have been certified by:
    (1) Registered Professional Building Designers certified by the 
American Institute of Building Design.
    (2) A local community, if that community has adopted, by reference, 
one of the model building codes and has trained official(s) who 
review(s) plans as well as inspect(s) construction for compliance as a 
requisite for issuing a building permit. The building permit, issued by 
the community, may serve as evidence of acceptance. The State Director 
will determine eligible communities and publish, as a State supplement 
to this section, a list of those communities that qualify.
    (3) A plan service that provides drawings and specifications that 
are certified by individuals or organizations as listed in paragraph 
(f)(1)(iii)(A) or (f)(1)(iii)(C) (1) and (2) of this section as meeting 
the appropriate state adopted development standard.
    (4) Builders/Contractors who provide 10-year warranty plans for the 
specific FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 finance 
dwelling unit that meet the requirements of exhibit L of this subpart.
    (5) Builders/Contractors that are approved by the United States 
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for self-
certification.
    (D) The modifications of certified drawings or specifications must 
be certified by the same individual or organization that certified the 
original drawings and specifications. If such individual or organization 
is not available, the entire set of modified drawings and specifications 
must be recertified.
    (E) The certification of modifications for single family housing 
(SFH) construction may be waived if the builder or original author of 
the drawings and specifications provides a written statement that the 
modifications are not regulated by the applicable development standard. 
The County Supervisor may consult with the State Office Architect/
Engineer as to acceptance of the statement and granting a waiver.
    (F) All certifications of final drawings, specifications, and 
calculations shall be on Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 1924-25, ``Plan Certification.''
    (2) Responsibility of the County Supervisor or District Director. In 
accordance with program regulations for loans and grants they are 
required to process, the County Supervisor or District Director, for the 
sole benefit of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354, 
will:
    (i) Visit each farm or site on which the development is proposed. 
For an FO loan, the County Supervisor and the applicant will determine 
the items of development necessary to put the farm in a livable and 
operable condition at the outset. Prepare Form FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-1, when applicable in accordance 
with the Forms Manual Insert (FMI) for the form, after a complete 
understanding has been reached between the applicant and the County 
Supervisor regarding the development to be accomplished, including the 
dates each item of development will be started and completed.
    (ii) Notify the loan or grant applicant in writing immediately if, 
after reviewing the preliminary proposal and inspecting the site, the 
proposal is not acceptable. If the proposal is acceptable, an 
understanding will be reached with the applicant concerning the starting 
date for each item of development.
    (iii) Discuss with the applicant the FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 requirements with respect to good construction 
and land development practices.
    (iv) Advise the applicant regarding drawings, specifications, cost 
estimates, and other related material which the applicant must submit to 
the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 for review 
before the loan can be developed. Advise the applicant of the 
information necessary in the drawings, how the cost estimates should be 
prepared, the number of sets of drawings, specifications, and cost 
estimates required, and the necessity for furnishing such information 
promptly. Advise the applicant that FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 will provide appropriate specification forms, Form 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-2, 
``Description of Materials,'' and Form FmHA or its

[[Page 75]]

successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-3, ``Service Building 
Specifications.'' The applicant may, however, use other properly 
prepared specifications.
    (v) Advise the applicant regarding publications, plans, planning 
aids, engineering data, and other technical advice and assistance 
available through local, state, and Federal agencies, and private 
individuals and organizations.
    (vi) Review the information furnished by the applicant to determine 
the completeness of the plans, adequacy of the cost estimates, 
suitability and soundness of the proposed development.
    (vii) When appropriate, offer suggestions as to how drawings and 
specifications might be altered to improve the facility and better serve 
the needs of the applicant. The County Supervisor or District Director 
may assist the applicant in making revisions to the drawings. When 
appropriate, the contract documents will be forwarded to the State 
architect/engineer for review. For revisions requiring technical 
determinations that FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 is not able to make, the applicant will be requested to obtain 
additional technical assistance.
    (viii) Provide the applicant with a written list of changes required 
in the contract documents. The applicant will submit two complete 
revised (as requested) sets of contract documents, for approval. On one 
set, the County Supervisor or District Director will indicate acceptance 
on each sheet of the drawings, and on the cover of the specifications 
and all other contract documents. At least the date and the initials of 
the approval official must be shown. On projects where a consulting 
architect or engineer has been retained, this acceptance will be 
indicated only after the State Director has given written authorization. 
The marked set of documents shall be available at the job site at all 
times for review by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354. The second set will become part of the loan docket.
    (ix) Review the proposed method of doing the work and determine 
whether the work can be performed satisfactorily under the proposed 
method.
    (x) Instruct the applicant not to incur any debts prior to loan 
closing for materials or labor or make any expenditures for such 
purposes with the expectation of being reimbursed from loan funds.
    (xi) Instruct the applicant not to commence any construction nor 
cause any supplies or materials to be delivered to the construction site 
prior to loan closing.
    (xii) Under certain conditions prescribed in exhibit H of this 
subpart, provide the applicant with a copy of the leaflet, ``Warning--
Lead-Based Paint Hazards,'' which is attachment 1 of exhibit H 
(available in any FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
office), and the warning sheet, ``Caution Note on Lead-Based Paint 
Hazard,'' which is attachment 2 of exhibit H (available in any FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 office).
    (g) Surplus structures and use or sale of timber, sand, or stone. In 
planning the development, the applicant and the County Supervisor or 
District Director should, when practicable, plan to use salvage from old 
buildings, timber, sand, gravel, or stone from the property. The 
borrower may sell surplus buildings, timber, sand, gravel, or stone that 
is not to be used in performing planned development and use net proceeds 
to pay costs of performing planned development work. In such a case:
    (1) An agreement will be recorded in the narrative of Form FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-1 which as a minimum 
will:
    (i) Identify the property to be sold, the estimated net proceeds to 
be received, and the approximate date by which the property will be 
sold.
    (ii) Provide that the borrower will deposit the net proceeds in the 
supervised bank account and apply any funds remaining after the 
development is complete as an extra payment on the loan, or in 
accordance with Sec. 1965.13(f) of subpart A of part 1965 of this 
chapter for farm program loans.
    (2) The agreement will be considered by the Government as modifying 
the mortgage contract to the extent of authorizing and requiring the 
Government to release the identified property

[[Page 76]]

subject to the conditions stated in the agreement without payment or 
other consideration at the time of release, regardless of whether or not 
the mortgage specifically refers to Form FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 1924-1 or the agreement to release.
    (3) If the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
loan will be secured by a junior lien, all prior lienholders must give 
written consent to the proposed sale and the use of the net proceeds 
before the loan is approved.
    (h) Review prior to performing development work. For the sole 
benefit of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354, prior 
to beginning development work, the County Supervisor or District 
Director will review planned development with the borrower. Adequacy of 
the drawings and specifications as well as the estimates will be checked 
to make sure the work can be completed within the time limits previously 
agreed upon and with available funds. Items and quantities of any 
materials the borrower has agreed to furnish will be checked and dates 
by which each item of development should be started will be checked in 
order that the work may be completed on schedule. If any changes in the 
plans and specifications are proposed, they should be within the general 
scope of the work as originally planned. Changes must be approved and 
processed in accordance with Sec. 1924.10 of this subpart. The 
appropriate procedure for performing development should be explained to 
the borrower. Copies of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 forms that will be used during the period of construction should 
be given to the borrower. The borrower should be advised as to the 
purpose of each form and at what period during construction each form 
will be used.
    (i) Time of starting development work. Development work will be 
started as soon as feasible after the loan is closed. Except in cases in 
which advance commitments are made in accordance with 7 CFR part 3550 or 
according to Sec. 1924.13(e)(1)(vi)(A) or Sec. 1924.13(e)(2)(ix)(A) of 
this subpart, no commitments with respect to performing planned 
development will be made by the Agency or the applicant before the loan 
is closed. The applicant will be instructed that before the loan is 
closed, debts should not be incurred for labor or materials, or 
expenditures made for such purposes, with the expectation of being 
reimbursed from funds except as provided in subpart A of part 1943 of 
this chapter, 7 CFR part 3550, and subpart E of part 1944 of this 
chapter. However, with the prior approval of the National Office, a 
State Supplement may be issued authorizing County Supervisors to permit 
applicants to commence welldrilling operations prior to loan closing, 
provided:
    (1) It is necessary in the area to provide the water supply prior to 
loan closing,
    (2) The applicant agrees in writing to pay with personal funds all 
costs incurred if a satisfactory water supply is not obtained,
    (3) Any contractors and suppliers understand and agree that loan 
funds may not be available to make the payment,
    (4) Such action will not result under applicable State law in the 
giving of priority to mechanics and materialmen's liens over the later 
recorded FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 mortgage, 
and
    (5) FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 does not 
guarantee that the cost will be paid.

[52 FR 8002, Mar. 13, 1987, as amended at 52 FR 19283, May 22, 1987; 52 
FR 48391, Dec. 22, 1987; 52 FR 48799, Dec. 28, 1987; 53 FR 43676, Oct. 
28, 1988; 59 FR 43723, Aug. 25, 1994; 61 FR 65156, Dec. 11, 1996; 67 FR 
78326, Dec. 14, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 1924.6  Performing development work.

    All construction work will be performed by one, or a combination, of 
the following methods: Contract, borrower, mutual self-help, or owner-
builder. All development work must be performed by a person, firm or 
organization qualified to provide the service. The mutual self-help 
method is performance of work by a group of families by mutual labor 
under the direction of a construction supervisor, as described in 7 CFR 
part 3550.

[[Page 77]]

    (a) Contract method. This method of development will be used for all 
major construction except in cases where it is clearly not possible to 
obtain a contract at a reasonable or competitive cost. Work under this 
method is performed in accordance with a written contract.
    (1) Forms used. Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 1924-6, ``Construction Contract,'' will be used for SFH 
construction. Other contract documents for more complex construction, 
acceptable to the loan approval official and containing the requirements 
of subpart E of part 1901 of this chapter, may be used provided they are 
customarily used in the area and protect the interest of the borrower 
and the Government with respect to compliance with items such as the 
drawings, specifications, payments for work, inspections, completion, 
nondiscrimination in construction work and acceptance of the work. If 
needed, the Office of the General Counsel (OGC) will be consulted. The 
United States (including FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354) will not become a party to a construction contract or incur any 
liability under it.
    (2) Contract provisions. Contracts will have a listing of 
attachments and the provisions of the contract will include:
    (i) The contract sum.
    (ii) The dates for starting and completing the work.
    (iii) The amount of liquidated damages to be charged.
    (iv) The amount, method, and frequency of payment.
    (v) Whether or not surety bonds will be provided.
    (vi) The requirement that changes or additions must have prior 
written approval of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354.
    (3) Surety requirements. (i) Unless an exception is granted in 
accordance with paragraph (a)(3)(iii) of this section or when interim 
financing will be used, surety that guarantees both payment and 
performance in the amount of the contract will be furnished when one or 
more of the following conditions exist:
    (A) The contract exceeds the applicable Rural Development Single 
Family Housing area loan limit as per 7 CFR 3550.63. (Loan limits are 
available at the local Rural Development field office.)
    (B) The loan approval official determines that a surety bond appears 
advisable to protect the borrower against default of the contractor.
    (C) The applicant requests a surety bond.
    (D) The contract provides for partial payments in excess of the 
amount of 60 percent of the value of the work in place.
    (E) The contract provides for partial payments for materials 
suitably stored on the site.
    (ii) If surety bonds are required the construction contract must 
indicate that the contractor will furnish properly executed surety bonds 
prior to the start of any work. Exhibits F and G of this subpart as 
revised by OGC if necessary to comply with local or state statutory 
requirements will be used as the forms of payment bond and performance 
bond to be provided. Unless noncorporate surety is provided, the surety 
bonds may only be obtained from a corporate bonding company listed on 
the current Department of the Treasury Circular 570 (published annually 
in the Federal Register), as holding a certificate of authority as an 
acceptable surety on Federal bonds and as legally doing business in the 
State where the land is located. Noncorporate sureties are not 
recommended and the State Director will be responsible for determining 
the acceptability of the individual or individuals proposed as sureties 
on the bonds. The State Director must determine that an individual or 
individuals proposed as sureties must have cash or other liquid assets 
easily convertible to cash in an amount at least equal to 25 percent 
more than the contract amount in order to be acceptable. The 
individual(s) will pledge such liquid assets in an amount equal to the 
contract amount. Fees charged for noncorporate sureties may not exceed 
fees charged by corporate sureties on bonds of equal amount and, in no 
case, may surety be provided by the applicant or any person or 
organization with an identity of interest in the applicant's operation. 
The United States (including FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law

[[Page 78]]

103-354) will incur no liability related in any way to a performance or 
payment bond provided in connection with a construction contract. FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 will be named as co-
obligee in the performance and payment bonds unless prohibited by state 
law.
    (iii) When an experienced and reliable contractor cannot obtain 
payment and performance bonds meeting the surety requirements of 
paragraph (a)(3)(ii) of this section, the State Director may entertain a 
request from the applicant for an exception to the surety requirements. 
The applicant's request must specifically state why the proposed 
contractor is unable to obtain payment and performance bonds meeting the 
surety requirements, and why it is financially advantageous for the 
applicant to award the contract to the proposed contractor without the 
required bonds.

If the applicant's request is reasonable and justified, and if the 
proposed contractor is reliable and experienced in the construction of 
projects of similar size, design, scope, and complexity, the State 
Director may grant an exception to the surety requirements for loans or 
grants within the State Director's approval authority and accept one or 
a combination of the following:
    (A) An unconditional and irrevocable letter of credit issued by a 
lending institution which has been reviewed and approved by OGC. In such 
cases, the construction contract must indicate that the contractor will 
furnish a properly executed letter of credit from a lending institution 
acceptable to FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
prior to the start of any work. The letter of credit must remain in 
effect until the date of final acceptance of work by the owner and FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354. In addition, the 
letter of credit must stipulate that the lending institution, upon 
written notification by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 of the contractor's failure to perform under the terms of the 
contract, will advance funds up to the amount of the contract (including 
all FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 approved 
contract change orders) to satisfy all prior debts incurred by the 
contractor in performing the contract and all funds necessary to 
complete the work. Payments may be made to the contractor in accordance 
with paragraph (a)(12)(i)(C) of this section as if full surety bonds 
were being provided.
    (B) If a letter of credit satisfying the conditions of paragraph 
(a)(3)(iii)(A) of this section cannot be obtained, the State Director 
may accept a deposit in the amount of the contract, into an interest or 
non-interest bearing supervised bank account. In such cases, the 
construction contract must indicate that the contractor will furnish the 
required deposit prior to the start of any work and that the funds shall 
remain on deposit until final acceptance of work by the owner and FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354. Payments may be made 
to the contractor in accordance with paragraph (a)(12)(i)(C) of this 
section as if full surety bonds were being provided.
    (C) When the provisions of paragraph (a)(3)(iii) (A) or (B) of this 
section can be met except that a surety bond, a letter of credit, and/or 
deposits are not obtainable in full amount of the contract, the State 
Director may accept an amount less than the full amount of the contract 
provided all of the following conditions are met:
    (1) The contractor provides a surety bond, a letter of credit, or 
deposits in the greatest amount possible, and provides documentation 
indicating the reasons why amounts exceeding the proposed amount cannot 
be provided.
    (2) The applicant agrees to the amount of the surety bond, letter of 
credit, or deposits proposed, and the State Director determines that the 
applicant has the financial capability to withstand any financial loss 
due to default of the contractor.
    (3) In the opinion of the State Director, the proposed amount and 
the method of payment will provide adequate protection for the borrower 
and the Government against default of the contractor.
    (4) The contract provides for partial payments not to exceed 90 
percent of the value of the work in place for that portion of the total 
contract which is guaranteed by an acceptable surety bond, letter of 
credit, or deposits, and

[[Page 79]]

partial payments not to exceed 60 percent of the value of the work in 
place for that portion of the total contract which is not guaranteed by 
surety, letter of credit, or deposits.

    Example:

    Contractor has a surety bond which guarantees payment and 
performance in an amount of $150,000 which represents 75 percent of the 
total contract amount of $200,000. The contractor's first request for 
payment appears thus:

--Value of work in place is $10,000.
--Payment for work guaranteed by surety is 75 percent times $10,000 
times 90 percent is $6,750.
--Payment for work not guaranteed by surety is 25 percent times $10,000 
times 60 percent is $1,500.
--Authorized payment is $8,250.

    (Each partial payment shall reflect values for work guaranteed by 
surety, letter of credit, or deposits, and work not so guaranteed).

    (iv) In cases where the contractor does not obtain payment and 
performance bonds in accordance with the surety requirements of 
paragraph (a)(3)(ii) of this section, or where an exception to the 
surety requirements is granted by the State Director, the following 
steps will be taken to protect the borrower and the government against 
latent obligations or defects in connection with the construction:
    (A) The contractor will furnish a properly executed corporate latent 
defects bond or a maintenance bond in the amount of 10 percent of the 
construction contract; or
    (B) An unconditional and irrevocable letter of credit in the amount 
of 10 percent of the construction contract issued by a lending 
institution which has been reviewed and approved by OGC; or
    (C) A cash deposit into an interest or non-interest bearing 
supervised bank account in the amount of 10 percent of the construction 
contract;
    (D) The period of protection against latent obligations and/or 
defects shall be one year from the date of final acceptance of work by 
the owner and FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354;
    (E) Final payment shall not be rendered to the contractor until the 
provisions of paragraph (a)(3)(iv) (A), (B) or (C) of this section have 
been met;
    (F) The contract will contain a clause indicating that the 
contractor agrees to provide surety or guarantee acceptable to the owner 
and FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 against latent 
obligations and/or defects in connection with the construction.
    (4) Equal opportunity. Section 1901.205 of subpart E of part 1901 of 
this chapter applies to all loans or grants involving construction 
contracts and subcontracts in excess of $10,000.
    (5) Labor standards provisions. The provisions of the Davis-Bacon 
and related acts, which are published by the Department of Labor (29 CFR 
parts 1, 3 and 5), will apply when the contract involves either LH grant 
assistance, or 9 or more units in a project being assisted under the HUD 
section 8 housing assistance payment program for new construction.
    (6) Historical and archaeological preservation. The provisions of 
subpart F of part 1901 of this chapter concerning the protection of 
historical and archaeological properties will apply to all construction 
financed, in whole or in part, by FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 loans and grants. These provisions have special 
applicability to development in areas designated by NRCS as Resource 
Conservation and Development (RC&D) areas. (See part 1942, subpart I of 
this chapter.)
    (7) Air and water acts. Under Executive Order 11738, all loans or 
grants involving construction contracts for more than $100,000 must meet 
all the requirements of section 114 of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 
7414) and section 308 of the Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C., 
section 1813). The contract should contain provisions obligating the 
contractor as a condition for the award of the contract as follows:
    (i) To notify the owner of the receipt of any communication from 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) indicating that a facility to be 
utilized in the performance of the contract is under consideration to be 
listed on the EPA list of Violating Facilities. Prompt notification is 
required prior to contract award.

[[Page 80]]

    (ii) To certify that any facility to be utilized in the performance 
of any nonexempt contractor subcontract is not listed on the EPA list of 
Violating Facilities as of the date of contract award.
    (iii) To include or cause to be included the above criteria and 
requirements of paragraphs (a)(7) (i) and (ii) of this section in every 
nonexempt subcontract, and that the contractor will take such action as 
the Government may direct as a means of enforcing such provisions.
    (8) Architectural barriers. In accordance with the Architectural 
Barriers Act of 1968 (Pub. L. 90-480), as implemented by the General 
Services Administration regulations (41 CFR 101- 19.6) and section 504 
of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Pub. L. 93-112) as implemented by 7 
CFR, parts 15 and 15b, all facilities financed with FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 loans and grants and which are 
accessible to the public or in which people with disabilities may be 
employed or reside must be developed in compliance with this Act. Copies 
of the Act and Federal accessibility design standards may be obtained 
from the Executive Director, Architectural and Transportation Barriers 
Compliance Board, Washington, DC 20201.
    (9) National Environmental Policy Act. The provisions of subpart G 
of part 1940 of this chapter concerning environmental requirements will 
apply to all loans and grants including those being assisted under the 
HUD section 8 housing assistance payment program for new construction.
    (10) Obtaining bids and selecting a contractor. (i) The applicant 
may select a contractor and negotiate a contract or contact several 
contractors and request each to submit a bid. For complex construction 
projects, refer also to Sec. 1924.13(e) of this subpart.
    (ii) When a price has already been negotiated by an applicant and a 
contractor, the County Supervisor, District Director or other 
appropriate FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
official will review the proposed contract. If the contractor is 
qualified to perform the development and provide a warranty of the work 
and the price compares favorably with the cost of similar construction 
in the area, further negotiation is unnecessary. If the FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 official determines the price 
is too high or otherwise unreasonable, the applicant will be requested 
to negotiate further with the contractor. If a reasonable price cannot 
be negotiated or if the contractor is not qualified, the applicant will 
be requested to obtain competitive bids.
    (iii) When an applicant has a proposed development plan and no 
contractor in mind, competitive bidding will be encouraged. The 
applicant should obtain bids from as many qualified contractors, dealers 
or tradespeople as feasible depending on the method and type of 
construction.
    (iv) If the award of the contract is by competitive bidding, Form 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-5, 
``Invitation for Bid (Construction Contract),'' or another similar 
invitation bid form containing the requirements of subpart E of part 
1901 of this chapter, may be used. All contractors from whom bids are 
requested should be informed of all conditions of the contract including 
the time and place of opening bids. Conditions shall not be established 
which would give preference to a specific bidder or type of bidder. When 
applicable, copies of Forms FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 1924-6 and FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 400-6, ``Compliance Statement,'' also should be provided to the 
prospective bidders.
    (11) Awarding the contract. The borrower, with the assistance of the 
County Supervisor or District Director, will consider the amount of the 
bids or proposals, and all conditions which were listed in the 
``Invitation for Bid.'' On the basis of these considerations, the 
borrower will select and notify the lowest responsible bidder.
    (i) Before work commences, the County Supervisor, District Director 
or other FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 employee 
having knowledge of contracts and construction practices will hold a 
preconstruction conference with the borrower(s), contractor and 
architect/engineer (if applicable). The purpose of

[[Page 81]]

the conference is to reach a mutual understanding of each party's 
responsibilities under the terms and conditions of the contract 
documents and the loan agreement during the construction and warranty 
periods. Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
1924-16, ``Record of Preconstruction Conference,'' may be used as a 
guide for an agenda.
    (ii) A summary of the items covered will be entered in the running 
case record.
    (iii) The contract will then be prepared, signed and copies 
distributed in accordance with the FMI for Form FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-6.
    (iv) After a borrower/contractor's contract or subcontract in excess 
of $10,000 is received in the FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 County or District Office, the responsible FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 official will send within 10 
calendar days of the date of the contract or subcontract, a report 
similar in form and content to exhibit C of subpart E of part 1901 of 
this chapter to the Area Director, Office of Federal Contract Compliance 
Programs, U.S. Department of Labor, at the applicable address listed in 
exhibit E, subpart E of part 1901 of this chapter. The report must 
contain, at least, the following information: contractor's name, address 
and telephone number; employer's identification number; amount, starting 
date and planned completion date of the contract; contract number; and 
city and DOL region of the contract site. The information for this 
report should be obtained from the contractor when the contract is 
awarded.
    (12) Payments for work done by the contract method. (i) Payments 
will be made in accordance with one of the following methods unless 
prohibited by state statute, in which case the State Director shall 
issue a State Supplement to this section:
    (A) The ``One-Lump-Sum'' payment method will be used when the 
payment will be made in one lump-sum for the whole contract.
    (B) The ``Partial payments not to exceed 60 percent of the value of 
the work in place'' payment method will be used when the contractor does 
not provide surety bond, a letter of credit, or deposits.
    (C) The ``Partial payments in the amount of 90 percent of the value 
of the work in place and of the value of the materials suitably stored 
at the site'' payment method will be used when the contractor provides a 
surety bond equal to the total contract amount.
    (D) The ``Partial payments which reflect the portions of the 
contract amount which is guaranteed'' method will be used when the 
contractor provides surety bonds, a letter of credit, or deposits less 
than the total amount of the contract in accordance with the provisions 
of paragraph (a)(3)(iii)(C) of this section.
    (ii) When Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
1924-6 is used, the appropriate payment clause will be checked and the 
other payment clauses not used will be effectively crossed out.
    (iii) When a contract form other than Form FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-6 is used, the payment clause must 
conform with paragraph (a)(12)(i) of this section and the appropriate 
clause as set forth in Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 1924-6.
    (iv) The borrower and FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 must take precautionary measures to see that all payments made 
to the contractor are properly applied against bills for materials and 
labor procured under the contract. Prior to making any partial payment 
on any contract where a surety bond is not used, the contractor will be 
required to furnish the borrower and the FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 with a statement showing the total amount owed 
to date for materials and labor procured under the contract. The 
contractor also may be required to submit evidence showing that previous 
partial payments were applied properly. When the borrower and the County 
Supervisor or District Director have reason to believe that partial 
payments may not be applied properly, checks may be made jointly to the 
contractor and persons who furnished materials

[[Page 82]]

and labor in connection with the contract.
    (v) When partial payments are requested by the contractor and 
approved by the owner, the amount of the partial payment will be 
determined by one of the following methods:
    (A) Based upon the percentage completed as shown on a recently 
completed and properly executed Form FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 1924-12, ``Inspection Report.''
    (B) When the structure will be covered by an insured 10-year 
warranty, the insurer's construction inspector must provide FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 with any available copies of 
inspection reports showing percentage of completion immediately after 
the inspections are completed. To make partial payments when copies of 
inspection reports are not available, the responsible FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 official will make the 
inspections or will be guided by the provisions of Sec. 
1924.6(a)(12)(v)(C) of this subpart. If further assurance is deemed 
necessary to justify partial payments, the FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 official may make onsite inspections or require 
additional information.
    (C) Based upon an application for payment containing an estimate of 
the value of work in place which has been prepared by the contractor and 
accepted by the borrower and FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354. When the contract provides for partial payments for 
materials satisfactorily stored at the site, the application for payment 
may include these items. Prior to receiving the first partial payment, 
the contractor should be required to submit a list of major 
subcontractors and suppliers and a schedule of prices or values of the 
various phases of the work aggregating the total sum of the contract 
such as excavation, foundations, framing, roofing, siding, mill work, 
painting, plumbing, heating, electric wiring, etc., made out in such 
form as agreed upon by the borrower, FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354, and the contractor. In applying for payments, the 
contractor should submit a statement based upon this schedule. See 
exhibit A of this subpart for guidance in reviewing the contractor's 
schedule of prices and estimating the value of the work in place.
    (vi) Final payment. (A) When the structure will be covered by an 
insured 10-year warranty, the insurer must provide an insured 10-year 
warranty policy (or a binder if the policy is not available) before 
final payment is made to the builder.
    (B) Final payment of the amount due on the contract or disbursal of 
the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 loan funds 
where an interim loan was used will be made only upon completion of the 
entire contract, final inspection by FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354, acceptance of the work by FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 and the borrower, issuance of any and 
all final permits and approvals for the use and occupancy of the 
structure by any applicable state and local governmental authorities, 
and compliance by the contractor with all terms and conditions of the 
contract. In the event the work of construction is delayed or 
interrupted by reason of fire, flood unusually stormy weather, war, 
riot, strike, an order, requisition or regulation of any governmental 
body (excluding delays related to possible defects in the contractor's 
performance and excluding delays caused by the necessity of securing 
building permits or any required inspection procedures connected 
therewith) or other contingencies reasonably unforeseeable and beyond 
the reasonable control of the contractor, then with the written consent 
of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354, the date of 
completion of the work may be extended by the owner by the period of 
such delay, provided that the contractor shall give the owner and FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 written notice within 
72 hours of the occurrence of the event causing the delay or 
interruption.
    (C) Prior to making final payment on the contract when a surety bond 
is not used or disbursing the FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 loan funds when an interim loan

[[Page 83]]

was used, FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 will be 
provided with a Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 1924-9, ``Certificate of Contractor's Release,'' and Form FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-10, ``Release by 
Claimants.'' executed by all persons who furnished materials or labor in 
connection with the contract. The borrower should furnish the contractor 
with a copy of the ``Release by Claimants'' form at the beginning of the 
work in order that the contractor may obtain these releases as the work 
progresses.
    (1) If such releases cannot be obtained, the funds may be disbursed 
provided all the following can be met:
    (i) Release statements to the extent possible are obtained;
    (ii) The interests of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 can be adequately protected and its security position is not 
impaired; and
    (iii) Adequate provisions are made for handling the unpaid account 
by withholding or escrowing sufficient funds to pay any such claims or 
obtaining a release bond.
    (2) The State Director may issue a State Supplement which will:
    (i) Not require the use of Form FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 1924-10, if, under existing state statutes, the 
furnishing of labor and materials gives no right to a lien against the 
property, or
    (ii) Provide an alternative method to protect against mechanic's and 
materialmen's liens. In this case, the use of Form FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-10 is optional.
    (b) Borrower method. The borrower method means performance of work 
by or under the direction of the borrower, using one or more of the ways 
specified in this paragraph. Development work may be performed by the 
borrower method only when it is not practicable to do the work by the 
contract method; the borrower possesses or arranges through an approved 
self-help plan for the necessary skill and managerial ability to 
complete the work satisfactorily; such work not interfere seriously with 
the borrower's farming operation or work schedule, and the County Office 
caseload will permit a County Supervisor to properly advise the borrower 
and inspect the work.
    (1) Ways of performing the work. The borrower will:
    (i) Purchase the material and equipment and do the work.
    (ii) Utilize lump-sum agreements for (A) minor items or minor 
portions of items of development, the total cost of which does not 
exceed $5,000 per agreement, such as labor, material, or labor and 
material for small service buildings, repair jobs, or land development; 
or (B) material and equipment which involve a single trade and will be 
installed by the seller, such as the purchase and installation of 
heating facilities, electric wiring, wells, painting, liming, or 
sodding. All agreements will be in writing, however, the County 
Supervisor may make an exception to this requirement when the agreement 
involves a relatively small amount.
    (2) Acceptance and storage of material on site. The County 
Supervisor will advise the borrower that the acceptance of material as 
delivered to the site and the proper storage of material will be the 
borrower's responsibility.
    (3) Payment for work done by the borrower method--(i) Payments for 
labor. Before the County Supervisor countersigns checks for labor, the 
borrower must submit a completed Form FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 1924-11, ``Statement of Labor Performed,'' for each 
hired worker performing labor during the pay period. Ordinarily, checks 
for labor will be made payable to the workers involved. However, under 
justifiable circumstances, when the borrower has paid for labor with 
personal funds and has obtained signatures of the workers on Form FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-11 as having 
received payment, the County Supervisor may countersign a check made 
payable to the borrower for reimbursement of these expenditures. Under 
no circumstances will the County Supervisor permit loan funds or funds 
withdrawn from the supervised bank account to be used to pay the 
borrower for the borrower's own labor or labor performed by any member 
of the borrower's household.

[[Page 84]]

    (ii) Payment for equipment, materials or lump-sum agreements. (A) 
Before countersigning checks for equipment or materials, the County 
Supervisor must normally have an invoice from the seller covering the 
equipment or materials to be purchased. When an invoice is not available 
at the time the check is issued, an itemized statement of the equipment 
or materials to be purchased may be substituted until a paid invoice 
from the seller is submitted, at which time the prepurchase statement 
may be destroyed.
    (B) When an invoice is available at the time the check is drawn, the 
check will include a reference to the invoice number, the invoice date 
if unnumbered and, if necessary, the purpose of the expenditure.
    (C) The check number and date of payment will be indicated on the 
appropriate Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
1924-11, invoice, itemized statement of equipment or materials and/or 
lump-sum agreement.
    (D) Ordinarily, checks for equipment or materials will be made 
payable to the seller. Under justifiable circumstances, when the 
borrower has paid for equipment or materials with personal funds and 
furnished a paid invoice, the County Supervisor may countersign a check 
made payable to the borrower for reimbursement of these expenses.
    (E) When an invoice includes equipment or materials for more than 
one item of development, the appropriate part of the cost to be charged 
against each item of development will be indicated on the invoice by the 
borrower, with the assistance of the County Supervisor.
    (F) Payment made under lump-sum agreements will be made only when 
all items of equipment and materials have been furnished, labor has been 
performed as agreed upon, and the work has been accepted by the borrower 
and FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354.
    (G) Each paid Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 1924-11, invoice, itemized statement for equipment or material 
and/or lump-sum agreement will be given to the borrower in accordance 
with the FMI.
    (c) Mutual self-help method. The mutual self-help method is 
performance of work by a group of families by mutual labor under the 
direction of a construction supervisor, as described in 7 CFR part 3550. 
The ways of doing the work, buying materials, and contracting for 
special services are like those used for the borrower method. Materials 
can be bought jointly by the group of families, but payments will be 
made individually by each family. In the case of RH loans to families 
being assisted by Self-Help Technical Assistance (TA) grants in 
accordance with subpart I of part 1944 of this chapter, the County 
Supervisor may countersign checks for materials and necessary contract 
work made payable directly to the TA grantee, provided the District 
Director determines that:
    (1) The grantee acts in the same capacity as a construction manager 
in the group purchase of material and services.
    (2) The grantee has an adequate bookkeeping system approved by the 
District Director to assure that funds in each RH account are properly 
distributed and maintained.
    (3) The grantee receives no compensation in the way of profit or 
overhead for this service and all discounts and rebates received in 
connection with the purchase of materials or services are passed on to 
the participating families.
    (4) The grantee has a record-keeping system which shows that the 
costs of the materials and services were prorated to each borrower's 
account in relation to the actual material and service used by each 
borrower.
    (d) Owner-builder method. This method of construction applies only 
to RRH loans made under subpart E of part 1944 of this chapter. 
Regulations governing this method are found at Sec. 1924.13(e)(2) of 
this subpart.

[52 FR 8002, Mar. 13, 1987, as amended at 55 FR 41833, Oct. 16, 1990; 60 
FR 55122, Oct. 27, 1995; 61 FR 56116, Oct. 31, 1996; 71 FR 25740, May 2, 
2006]

[[Page 85]]


<R05>
Sec. 1924.7  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1924.8  Development work for modular/panelized housing units.

    (a) Exhibit B of this subpart applies to all loans involving 
modular/panelized housing units.
    (b) Complete drawings and specifications will be required as 
prescribed in exhibit C of this subpart. Each set of drawings will 
contain the design of the foundation system required for the soil and 
slope conditions of the particular site on which the modular/panelized 
house is to be placed.
    (c) The manufacturer will provide a certification (exhibit B, 
attachment 5 of this subpart), stating that the building has been built 
substantially in accordance with the drawings and specifications. The 
builder will also provide a certification that the onsite work complies 
with drawings, specifications, and the applicable development standard 
(eExhibit B, attachment 5 of this subpart).
    (d) Responsibility for field inspections will be in accordance with 
Sec. 1924.9(a) of this subpart. Frequency and timing of inspections 
will be in accordance with Sec. 1924.9(b) of this subpart, except that 
the Stage 2 inspection should be made during the time and in no case 
later than two working days after the crews commence work on the site 
and the house is being erected or placed on the foundation, to determine 
compliance with the accepted drawings and specifications.
    (e) Periodic plant inspections will be performed in accordance with 
paragraphs II and III of exhibit B of this subpart. FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 employees responsible for 
inspections in the area in which the manufacturing plant or material 
supply yard is located will perform such inspections as deemed necessary 
under paragraph III of exhibit B of this subpart.
    (1) Plant inspections will be made if the type construction method 
used could restrict adequate inspections on the building site.
    (2) Plant inspections will be made as often as necessary; however, 
after initial inspection and acceptance of the unit, only when it 
appears advisable to ascertain the performance and continuing stability 
of accepted materials and construction.
    (f) Only one contract will be accepted for the completed house on 
the site owned or to be bought by the borrower. The manufacturer of the 
house or the manufacturer's agent may be the prime contractor for 
delivery and erection of the house on the site or a builder may contract 
with the borrower for the complete house in place on the site. Such 
contracts should provide that payments will be made only for work in 
place on the borrower's site.
    (g) Payments for modular/panelized units will be made in accordance 
with the terms of the contract and in compliance with Sec. 
1924.6(a)(12) of this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 1924.9  Inspection of development work.

    The following policies will govern the inspection of all development 
work.
    (a) Responsibility for inspection. The County Supervisor or District 
Director, accompanied by the borrower when practicable, will make final 
inspection of all development work and periodic inspections as 
appropriate to protect the security interest of the government. In this 
respect, inspections other than final inspections, may be conducted by 
other qualified persons as authorized in paragraph (d) of this section, 
in 7 CFR part 3550, in RD Instruction 2024-A (available in any Rural 
Development office), and as authorized under other agreements executed 
by, or authorized by, the National Office.

The borrower will be responsible for making inspections necessary to 
protect the borrower's interest. RHS or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 inspections are not to assure the borrower that the 
house is built in accordance with the plans and specifications. The 
inspections create or imply no duty or obligation to the particular 
borrower. RHS or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
inspections are for the dual purpose of determining that RHS or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 has adequate security for its 
loan and is achieving the statutory goal of providing adequate housing. 
If difficult technical problems

[[Page 86]]

are encountered, the County Supervisor or District Director should 
request the assistance of the State Office or a qualified technician 
from SCS or the State University Cooperative Extension Service.
    (b) Frequency of inspections. The County Supervisor or District 
Director will inspect development work as frequently as necessary to 
assure that construction and land development conforms to the drawings 
and specifications. The final inspection will be made at the earliest 
possible date after completion of the planned development. When several 
major items of development are involved, final inspection will be made 
upon completion of each item.
    (1) For new buildings and additions to existing buildings, 
inspections will be made at the following stages of construction and at 
such other stages of construction as determined by the County Supervisor 
or District Director except as modified by paragraph (b)(3) of this 
section.
    (i) Stage 1. Customarily, the initial inspection in construction 
cases is made just prior to or during the placement of concrete footings 
or monolithic footings and floor slabs. At this point, foundation 
excavations are complete, forms or trenches and steel are ready for 
concrete placement and the subsurface installation is roughed in. 
However, when it is not practicable to make the initial inspection prior 
to or during the placement of concrete, the County Supervisor or 
District Director will make the initial inspection as soon as possible 
after the placement of concrete and before any backfill is in place.
    (ii) Stage 2. The Stage 2 inspection will be made when the building 
is enclosed, structural members are still exposed, roughing in for 
heating, plumbing, and electrical work is in place and visible, and wall 
insulation and vapor barriers are installed. Customarily, this is prior 
to installation of brick veneer or any interior finish which would 
include lath, wallboard and finish flooring.
    (iii) Stage 3. The final inspection will be made when all on-site 
and off-site development has been completed and the structure is ready 
for occupancy or its intended use.
    (2) For rehabilitation of existing buildings, inspections will be 
made in accordance with paragraphs (b)(1) (ii) and (iii) of this 
section, and at such other stages of construction to assure that 
construction is being performed in a professional manner and in 
accordance with the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 approved drawings and specifications.
    (3) For new construction when the structure will be covered by an 
insured 10-year warranty plan as described in exhibit L of this subpart, 
only the final inspection is required, except in cases when partial 
payments are required when the provisions of Sec. 1924.6(a)(12)(v) of 
this subpart will be followed.
    (4) Arrangements should be made to have the borrower join the County 
Supervisor or the District Director in making periodic inspections as 
often as necessary to provide a mutual understanding with regard to the 
progress and performance of the work.
    (5) The Borrower should make enough periodic visits to the site to 
be familiar with the progress and performance of the work, in order to 
protect the borrower's interest. If the borrower observes or otherwise 
becomes aware of any fault or defect in the work or nonconformance with 
the contract documents, the borrower should give prompt written notice 
thereof to the contractor with a copy to the County Supervisor or 
District Director responsible for servicing the type of loan or grant 
involved.
    (6) The borrower should, when practicable, join the County 
Supervisor or District Director in making all final inspections.
    (7) When irrigation equipment and materials are to be purchased and 
installed, a performance test under actual operating conditions by the 
person or firm making the installation should be required before final 
acceptance is made. The test should be conducted in the presence of the 
borrower, a qualified technician, and, when practicable, the County 
Supervisor or District Director. If the FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 official is not present at the performance 
test, he or she should request the technician to furnish a report as to 
whether

[[Page 87]]

or not the installation meets the requirements of the plans and 
specifications.
    (8) For irrigation and drainage construction or any dwelling 
construction where part or all of the work will be buried or backfilled, 
interim inspections should be made at such stages of construction that 
compliance with plans and specifications can be determined.
    (c) Recording inspections and correction of deficiencies. All 
periodic and final inspections made by the County Supervisor or District 
Director will be recorded on Form FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 1924-12 in accordance with the FMI. The County 
Supervisor or District Director will be responsible for following up on 
the correction of deficiencies reported on Form FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-12. When an architect/engineer is 
providing services on a project, the District Director should notify the 
architect/engineer immediately of any fault or defect observed in the 
work or of any nonconformance with the contract document. If the 
borrower or the contractor refuses to correct the deficiencies, the 
District Director will report the facts to the State Director who will 
determine the action to be taken. No inspection will be recorded as a 
final inspection until all deficiencies or nonconforming conditions have 
been corrected.
    (d) Acceptance by responsible public authority. When local (city) 
county, state, or other public authority) codes and ordinances require 
inspections, final acceptance by the local authority having jurisdiction 
will be required prior to final inspection or acceptance by FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354.
    (e) Acceptance by project architect. If architectural services 
pursuant to Sec. 1924.13(a) of this subpart have been obtained, final 
acceptance by the project architect pursuant to Sec. 1924.13(a)(5)(v) 
of this subpart will be required prior to acceptance by FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354.

[52 FR 8002, Mar. 13, 1987, as amended at 60 FR 55122, Oct. 27, 1995; 61 
FR 2899, Jan. 30, 1996; 67 FR 78327, Dec. 24, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 1924.10  Making changes in the planned development.

    The borrower may request changes in the planned development in 
accordance with this section.
    (a) Authority of the County Supervisor. The County Supervisor is 
authorized to approve changes in the planned development involving loans 
and grants within the County Supervisor's approval authority provided:
    (1) The change is for an authorized purpose and within the scope of 
the original proposal.
    (2) Sufficient funds are deposited in the borrower's supervised bank 
account or with the interim lender, as appropriate, to cover the 
contemplated changes when the change involves additional funds to be 
furnished by the borrower.
    (3) The change will not adversely affect the soundness of the 
operation or FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354's 
security. If uncertain as to the probable effect the change would have 
on the soundness of the operation or FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 security, the County Supervisor will obtain advice 
from the District Director on whether to approve the change.
    (4) If a surety bond has been provided on the full amount of the 
construction contract, the aggregate amount of all contract change 
orders on Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
1924-7, ``Contract Change Order,'' or other acceptable form will not 
exceed 20 percent of the original contract amount. Change orders for 
contracts on which a surety bond has been provided which increases the 
original contract amount by more than 20 percent may only be approved if 
additional surety is provided in the full revised amount of the 
contract. For purposes of this paragraph, letters of credit and deposits 
are not considered surety.
    (5) Change orders for contracts on which letters of credit or 
deposits have been provided on the full amount of the contract which 
will increase the original contract amount are approved only if 
additional letters of credit or deposits are provided in the full 
revised amount of the contract.

[[Page 88]]

    (6) Modifications have been certified in accordance with Sec. 
1924.5(f)(1)(iii) or certification has been waived in accordance with 
Sec. 1924.5(f)(1)(iii)(C) of this subpart.
    (b) Authority of the District Director. The District Director is 
authorized to approve changes in the development planned with RRH, RCH, 
and RHS loans and LH loans and grants within the District Director's 
approval authority, provided the conditions in Sec. 1924.10(a) have 
been met. For such loans in excess of the District Director's approval 
authority, the borrower's request with the District Director's 
recommendation will be forwarded to the State Director for 
consideration.
    (c) Recording changes in the planned development. (1) Changes should 
be accomplished only after FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 written approval. Changes will not be included in payment 
requests until approved by the borrower; the contractor, if applicable; 
the architect/engineer, if applicable; and the FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 loan approval official. Examples of 
changes requiring documentation are:
    (i) Any changes in labor and materials and their respective costs.
    (ii) Changes in facility design.
    (iii) Any decrease or increase in unit-price on final measurements 
that are different from those shown in the bidding schedule.
    (iv) Any increase or decrease in the time to complete the project.
    (2) All changes shall be recorded in chronological order as follows:
    (i) Contract method. Changes shall be numbered in sequence as they 
occur using Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
1924-7 with necessary attachments.
    (ii) Borrower method. An increase or decrease in the cash cost, 
extension of time, transfer of funds between items, or an addition or 
deletion of items of development, will be summarized on the front of 
Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-1 by 
striking through the original figures on items and writing in the 
changes. Changes made in the ``Development Plan'' in the working 
drawings, or in the plans and specifications will be dated and initialed 
by all parties.
    (iii) Mutual self-help method. [See paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of this 
section.]
    (iv) Owner-builder method. [See paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this 
section.]
    (3) All changes in facility design and/or materials must be 
certified in accordance with Sec. 1924.5(f)(1)(iii) of this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 1924.11  District Director's review of incomplete development.

    During monthly District Office work organization meetings and during 
regular visits to the County Office, the District Director will review 
the progress that is being made in completing development financed with 
loans within the District Director's and County Supervisor's 
responsibility.
    (a) Once each year the District Director will make a comprehensive 
review of all development work not completed within the time scheduled. 
For incomplete development financed with loan or grant funds within the 
responsibility of the District Director, the District Director will take 
the necessary actions to assure that the borrower or grantee completes 
the planned development. For incomplete development financed with loan 
or grant funds within the responsibility of the County Supervisor, the 
District Director will give the necessary direction to the County 
Supervisor to assure completion of the work. In connection with these 
responsibilities, the District Director will consider:
    (1) The current farm and home operations with respect to the need 
for the development as originally planned.
    (2) Revisions to the development plan.
    (3) Funds remaining in the supervised bank account.
    (4) Need for additional funds.
    (5) Personal funds that could be furnished by the borrower.
    (6) Estimated completion dates.
    (7) The borrower's attitude with respect to completing the 
development.
    (b) After a complete review of the status of development in both the 
District and County Offices has been made, the District Director will 
make a written report to the State Director which will include 
observations and

[[Page 89]]

recommendations regarding incomplete development. The report may be 
included in the District Director's regular report, and will include:
    (1) The number of cases in which borrowers have not completed their 
development within 9, 15 or 24 months when authorized, and also the 
number of cases in which funds have been exhausted and the work is 
incomplete.
    (2) The number of borrowers who have not completed their development 
within 3 years from the loan closing, and indicate the action that was 
taken in each such case.
    (c) If the borrower has not completed development work within 3 
years after the date of loan closing and the District Director has 
determined that the borrower cannot or will not complete the 
development, the District Director will so indicate on Form FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-1 and request the State 
Director to withdraw, for application on the loan, any unused 
development funds remaining in the borrower's supervised bank account, 
if the borrower will not sign a check for a refund to the loan account.


<R05>
Sec. 1924.12  Warranty of development work.

    (a) Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-
19, ``Builder's Warranty,'' or an insured 10-year home warranty as 
described in exhibit L of this subpart, and normal trade warranties on 
items of equipment will be issued to the borrower at the completion of 
new building construction, dwelling rehabilitation by the contract 
method, all cases of newly completed and previously unoccupied dwellings 
or construction under conditional commitments issued to builders and 
sellers.
    (b) If the warranty is not an insured 10-year warranty, a completed 
Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-19, with 
warranty protection for 1 year, must be provided by the builder upon 
final acceptance of the work by the owner and FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354. If an insured 10-year warranty is 
provided, the requirements of exhibit L of this subpart apply, and a 
copy of the warranty insurance policy or a binder must have been 
received by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 prior 
to disbursement of the final payment to the builder.
    (c) If, for some reason, the warranty insurance policy cannot be 
issued, the contractor will be required to execute Form FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-19 and the case will be 
forwarded to the State Director for consideration of debarment under the 
provisions of subpart M of part 1940 (available in any FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 office). The County Supervisor 
will assist the borrower to the extent necessary under the provisions of 
the warranty and subpart F of part 1924 of this chapter.
    (d) The County Supervisor will take the following action prior to 
the expiration of the first year of the warranty period:
    (1) As soon as the warranty has been executed, the follow-up date 
for sending Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
1924-21, ``Notice of Expiration of First Year of Warranty,'' which will 
be used for the 1 year warranty or the first year of the insured 10-year 
warranty, will be posted to the ``Servicing and Supervision'' section of 
the Management System card.
    (2) Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-
21 is provided for use in notifying the borrower of the expiration date 
of the first year of the warranty. This letter will be mailed to the 
borrower early in the second month preceding the expiration date of the 
first year of the warranty period.
    (3) If the County Supervisor or District Director does not hear from 
the borrower within 30 days, it can reasonably be assumed that no 
complaint exists or that any complaint has been satisfied unless 
information to the contrary has been received.
    (4) If the borrower notifies FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 that any complaint has not been satisfied, an onsite 
inspection shall be made as early as possible, but not later than 1 
month preceding the expiration date of the first year of the warranty. 
The results of the inspection

[[Page 90]]

will be recorded on Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 1924-12. If the borrower has complaints, the case should be 
handled in accordance with the provisions of subpart F of part 1924 of 
this chapter, or as otherwise provided in this subpart.

[52 FR 8002, Mar. 13, 1987, as amended at 54 FR 14334, Apr. 11, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 1924.13  Supplemental requirements for more complex construction.

    This section includes additional provisions that apply to planning 
and conduct of construction work on all multiple family housing projects 
and other projects that are more extensive in scope and more complex in 
nature than individual housing units or farm buildings. This section 
will apply in addition to all other requirements contained elsewhere in 
this subpart.
    (a) Architectural services. Complete architectural services, as 
defined in Sec. 1924.4(o)(1) of this subpart are recommended on all 
projects. They are required for projects involving an LH grant and for 
all loans for RRH, RCH, and LH projects consisting of more than 4 units 
unless prior consent to making an exception to the requirements for 
complete architectural services is obtained from the National Office. If 
the applicant or contractor is an architect or organization with 
architectural capability, the applicant must, nevertheless, hire an 
independent qualified architect or architectural firm to inspect the 
construction work and perform other needed services during the 
construction and warranty phases. See Guide 4, attachment 1, 
``Attachment to AIA Document--Standard Form of Agreement Between Owner 
and Architect,'' for further information (available in any FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 office).
    (1) Exception. Any request for National Office consent to an 
exception being made for complete architectural services should include 
the proposed drawings and specifications, method of providing specific 
services, the comments and recommendations of the FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 State Architect, and any other pertinent 
information. The State Director must determine that any services for 
which an exception is requested can be performed by qualified State or 
District Office staff members.
    (2) Selecting the architect. The applicant is responsible for 
selecting the architect. The District Director with the advice of the 
State architect/engineer should discuss with the applicant the selection 
of the architect for the job as early as possible to assist in the site 
selection and participate in early consultations regarding project scope 
and design.
    (3) Architectural fees. Fees for architectural services shall not 
exceed the fee ordinarily charged by the profession for similar work 
when FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 financing is 
not involved. The fee should cover only the architectural services 
rendered by the architect. The reduction or elimination of any services 
described in paragraph (a)(5) of this section shall be directly 
reflected in the fee. Fees for special services rendered by the 
architects, such as the packaging of the loan application or additional 
nonarchitectural services, will not be authorized to be paid with loan 
funds.
    (4) Agreement between borrower and architect. The borrower and the 
architect will execute a written agreement. The agreement must provide:
    (i) The services listed in paragraph (a)(5) of this section.
    (ii) The amount of the fee and how it will be determined and paid.
    (iii) That the agreement and any amendments to the agreement shall 
not be in full force and effect until concurred with in writing by the 
State Director or the State Director's delegate, and it will contain the 
following provision:

    The Farmers Home Administration or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354, as potential lender or insurer of funds to defray the costs 
of this agreement and without liability for any payments thereunder, 
hereby concurs in the form, content and the execution of this agreement.

Date____________________________________________________________________
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 Approval Official_
Title___________________________________________________________________


[[Page 91]]

________________________________________________________________________
    (5) Specific services. Architectural services will include six 
consecutive phases as follows:
    (i) Schematic design phase. The architect will:
    (A) Consult with the applicant to obtain available information 
pertinent to the project requirements.
    (B) Consult with FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 State architect/engineer about FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 requirements and procedures.
    (C) Assist in preparing the project design after analyzing 
engineering and survey data on the site selected by applicant.
    (D) Prepare schematic design studies consisting of drawings and 
other documents illustrating the scale and relationship of project 
components for the applicant's approval.
    (E) Submit estimates of current development costs based on current 
area, volume, or other unit costs.
    (F) When the applicant and FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 have accepted the schematic design studies and estimated 
development costs, the project architect may be authorized to proceed 
with the next phase.
    (ii) Design development phase. The architect will:
    (A) Prepare the design development exhibits from the accepted 
schematic design studies for approval by the applicant. These exhibits 
should consist of drawings and other documents to fix and describe the 
size and character of the entire project as to structural, mechanical, 
and electrical systems, materials, and other essentials as appropriate.
    (B) Submit a further statement of probable construction cost.
    (C) Obtain applicant and FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 approval of drawings, specifications, and authorization to 
proceed with next phase.
    (iii) Construction documents phase. The architect will:
    (A) Prepare the working drawings and specifications from the 
approved design development drawings and set forth in detail the 
requirements for the construction of the entire project in accordance 
with applicable regulations and codes; for example, necessary bidding 
information, assistance in preparing bidding forms, conditions of the 
construction contract, and the form of agreement between applicant/owner 
and contractor.
    (B) Submit a final and more comprehensive statement of probable 
development cost. It should show a breakdown of the estimated total 
development cost of the project and the various trades in enough detail 
for an adequate review.
    (C) Obtain the acceptance of the applicant and FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 for contract documents, including 
approval of the final drawings and specifications and authorization to 
proceed.
    (D) Discuss with the applicant various items as they develop.
    (iv) Bidding or negotiation phase. The architect will, as 
appropriate, for a bidded or negotiated contract:
    (A) Assist in review and selection of bidders and submission of 
contract documents to selected bidders.
    (B) Assist in the interpretation of drawings and specifications, and 
other contract documents.
    (C) Receive and tabulate all bids.
    (D) Review the bids and the negotiated proposals and assist in the 
award and preparation of construction contracts.
    (v) Construction phase. This phase includes the administration of 
the construction contract. It will commence with the award of the 
construction contract and end when the borrower makes final payment to 
the contractor. The architect will:
    (A) Attend the preconstruction conference. Advise and consult with 
the borrower (or the borrower's representative) and issue the borrower's 
instructions to the contractor.
    (B) Prepare change orders.
    (C) Keep construction accounts and work as the general administrator 
of the project during construction.
    (D) Interpret the contract documents and have the authority to 
reject all work and materials which do not comply.
    (E) Review and approve shop drawings, samples, and other submissions 
of the contractor for conformance with

[[Page 92]]

the design concept and for compliance with the contract documents.
    (F) Conduct periodic inspections of all phases of construction to 
determine compliance with the contract documents and certify as to the 
amount is in place and materials suitably stored on site for partial 
payment estimates. These inspections will be augmented, when necessary, 
by inspections performed by structural, mechanical, and electrical 
representatives. Periodic inspections should be made as frequently as is 
necessary to verify that the work conforms with the intent of the 
contract documents and that a high quality of workmanship is maintained. 
The State Director may require a full-time project representative on 
projects with a total development cost of $750,000 or more, when in the 
opinion of the State Director there is a need for such representative, 
and the State Director states the reasons for such need to the borrower.
    (G) Determine, based on the inspections, the dates of substantial 
completion and final completion; receive on the borrower's behalf all 
written guarantees and related documents assembled by the contractor; 
and issue a final certificate for payment.
    (vi) Warranty phase. The architect will advise and consult with the 
borrower, as the borrower's representative, about items to be corrected 
within the warranty period. The architect will accompany the FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 representative during the 
inspection required one month prior to expiration of the warranty 
period.
    (b) Other professional services. The State Director, on the 
recommendation of the State architect/engineer, may request that 
additional professional services be provided.
    (1) Professional services typically include soils engineering, 
structural engineering, civil engineering, surveying, land planning, or 
professional cost estimation or certification. Fees for these services 
may be paid directly by the borrower or by the architect as reimbursable 
expenses.
    (2) When a project representative is utilized, unless otherwise 
agreed, the representative will be provided by the consulting architect/
engineer. Prior to the preconstruction conference, the architect/
engineer will submit a resume of qualifications of the project 
representative to the applicant and to FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 for acceptance in writing. If the applicant 
provided the project representative, the applicant must submit a resume 
of the representative's qualifications to the project architect/engineer 
and FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 for acceptance 
in writing, prior to the preconstruction conference. The project 
representative will attend the preconstruction conference where duties 
and responsibilities will be fully discussed. The project representative 
will work under the general supervision of the architect/engineer. The 
project representative will maintain a daily diary in accordance with 
the following:
    (i) The diary shall be maintained in a hard-bound book.
    (ii) The diary shall have all pages numbered and all entries in ink.
    (iii) All entries shall be on daily basis, beginning with the date 
and weather conditions.
    (iv) Daily entries shall include daily work performed, number of men 
and equipment used in the performance of the work, and all significant 
happenings during the day.
    (v) The diary shall be made available to FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 personnel and will be reviewed during 
project inspections.
    (vi) The project representative's diary will become the property of 
the owner after the project is accepted and final payments are made.
    (c) Drawings. The type and kinds of drawings should be in accordance 
with exhibit C of this subpart and subpart D of part 1944 of this 
chapter.
    (1) The drawings must be clear, accurate, with adequate dimensions 
and of sufficient scale for estimating purposes.
    (2) Construction sections and large-scale details sufficient for 
accurate bidding and for the purpose of correlating all parts of the 
work should be part of the general drawings. This is particularly 
important where the size

[[Page 93]]

of a project makes necessary the preparation of the general drawings at 
a scale of 1/8 inch equals 1 foot or less.
    (3) Mechanical and electrical work should be shown on separate 
plans.
    (4) Schedules should be provided for doors, windows, finishes, 
electrical fixtures, finish hardware, and any other specialty items 
necessary to clarify drawings.
    (d) Specifications. Trade-type specifications (specifications 
divided into sections for various trades) should be used. The 
specifications should be complete, clear, and concise, with adequate 
description of the various classes of work shown under the proper 
sections and headings.
    (e) Methods of administering construction. Projects involving a 
total development cost of less than $100,000 which do not include an LH 
grant may, with the approval of the State Director, follow the contract 
procedure in Sec. 1924.6(a) of this subpart without modification. 
Construction of all other projects, however, will be administered by the 
contract method or owner-builder method as set forth in this section.
    (1) Contract method. This method of development will be used for all 
complex construction except in cases where owner-builder method is 
authorized. Development under this method is done in accordance with 
Sec. 1924.6(a) of this subpart except as modified by this paragraph. 
All construction work will be completed under one written construction 
contract. Guide 1, ``Contract Documents,'' of this subpart (available in 
any FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 office) is 
provided to assist FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
personnel and applicants in assembling and reviewing contract documents 
for more complex construction such as that administered under this 
section.
    (i) Competitive bidding methods. (A) All construction contracts must 
be awarded on the basis of competitive bidding unless an exception is 
granted in accordance with paragraph (e)(1)(vii) of this section thereby 
permitting contract negotiation. The applicant's architect should 
prepare the bidding documents. Public notice must be given inviting all 
interested bidders to submit a bid. Prospective bidders may be contacted 
asking for their bids; however, public notice is necessary so that all 
local contractors have the opportunity to submit bids.
    (B) A bid bond is required from each bidder in the amount of 5 
percent of the bid price as assurance that the bidder will, upon 
acceptance of the bid, execute the required contract documents within 
the time specified.
    (C) The construction contract will be awarded based on the contract 
cost, and all conditions listed in the ``Invitation to Bid.''
    (D) If advertising does not provide a satisfactory bid in the 
opinion of the applicant and FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354, the applicant shall reject all bids and will then be free 
to negotiate with bidders on anyone else to obtain a satisfactory 
contract. The following conditions must be met:
    (1) The State Director determines that the original competitive bid 
process was handled in a satisfactory manner and that there is no 
advantage to advertising for competitive bid again.
    (2) The requirements of paragraph (e)(1)(vii) of this section are 
met.
    (E) If there is no agreement by FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 and the applicant as to the construction cost, the 
State Director will cease any further action on the preapplication and 
inform the applicant of the right to appeal in accordance with subpart B 
of part 1900 of this chapter.
    (ii) Contract documents. Contract documents will conform with 
recognized professional practices as prescribed in this paragraph. Such 
contract documents will contain substantially the following:

Item I Invitation for Bids (Form FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 1924-5)
Item II Information for Bidders
Item III Bid
Item IV Bid Bond
Item V Agreement (Construction Contract)
Item VI Compliance Statement (Form FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 400-6)
Item VII General Conditions
Item VIII Supplemental General Conditions
Item IX Payment Bond (exhibit F of this subpart)
Item X Performance Bond (exhibit G of this subpart)

[[Page 94]]

Item XI Notice of Award
Item XII Notice of Proceed
Item XIII Drawings and Specifications
Item XIV Addenda
Item XV Contract Change Order (Form FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 1924-7)
Item XVI Labor Standards Provisions [Where applicable]
Item XVII Monthly Employment Utilization Report (Form CC-257)
Item XVIII Partial Payment Estimate (Form FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 1924-18)
Item XIX Builder's Warranty (Form FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 1924-19)

    (A) Substitution of term ``architect'' for ``engineer'' may be 
necessary on some of the forms. Other modifications may be necessary in 
some cases to conform to the nature and extent of the project. All such 
contract documents and related items will be concurred with by the State 
Director, with the assistance of OGC prior to the release of invitations 
to bid.
    (B) Items listed as I through IV and item XI of paragraph (e)(1)(ii) 
of this section may be omitted when an exception to the competitive 
bidding requirement is granted in accordance with paragraph (e)(1)(vii) 
of this section, thereby permitting a negotiated contract.
    (C) All negotiated contracts shall include a provision to the effect 
that the borrower, USDA, the Comptroller General of the United States, 
or any of their duly authorized representatives, shall have access to 
any books, documents, papers, and records of the contractor which are 
directly pertinent to a specific Federal loan program for the purpose of 
making audit, examination, excerpts, and transcriptions.
    (D) A provision of liquidated damages will be included in all 
contracts. The liquidated damage amount must be reasonable and represent 
the best estimate possible of how much interest or other costs will 
accrue on the loan, and also represent any loss of rent or other income 
which would result from a delay in the completion of the project beyond 
the estimated completion date.
    (E) All contracts shall include a provision for compliance with the 
Copeland ``Anti-Kickback'' Act (18 U.S.C. 874) as supplemented in 
Department of Labor regulations (29 CFR part 3). This Act prohibits 
anyone from inducing any person in connection with the construction to 
give up any part of the compensation to which the person is otherwise 
entitled.
    (F) All contracts will contain a certification by the applicant 
indicating that there is not now nor will there be an identity of 
interest between the applicant and any of the following: Contractor, 
architect, engineer, attorney, subcontractors, material suppliers, 
equipment lessors, or any of their members, directors, officers, 
stockholders, partners, or beneficiaries unless specifically identified 
to FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 in writing 
prior to the award of the contract. All contracts must also indicate 
that when any identity of interest exists or comes into being, the 
contractor agrees to have construction costs as reported to FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 on Form 1924-13, ``Estimate 
and Certificate of Actual Cost,'' audited by a Certified Public 
Accountant (CPA) or Licensed Public Accountant (LPA) licensed prior to 
December 31, 1970, who will provide an opinion as to whether the Form 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-13 presents 
fairly the costs of construction in conformity with eligible 
construction costs as prescribed in FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 regulations.
    (G) All contracts on any form other than Form FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-6, must contain the language of 
clause (D) of Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
1924-6, which is available in all FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 offices. The language of clause (D) of Form FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-6 sets forth the 
Notice of Requirement for Affirmative Action to Ensure Equal Employment 
Opportunity required by Executive Order 11246, the Equal Opportunity 
clause published at 41 CFR 60-1.4 (a) and (b), and the Standard Federal 
Equal Employment Opportunity Construction Contract Specifications 
required by Executive Order 11246. For contract forms other than Form 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public

[[Page 95]]

Law 103-354 1924-6, Form AD 767, ``Equal Employment Opportunity Contract 
Compliance Notices,'' which can be obtained from the Finance Office, 
should be attached and made a part of the contract.
    (H) All contracts will contain a provision that they are not in full 
force and effect until concurred with by the State Director or the State 
Director's delegate, in writing. Therefore, before loan closing or 
before the start of construction, whichever occurs first, the State 
Director or the State Director's delegate will concur in the contract 
form, content, and execution if acceptable, by including the following 
paragraph at the end of the contract:

    The Farmers Home Administration or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354, as potential lender or insurer of funds to defray to costs 
of this contract, and without liability for any payments thereunder, 
hereby concurs in the form, content, and execution of this contract.

Date____________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________

FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 Official
________________________________________________________________________
Title

    (I) The requirements of Sec. 1924.6 (a)(11)(iv) of this subpart 
apply to all contracts or subcontracts in excess of $10,000.
    (iii) Surety. When multiple advances of loan or grant funds are 
utilized, surety that guarantees both payment and performance in the 
full amount of the contract will be provided in accordance with Sec. 
1924.6(a)(3)(ii) of this subpart. Exceptions to the surety requirements 
shall be governed by the following:
    (A) In accordance with the guidance and recommendations of OMB 
Circulars A-102 and A-110, exceptions to the surety requirements of 
Sec. 1924.6(a)(3)(ii) of this subpart will not be granted for nonprofit 
organization or public body applicants.
    (B) For loans or grants to applicants other than non-profit 
organizations or public bodies that are within the State Director's 
approval authority, the State Director may, upon request of the borrower 
or grantee, grant exceptions to the surety requirements in accordance 
with the provisions of Sec. 1924.6(a)(3)(iii) of this subpart. Before 
granting such an exception, however, the State Director should be 
provided the following information from the proposed contractor in order 
to fully evaluate the experience and capabilities of the contractor:
    (1) A resume indicating the contractor's history, ability and 
experience.
    (2) A current, dated and signed financial statement of the 
contractor's operations indicating the payment status of accounts and 
any contingent liabilities that may exist. FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 personnel will be responsible for analyzing the 
financial statement as to the sufficiency of the contractor's financial 
capability to carry out construction. The financial strength must 
demonstrate the ability of the contractor to pay all bills prior to 
receiving periodic draws of funds from the lender.
    (3) A credit report (obtained at no expense to FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354) attesting to the contractor's credit 
standing.
    (4) A listing of trade references that could be contacted to 
substantiate the contractor's experience and good standing.
    (5) Statements from owners for whom the contractor has done similar 
work, indicating the scope of the work and the owner's evaluation of the 
contractor's performance.
    (C) For loans or grants to applicants other than non-profit 
organization or public bodies that are in excess of the State Director's 
approval authority, the State Director may request National Office 
authorization to grant one of the exceptions to the surety requirements 
as indicated in Sec. 1924.6(a)(3)(iii) of this subpart. The following 
information must be submitted with the request to the National Office:
    (1) An explanation of why interim financing is not available.
    (2) An explanation of why the proposed contractor cannot obtain 
surety bonds meeting the requirements of Sec. 1924.6(a)(3)(ii) of this 
subpart.
    (3) The information listed in paragraph (e)(1)(iii)(B) of this 
section.
    (4) The drawings and specifications for the proposed project, 
together with

[[Page 96]]

the comments of the State architect/engineer.
    (5) The applicant's written request for an exception.
    (6) An explanation of why the requirements of Sec. 
1924.6(a)(3)(iii) (A) or (B) of this subpart cannot be met in those 
cases where the State Director requests authorization to grant an 
exception as indicated in Sec. 1924.6(a)(3)(iii)(C) of this subpart. 
When such a request is made, the documentation required of the 
contractor under the provision must also be forwarded.
    (7) The State Director's recommendation.
    (D) Adequate steps will be taken to protect the interests of the 
borrower and the government in accordance with the payment provisions of 
Sec. 1924.6(a)(12)(i) of this subpart and any alternative as outlined 
in Sec. 1924.6(a)(3)(iii)(c) of this subpart.
    (iv) Contract cost breakdown. In any case where the loan approval 
official feels it appropriate, and prior to the award or approval of any 
contract in which there is an identity of interest as defined in Sec. 
1924.4 (i) of this subpart, the contractor and any subcontractor, 
material supplier or equipment lessor sharing an identity of interest 
must provide the applicant and FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 with a trade-item cost breakdown of the proposed contract 
amount for evaluation. The cost of any surety as required by Sec. 
1944.222 (h) and (i) of subpart E of part 1944 of this chapter and Sec. 
1924.6(a)(3) of this subpart, or cost certification as required by 
paragraph (e)(1)(v) of this section, will be included in the proposed 
contract amount and shown under General Requirements on Form FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-13, which is available in 
all FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 offices. FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 personnel will be 
responsible for reviewing the estimates on Form FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-13 to determine if the dollar 
amounts total correctly, to assure that costs are categorized under 
their appropriate columns, and to confirm that the estimated costs for 
all line items are reasonable and customary for the State.
    (v) Cost certification. Whenever the State Director determines it 
appropriate, and in all situations where there is an identity of 
interest as defined in Sec. 1924.4(i) of this subpart, the borrower, 
contractor and any subcontractor, material supplier, or equipment lessor 
having an identity of interest must each provide certification using 
Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-13 as to 
the actual cost of the work performed in connection with the 
construction contract. The construction costs, as reported on Form FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-13, must also be 
audited, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, by a CPA, or 
LPA licensed on or before December 31, 1970. In addition, certain agreed 
upon procedures (available in any FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 office) will be performed in accordance with 
Attestation Standards. In some cases, FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 will contract directly with a CPA or LPA for the cost 
certification. In that event, documentation necessary to have the costs 
of construction certified by an FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 contractor that they were the actual costs of the 
work performed, as reported on Form FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 1924-13, will be provided. Funds which were included 
in the loan for cost certification and which are ultimately not needed 
because FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 contracts 
for the cost certification will be returned on the loan. FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 personnel will utilize exhibit 
M of this subpart (available in any FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 office) and Form FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 1924-26, ``Cost Certification Worksheet,'' to assist 
in the evaluation of the cost certification process.
    (A) Prior to the start of construction, the borrower, contractor and 
any subcontractor, material supplier, or equipment lessor sharing an 
identity of interest must submit, to the CPA or

[[Page 97]]

LPA, the accounting system that the borrower, contractor, subcontractor, 
material supplier or equipment lessor and/or the CPA or LPA proposes to 
set up and use in maintaining a running record of the actual cost. In 
order to be acceptable, the borrower must provide a written assertion 
that it has an accounting system that is suitably designed to provide 
for a trade-item basis comparison of the actual cost as compared to the 
estimated cost submitted on Form FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 1924-13. Costs pertaining to a specific line item 
will be set up in the accounting system for that particular account. For 
instance, only costs of materials, supplies, equipment, and labor 
associated with concrete will be shown in the concrete account. The 
accounting system must also restrict costs to those pertaining to a 
specific project so that costs from multiple projects will not be co-
mingled. The independent CPA or LPA shall report on the borrower's 
assertion in accordance with the Standards for Attestation Engagements 
of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA). The 
borrower's and the CPA or LPA's reports on the accounting system shall 
be provided to FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 by 
the borrower.
    (B) Prior to final payment to anyone required to cost certify, a 
trade-item breakdown showing the actual cost compared to the estimated 
cost must be provided to the owner and FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354. Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 1924-13 is the form of comparative breakdown that must be 
used, and contains the certifications required of the applicant and 
contractor prior to final payment. The amounts for builder's general 
overhead, builder's profit, and general requirements, respectively, 
shall not exceed the amounts represented on the estimate of cost 
breakdown provided in accordance with paragraph (e)(1)(iv) of this 
section for any contractor, subcontractor, material supplier, or 
equipment lessor having or sharing an identity of interest with the 
borrower. The amounts for general overhead, builder's profit, and 
general requirements must be established prior to FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 approving the construction contract and 
will not be changed during the course of construction. This applies to 
all contractors, subcontractors, material suppliers, or equipment 
lessors having or sharing an identity of interest with the applicant. 
Contract change orders will be processed to adjust the contract amount 
downward prior to the final payment to the contractor, if necessary, to 
assure that the amounts shown in the certificate of actual costs do not 
exceed the amounts represented in the contract cost breakdown. Reduction 
in the builder's profit, and general overhead if needed, will 
counterbalance any increase reflected in the contract costs. Any funds 
remaining as a result of hard cost savings will be applied to the 
account as an extra payment or used for eligible loan purposes approved 
by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 as long as the 
improvements are genuinely needed and will enhance marketability of the 
project. All increases or decreases of 15 percent or more in line item 
costs will require documentation as to the reason for the increases and/
or decreases. The State Director may require documentation for increases 
and/or decreases of less than 15 percent, if he/she determines it 
necessary. This information will be required with the cost 
certification.
    (C) The CPA or LPA audit, performed in accordance with Government 
Auditing Standards, will include such tests of the accounting records 
and such other auditing procedures of the borrower and the contractor 
(and any subcontractor, material supplier or equipment lessor sharing an 
identity of interest) concerning the work performed, services rendered, 
and materials supplied in accordance with the construction contract he/
she considers necessary to express an opinion on the construction costs 
as reported on Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 1924-13. The CPA or LPA shall also perform the additional agreed 
upon procedures specified by FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 (available in any FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 office), performed in

[[Page 98]]

accordance with Attestation Standards, for the applicant and the 
contractor (and any subcontractor, material supplier, or equipment 
lessor sharing an identity of interest) concerning the work performed, 
services rendered, and materials supplied in accordance with the 
construction contract.
    (D) Upon completion of construction and prior to final payment, the 
CPA or LPA will provide an opinion concerning whether the construction 
costs, as reported on Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 1924-13, present fairly the costs of construction in conformity 
with eligible construction costs as prescribed in FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 regulations.
    (E) In some cases, cost certification will be obtained by FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 through direct contract 
with the CPA or LPA. The borrower and his/her CPA or LPA will cooperate 
fully with the contract CPA or LPA by providing all documentation 
necessary to conduct the certification. FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 reserves the right to determine, upon receipt 
of the certified Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 1924-13 and the auditor's report, whether they are satisfactory to 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354. If not 
satisfactory to FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354, 
the borrower will be responsible for providing additional information.
    (F) There will exist no business relationship between the CPA or LPA 
and the borrower except for the performance of the examination of the 
cost certification, accounting systems work, and tax preparation. Any 
CPA or LPA who acts as the borrower's accountant (performing manual or 
automated bookkeeping services or maintains the official accounting 
records) will not be the same CPA or LPA who cost certifies the project.
    (G) Forms FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
1944-30, ``Identity of Interest (IOI) Disclosure Certificate'' and FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1944-31, ``Identity of 
Interest (IOI) Qualification Form,'' provide written notification to the 
borrower that willful and intentional falsification of cost 
certification documents will result in debarment of all violators in 
accordance with the provisions of FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 Instruction 1940-M (available in any FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 office). These forms require 
the disclosure of all identities of interest associated with project 
construction, certify the entity's ability to provide the contracted 
service, and cite the penalties for failure to disclose or falsify such 
certification. Each applicant/borrower will be required to complete and 
sign the forms (available in any FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 office).
    (H) Subcontracting development work.
    (1) Contractors will not be allowed to obtain a profit and overhead 
unless they are performing actual construction. ``Actual construction'' 
means ``work'' as defined in American Institute of Architects (AIA) 
documents: ``* * * labor, materials, equipment, and services provided by 
the contractor to fulfill the contractor's obligations.'' Under this 
definition, contractors who choose to subcontract out construction of 
the project to another contractor will not obtain a builder's fee 
(general overhead and profit) when:
    (i) More than 50 percent of the contract sum in the construction 
contract is subcontracted to one subcontractor, material supplier, or 
equipment lessor, and/or
    (ii) Seventy-five percent or more with three or fewer 
subcontractors, material suppliers and/or equipment lessors.
    (2) Note: If two or more subcontractors have common ownership, they 
are considered as one subcontractor.
    (3) How to apply rule:
    (i) The 50 percent rule will apply when division of the amount of 
the largest subcontract by the contract sum of the construction contract 
results in more than 50 percent.
    (ii) The 75 percent rule will apply when division of the sum of the 
amounts of the three largest subcontracts by the contract sum of the 
construction contract results in 75 percent or more.

[[Page 99]]

    (I) Qualified contracting entities. Contractors, subcontractors, 
material suppliers, and any other individual or organization sharing an 
identity of interest and providing materials or services for the project 
must certify that it is a viable, ongoing trade or business qualified 
and properly licensed to undertake the work for which it intends to 
contract. Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
1944-31 will be prepared and executed by the contracting entities. The 
form provides notification to the entities of the penalty, under law, 
for erroneously certifying to the statements contained therein. 
Debarment actions will be instituted against entities who fail to 
disclose an identity of interest in accordance with the provisions of 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 Instruction 1940-M 
(available in any FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
office).
    (vi) Method of payments. Partial payments may be requested in 
accordance with the terms of the construction contract on Form FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-18, ``Partial Payment 
Estimate,'' or other professionally recognized form that contains the 
architect's certification, approval of the owner, and conditional 
acceptance of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 as 
shown in Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
1924-18.
    (A) If interim financing is available at reasonable rates and terms 
for the construction period, such financing shall be obtained. exhibit B 
of subpart E of part 1944 of this chapter shall be used to inform the 
interim lender that FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 will not close its loan until the project is substantially complete, 
ready for occupancy, evidence is furnished indicating that all bills 
have been paid or will be paid at loan closing for work completed on the 
project, all inspections have been completed and all required approvals 
have been obtained from municipal and governmental authorities having 
jurisdiction over the project.

Upon presentation of proper partial payment estimates approved by the 
applicant and accepted by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354, the interim lender may advance construction funds in accordance 
with the payment terms of the contract. It is suggested that partial 
payments not exceed 90 percent of the value of work in place and 
materials suitably stored on site.
    (B) When interim financing is not available, payments will be made 
in accordance with Sec. 1924.6(a)(12) of this subpart.
    (vii) Exception to competitive bidding--(A) For all applicants. An 
applicant may negotiate a construction contract provided the State 
Director grants an exception and documentation shows that:
    (1) The contract price is competitive with other projects similar in 
construction and design being built in the area.
    (2) The proposed contractor is experienced in construction of 
projects of similar size, scope, and complexity, and is recognized as a 
reliable builder.
    (3) The proposed development work meets all requirements of this 
subpart.
    (4) If appropriate for nonprofit organizations and public bodies, 
the applicant provides a copy of a duly authorized resolution by its 
governing body requesting FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 to permit awarding the construction contract without formal 
bidding.
    (5) The applicant is permitted by state law, local law and/or 
organizational by-laws to negotiate a construction contract.
    (6) The requirements of paragraphs (e)(1) (ii), (iii), (iv) and (v) 
of this section are met.
    (B) In considering an exception to competitive bidding, the 
following additional steps will be taken in all cases.
    (1) If, after a full review of the case documents by the appropriate 
members of the State Office staff, the State Director determines that 
the requirements have been met and the costs are reasonable, an 
exception to competitive bidding may be granted. Written documentation 
of the State Office review results will be placed in the application 
file.
    (2) If after the full review by the State Office staff, the State 
Director determines that the negotiated contract price is not 
competitive with

[[Page 100]]

other similar projects in construction and design being built in the 
area, the applicant will be requested to competitively bid the 
construction of the project in accordance with paragraph (e)(1)(i) of 
this section.
    (3) If there is no agreement by FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 and the applicant as to the construction cost, the 
State Director will cease any further action on the preapplication and 
inform the applicant of the right to appeal in accordance with subpart B 
of part 1900 of this chapter.
    (C) Any requests for exceptions to competitive bidding that are not 
covered in this section may be submitted to the National Office for 
consideration.
    (viii) Exception to contract method--public body. With the approval 
of the National Office, the State Director may grant to a public body an 
exception to the requirement for using contract method construction 
under the following circumstances:
    (A) The loan or grant is for repair or rehabilitation of existing 
facilities and it is not practicable to perform all work by the contract 
method.
    (B) The applicant has the managerial ability and qualified employees 
necessary to complete the work successfully.
    (C) That applicant submits a written request to the District 
Director indicating:
    (1) The scope of work and construction timetable;
    (2) What phases of work can be contracted and what cannot;
    (3) Why is it not practicable to contract all phases;
    (4) Management ability and employee qualifications for performing 
the work;
    (5) Proposed method of fund control and frequency of payments;
    (6) How changes in scope of work and construction timetable will be 
approved; and,
    (7) Proposed method of certifying progress and requesting payments.
    (D) The request, recommendations of the District Director, 
appropriate members of the State Office staff and the State Director and 
the application file will be sent to the National Office.
    (2) Owner-builder method. This method of development is used only 
when requested by profit or limited profit RRH applicants when the 
applicant or any of its controlling principals (such as stockholders, 
members, partners other than limited partners, directors, or officers), 
are general contractors by profession, and will serve as the builder of 
the project without a written construction contract. The State Director 
may make an exception to the contract method of construction and 
authorize proceeding by the owner-builder method of construction in 
accordance with the provisions of this section if the amount of the 
loan(s) does not exceed the State Director's approval authority. For 
projects over the State Director's authority, prior written consent of 
the National Office is required. In such cases, the drawings, 
specifications, cost estimates, copy of the State Architect/Engineer's 
review and detailed information on the applicant's qualifications will 
be submitted to the National Office along with the State Director's 
recommendations.
    (i) The applicant's request to construct a project by the owner-
builder method of construction shall be in the form of a letter giving 
specific and detailed information concerning the owner-builder's 
proposal, and the qualifications and past experience of the owner-
builder. The following information must be included with the request:
    (A) A resume indicating the owner-builder's history, ability, and 
experience.
    (B) Dated and signed financial statements on the owner-builder's 
operation (including balance sheets and statements of income and 
expense) from current and prior years indicating the payment status of 
the owner-builder's accounts and any contingent liabilities that may 
exist. FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 personnel 
will be responsible for analyzing the financial statement as to the 
sufficiency of the owner-builder's financial capability to carry out 
construction. The financial strength must demonstrate the ability of the 
owner-builder to pay all bills prior to receiving periodic draws of 
funds from the lender.

[[Page 101]]

    (C) A written, dated, and signed statement agreement to provide any 
funds necessary in excess of the applicant's contribution and the loan 
amount to complete the project.
    (D) A credit report (obtained at no expense to FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354) attesting to the owner-builder's credit 
standing.
    (E) A listing of trade references that could be contacted to 
substantiate the owner-builder's experience and good standing.
    (F) Statements from other persons for whom the owner-builder has 
done similar work, indicating the scope of the work and that person's 
evaluation of the owner-builder's performance.
    (G) A current, dated, and signed trade-item cost breakdown of the 
estimated total development cost of the project which has been prepared 
by the applicant/owner-builder. Form FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 1924-13 will be used for this purpose. If cost 
certification services are required by FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354, the cost of such services may be included in 
the total development cost of the project. Any subcontractor, material 
supplier, or equipment lessor sharing an identity of interest with the 
applicant/owner-builder as defined in Sec. 1924.4(i) of this subpart 
must also provide a trade-item cost breakdown of the proposed amount.
    (H) Prior to the start of construction, the owner-builder and any 
subcontractor, material supplier, or equipment lessor sharing an 
identity of interest must submit, to the CPA or LPA, the accounting 
system that the owner-builder, subcontractor, material supplier or 
equipment lessor and/or the CPA or LPA proposes to set up and use in 
maintaining a running record of the actual cost. In order to be 
acceptable, the owner-builder must provide a written assertion that it 
has an accounting system that is suitably designed to provide for a 
trade-item basis comparison of the actual cost as compared to the 
estimated cost submitted on Form FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 1924-13. Costs pertaining to a specific line item 
will be set up in the accounting system for that particular account. For 
instance, only costs of materials, supplies, equipment, and labor 
associated with concrete will be shown in the concrete account. The 
accounting system must also restrict costs to those pertaining to a 
specific project so that costs from multiple projects will not be co-
mingled. The independent CPA or LPA shall report on the owner-builder's 
assertion in accordance with the Standards for Attestation Engagements 
of the AICPA. The owner-builder's and the CPA or LPA's reports on the 
accounting system shall be provided to FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 by the owner-builder.
    (I) A written, dated, and signed statement agreeing to permit U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, the Comptroller General of the United States, 
or any of their duly authorized representatives, to have access to any 
books, documents, papers, and records which are directly pertinent to 
the specific Federal program for the purpose of making audit, 
examination, excerpts and transcriptions.
    (ii) In order to grant an exception to the contract method of 
construction and proceed with the owner-builder method of construction, 
the State Director must determine that the following conditions exist:
    (A) The applicant or at least one of its principals is a fully 
qualified and licensed (if necessary under applicable local law) builder 
by profession, has adequate experience in constructing the type of units 
proposed as well as projects of similar size, scope, and complexity and 
will be able to complete the work in accordance with the FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 approved drawings and 
specifications.
    (B) Based upon the information presented in the applicant's 
financial statements, the applicant is presently able and is likely to 
continue to be able to provide any funds necessary in excess of the 
applicant's contribution and the loan amount to complete the project.
    (C) The total development cost of the project does not exceed that 
which is typical for similar type projects in the area. The total 
development cost recognized by FmHA or its successor

[[Page 102]]

agency under Public Law 103-354 for each individual case will be 
determined by the MFH Coordinator with the advice of the State 
Architect.
    (D) The owner-builder has provided sufficient information on all 
contracts or subcontracts in excess of $10,000 to permit compliance with 
Sec. 1924.6(a)(11)(iv) of this subpart.
    (iii) In addition to the requirements for the State Director to 
authorize the owner-builder method of construction as indicated in Sec. 
1924.13(e)(2) (i) and (ii) of this subpart, the following additional 
steps will be taken by the State Director.
    (A) If, after a full review of the case documents by the appropriate 
members of the State Office staff, the State Director determines that 
the requirements have been met and the construction cost is reasonable, 
an exception to competitive bidding may be granted. Written 
documentation of the State Office review results will be placed in the 
application file.
    (B) If, after the full review by the State Office staff, the State 
Director determines that the construction cost is not competitive with 
other similar projects in construction and design being built in the 
area, the applicant will be requested to competitively bid the 
construction of the project in accordance with paragraph (e)(1)(i) of 
this section.
    (C) If there is no agreement by FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 and the applicant as to construction cost and the 
applicant is not agreeable to any of the aforementioned alternatives, 
the State Director will cease any further action on the preapplication 
and inform the applicant of the right to appeal, in accordance with 
subpart B of part 1900 of this chapter.
    (iv) The development cost of the project may include a typical 
allowance for general overhead, general requirements and a builder's 
profit. These amounts may be determined by local investigation and also 
from HUD data for the area. The applicant/owner-builder and any 
subcontractors, material suppliers and equipment lessors having or 
sharing an identity of interest with the applicant/owner-builder may not 
be permitted a builder's profit, general overhead, and general 
requirements which exceed the amounts represented on their cost 
breakdown.
    (v) Under no circumstances will loan funds be used to pay the owner/
builder or its stockholders, members, directors or officers, directly or 
indirectly, any profits from the construction of the project except a 
typical builder's fee for performing the services that would normally be 
performed by a general contractor under the contract method of 
construction. Discounts and rebates given the owner-builder in advance 
must be deducted before the invoices are paid. If discounts or rebates 
are given after the invoices are paid, the funds must be returned to the 
supervised bank account or applied on the interim construction loan, as 
appropriate. Under no circumstances will the dollar amount be placed in 
the reserve account.
    (vi) The plan and specifications must be specific and complete so 
that there is a clear understanding as to how the facility will be 
constructed and the materials that will be used.
    (vii) When architectural services are required by Sec. 1924.13(a) 
during the construction and warranty phases they must be provided by an 
architect who has no identity of interest with the applicant/owner-
builder. The services to be rendered during the construction and 
warranty phases include, but are not limited to inspections, changes in 
the scope of project or work to be done, administration of construction 
accounts, rejection of work and materials not conforming to the FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 approved drawings and 
specifications, and other appropriate service listed in Sec. 
1924.13(a)(5) (v) and (vi) of this subpart.
    (viii) The applicant/owner-builder and any subcontractor, material 
supplier, or equipment lessor sharing an identity of interest as defined 
in Sec. 1924.4(i) of this subpart must each provide certification as to 
the actual cost of the work performed in connection with the 
construction of the project on Form FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 1924-13 prior to final payment. The construction 
costs, as reported on Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law

[[Page 103]]

103-354 1924-13, must be audited by a CPA, or LPA licensed on or before 
December 31, 1970, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, and 
certain agreed upon procedures (available in any FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 office) performed in accordance with 
Attestation Standards. In some cases, FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 will contract directly with a CPA or LPA for the cost 
certification. In that event, documentation necessary to have the costs 
of construction certified by an FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 contractor that they were the actual costs of the 
work performed, as reported on Form FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 1924-13, will be provided. Funds which were included 
in the loan for cost certification and which are ultimately not needed 
because FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 contracts 
for the cost certification will be returned on the loan.
    (A) The CPA or LPA's audit, performed in accordance with Government 
Auditing Standards, will include such tests of the accounting records 
and such other auditing procedures of the applicant/owner-builder (and 
any subcontractor, material supplier, or equipment lessor sharing an 
identity of interest) concerning the work performed, services rendered, 
and materials supplied in connection with the construction of the 
project he/she considers necessary to express an opinion on the 
construction costs as reported on Form FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 1924-13. Upon completion of construction and 
prior to final payment, the CPA or LPA will provide an opinion as to 
whether the construction costs as reported on Form FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-13 present fairly the costs of 
construction in conformity with eligible construction costs as 
prescribed in FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
regulations. FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
reserves the right to determine, upon receipt of the certified Form FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-13 and the 
auditor's report, whether they are satisfactory to FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354. At a minimum, the CPA or LPA shall also 
perform any additional agreed upon procedures (available in any FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 office) specified by FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354, performed in 
accordance with Attestation Standards, of the owner-builder (and any 
subcontractor, material supplier, or equipment lessor sharing an 
identity of interest) concerning the work performed, services rendered, 
and materials supplied in connection with the construction. There will 
exist no business relationship between the CPA or LPA and the borrower 
except for the performance of the examination of the cost certification, 
accounting systems work, and tax preparation. Any CPA or LPA who acts as 
the borrower's accountant (performing manual or automated bookkeeping 
services or maintains the official accounting records) will not be the 
same CPA or LPA who cost certifies the project.
    (B) Prior to final payment to anyone required to cost certify, FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 must be provided with a 
certification and a trade-item breakdown showing the actual cost 
compared to the estimated cost furnished in accordance with paragraph 
(e)(2)(i)(G) of this section. Form FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 1924-13 is the form of comparative breakdown that 
must be used, and contains the certification required of the applicant/
owner-builder prior to final payment. The amounts for builder's general 
overhead, general requirements, and builder's profit shall not exceed 
the amounts represented on the estimate of cost breakdown provided in 
accordance with paragraph (e)(2)(i)(G) of this section for the owner-
builder or any subcontractor, material supplier, or equipment lessor 
having or sharing an identity of interest with the applicant/owner-
builder. Final payment to the owner-builder will be adjusted, if 
necessary, to assure that the amounts shown on the certificate of actual 
cost do not exceed the amounts represented

[[Page 104]]

on the cost breakdown. Any funds remaining as a result of hard cost 
savings will be applied to the account as an extra payment or used for 
eligible loan purposes approved by FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 as long as the improvements are genuinely needed and 
will enhance marketability of the project. All increases or decreases of 
15 percent or more in line item costs will require documentation as to 
the reason for the increases or decreases. The State Director may 
require documentation for increases or decreases of less than 15 
percent, if he/she determines it necessary. This information will be 
required with the cost certification.
    (C) Subcontracting development work.
    (1) Owner-builders will not be allowed to obtain a profit and 
overhead unless they are performing actual construction. ``Actual 
construction'' means ``work'' as defined in AIA documents: ``* * * 
labor, materials, equipment, and services provided by the contractor to 
fulfill the contractor's obligations.'' Under this definition, owner-
builders who choose to subcontract out construction of the project to 
another contractor will not obtain a builder's fee (general overhead and 
profit) when:
    (i) More than 50 percent of the total cost of the building 
construction is subcontracted to one subcontractor, material supplier, 
or equipment lessor, and/or
    (ii) Seventy-five percent or more with three or fewer 
subcontractors, material suppliers, and/or equipment lessors.
    (2) Note: If two or more subcontractors have common ownership, they 
are considered as one subcontractor.
    (3) How to apply rule:
    (i) The 50 percent rule will apply when division of the amount of 
the largest subcontract by the total amount of the building cost results 
in more than 50 percent.
    (ii) The 75 percent rule will apply when division of the sum of the 
amounts of the three largest subcontracts by the total building cost 
results in 75 percent or more.
    (D) Qualified contracting entities. Contractors, subcontractors, 
material suppliers, and any other individual or organization sharing an 
identity of interest and providing materials or services for the project 
must certify that it is a viable, ongoing trade or business qualified 
and properly licensed to undertake the work for which it intends to 
contract. Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
1944-31 will be prepared and executed by the contracting entities. The 
form provides notification to the entities of the penalty, under law, 
for erroneously certifying to the statements contained therein. 
Debarment actions will be instituted against entities who fail to 
disclose an identity of interest in accordance with the provisions of 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 Instruction 1940-M 
(available in any FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
office).
    (ix) Requests for payment for work performed by the owner-builder 
method, shall be permitted to the FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 District Director for review and approval prior to 
each advance of funds in order to insure that funds are used for 
authorized purposes. Requests for payment shall be made on Form FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-18 or other 
professionally recognized form containing the following certification to 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354:

    The undersigned certifies that the work has been carefully inspected 
and to the best of their knowledge and belief, the quantities shown in 
this estimate are correct and the work has been performed in accordance 
with the contract documents.
________________________________________________________________________
(Name of Architect)

By:_____________________________________________________________________

________________________________________________________________________
    (Title (Date)

Approved by Owner's Representative: By:_________________________________

________________________________________________________________________
    (Title)

Accepted by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
Representative: By:_____________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
    (Title)

    The review and acceptance of partial payment estimates by FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 does not attest to the 
correctness of the quantities shown or that the work has been performed

[[Page 105]]

in accordance with the plans and specifications.

    (A) If interim financing is available at reasonable rates and terms 
for the construction period, such financing shall be obtained. Exhibit B 
of subpart E of part 1944 of this chapter shall be used to inform the 
interim lender that FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 will not close its loan until the project is complete, ready for 
occupancy, evidence is furnished indicating that all bills have been 
paid for work completed on the project, all inspections have been 
completed and all required approvals have been obtained from any 
governmental authorities having jurisdiction over the project. Upon 
presentation of proper partial payment estimates containing an estimate 
of the value of work in place which has been prepared and executed by 
the owner-builder, certified by the applicant's architect, and accepted 
by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354, the interim 
lender may advance construction funds in accordance with the provisions 
of this section. It is suggested that the partial payment not exceed 90 
percent of the value of work in place and material suitably stored on 
site.
    (B) If interim financing is not available, partial payments not to 
exceed 90 percent of the value of work in place and materials suitably 
stored on site may be made to the owner-builder for that portion of the 
estimated cost of development guaranteed by a letter of credit or 
deposits meeting the requirements of Sec. 1924.6(a)(3)(iii) (A), (B) or 
(C) of this subpart. Partial payments may not exceed 60 percent of the 
value of work in place in all other cases. The determination of the 
value of work in place will be based upon an application for payment 
containing an estimate of the value of work in place which has been 
prepared and executed by the owner-builder, certified by the borrower's 
architect, and accepted by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354. Prior to receiving the first partial payment, the owner-builder 
must submit a schedule of prices or values of the various trades or 
phases of the work aggregating the total development cost of the project 
as required in Sec. 1924.13(e)(2)(i) (G) and (H) of this subpart. Each 
application for payment must be based upon this schedule, and show the 
total amount owed and paid to date for materials and labor procured in 
connection with the project. With each application for payment, the 
owner-builder must also submit evidence showing how the requested 
partial payment is to be applied, evidence showing that previous partial 
payments were properly applied, and a signed statement from the 
applicant's attorney, title insurance company, or local official in 
charge of recording documents certifying that the public records have 
been searched and that there are no liens of record. When the District 
Director has reason to believe that partial payments may not be applied 
properly, checks will be made payable to persons who furnish materials 
and labor for eligible purposes in connection with the project.
    (x) Under no circumstances shall funds be released for final payment 
or to pay any items of the builder's profit until the project is 100 
percent complete, ready for occupancy, and the owner-builder has 
completed and properly executed Form FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 1924-13 or complied with the cost certification 
procedures of Sec. 1924.13(e)(2)(viii) of this subpart.

[52 FR 8002, Mar. 13, 1987; 52 FR 26139, July 13, 1987, as amended at 53 
FR 2155, Jan. 26, 1988; 59 FR 6882, Feb. 14, 1994; 61 FR 56116, Oct. 31, 
1996]


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 1924.14-1924.48  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1924.49  State supplements.

    State Supplements or policies will not be issued or adopted to 
either supplement or set requirements different from those of this 
subpart, unless specifically authorized in this subpart, without prior 
written approval of the National Office.


<R05>
Sec. 1924.50  OMB control number.

    The reporting and recordkeeping requirements contained in this 
regulation have been approved by the Office of Management and Budget 
(OMB) and have been assigned OMB control number 0575-0042. Public 
reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to vary 
from 5 minutes to 4

[[Page 106]]

hours per response, with an average of 37 minutes per response, 
including time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data 
sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and 
reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this 
burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, 
including suggestions for reducing this burden, to U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Clearance Officer, OIRM, AG Box 7630, Washington, DC 20250; 
and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project 
(OMB <greek-i>0575-0042), Washington, DC 20503.

[59 FR 6885, Feb. 14, 1994]


<R05>
    Sec. Exhibit A to Subpart A of Part 1924--Estimated Breakdown of 
             Dwelling Costs for Estimating Partial Payments

                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                              With      With
                                             slab on    crawl     With
                                              grade     space   basement
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Excavation.............................         3         5         6
2. Footings, foundations columns..........         8         8        11
3. Floor slab or framing..................         6         4         4
4. Subflooring............................         0         1         1
5. Wall framing, sheathing................         7         7         6
6. Roof and ceiling framing, sheathing....         6         6         5
7. Roofing................................         5         5         4
8. Siding, exterior trim, porches.........         7         7         6
9. Windows and exterior doors.............         9         9         8
10. Plumbing--roughed in..................         3         2         3
11. Sewage disposal.......................         1         1         1
12. Heating--roughed in...................         1         1         1
13. Electrical--roughed in................         2         2         2
14. Insulation............................         2         2         2
15. Dry wall or plaster...................         8         8         7
16. Basement or porch floor, steps........         1         1         6
17. Heating--finished.....................         3         3         3
18. Flooring..............................         6         6         5
19. Interior carpentry, trim, doors.......         6         6         5
20. Cabinets and counter tops.............         1         1         1
21. Interior painting.....................         4         4         3
22. Exterior painting.....................         1         1         1
23. Plumbing--complete fixtures...........         4         4         3
24. Electrical--complete fixtures.........         1         1         1
25. Finish hardware.......................         1         1         1
26. Gutters and downspouts................         1         1         1
27. Grading, paving, landscaping..........         3         3         3
                                           -----------------------------
      Total...............................       100       100       100
------------------------------------------------------------------------


<R05>
   Sec. Exhibit B to Subpart A of Part 1924--Requirements for Modular/
                         Panelized Housing Units

    For the benefit of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 this exhibit prescribes evaluation, acceptance, inspection and 
certification procedures formodular/panelized housing units proposed for 
use in Farmers Home Administration (FmHA) or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 Rural Housing programs. It applies to proposed 
development packages provided either under a contract between an FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 borrower and a single 
contractor or under a conditional commitment. This exhibit also 
describes the use of background information available through the 
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for analysis of 
manufactured products. This exhibit also applies to the evaluation of 
manufactured farm service buildings in paragraph XI, below. For the 
purpose of this exhibit, County Supervisor and County Office also mean 
District Director and District Office, respectively.
    I. Applicable Standards and Manuals.
    A. The HUD Handbook 4950.1, Technical Suitability of Products 
Program Technical and Processing Procedures, must be followed by housing 
manufacturers to obtain acceptance of their products. Acceptance 
documents issued by HUD include: Structural Engineering Bulletins (SEB) 
on a national basis, Area Letters of Acceptance (ALA) which when 
accepted by all Area HUD Offices in a HUD region will, in essence, 
become Regional Letters of Acceptance (RLA), Truss Connector Bulletins 
(TCB): and, Mechanical Engineering Bulletins (MEB). These documents as 
well as the Use of Material Bulletins (UM) and Materials Release 
Bulletins (MR) are addendums to the HUD Minimum Property Standards 
(MPS), Under handbook guidelines, HUD also examines state agency 
regulations concerning design, construction and labeling of modular/
panelized housing units and designates those states having procedures 
acceptable for use under HUD programs. Modular/panelized housing 
produced in these states is called Category III and is considered 
technically suitable for use without further structural analysis.
    B. All State FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
Offices should maintain a close working relationship with each HUD 
office in their jurisdiction to assure coordination. Any deviations in 
structure, materials or design from HUD acceptance documents must comply 
with one of the other applicable development standards.
    II. Modular Housing Units that Require Factory Inspections.

[[Page 107]]

    Only those types which cannot be completely inspected on site are 
required to obtain acceptance from HUD. Those that receive acceptance 
will be periodically factory inspected by HUD or HUD's designated 
agency, usually about every 6 months.
    III. Panelized Housing Units that Do Not Require Factory 
Inspections.
    A. Housing completely assembled on the building site does not 
require HUD acceptance. This includes housing that is manufactured but 
is assembled on the site such as: Precut pieces, log wall houses, 
trussed roof rafters or floor trusses; open panel walls, and other types 
that can be completely inspected on site.
    B. Housing that is assembled in local materials dealers' yards for 
moving to local sites and to be purchased by an FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 applicant, will be inspected during 
construction in the yard by the local FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 County representative. These units must be 
constructed according to the applicable development standard and not 
transported out of the local FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 County Office jurisdiction. The inspection must be recorded 
on Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-12, 
``Inspection Report.''
    IV. Manufacturer's Actions Required for Submissions to FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 are listed in attachment 1 to 
this exhibit B.
    V. State FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
Office Actions when Manufacturing Facilities are in its Jurisdiction. 
The State Office, upon receipt of manufacturer's submission, must:
    A. Determine that the unit structural system has been accepted by 
HUD as appropriate under HUD Handbook 4950.1 requirements.
    B. Review the thermal characteristics and approach of the 
calculations to determine actions to be taken in compliance with 
paragraph IV C of exhibit D of this subpart.
    C. Review the proposal for compliance with Sec. 1924.5(d)(1) of 
this subpart.
    D. Determine that the prerequisites for consideration of acceptance 
by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 are met. The 
prerequisites include all of the following:
    1. A current acceptance document from HUD (SEB, RLA, ALA), except 
for Category III housing (modular/panelized housing that does not have 
to have a Structural Engineering Bulletin as designated by HUD). In 
Category III states, the state government requirements for manufactured 
housing must be followed.
    2. A current HUD Factory Inspection Report, Form No. 2051m, or in 
the case of Category III housing, a copy of the inspection report from 
the state government or accepted third party performing the factory 
inspection. Each report must be made by HUD or a HUD authorized agency, 
and must be no older than 6 months.
    3. A letter from the manufacturer requesting a review for 
acceptance. Enclosed with the letter shall be all the information listed 
in attachment 1 to this exhibit B.
    E. Issue acceptance letters to the manufacturer stating the 
conditions of acceptance in the format of attachment 2 to this exhibit 
B. The letter shall have an attachment listing all models accepted in 
the format of attachment 3 to this exhibit B. A copy of the acceptance 
letter and list of models shall be sent to each County Office in the 
state and, when requested by the manufacturer, to each other FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 State Office in which the 
product is to be marketed.
    F. After initial review of a submission, maintain a master file of 
accepted manufacturers and models and review the file twice yearly to 
determine the currency of the factory inspection reports and HUD or 
state government acceptance documents.
    G. Notify manufacturers of overdue factory inspection reports, for 
acceptance of documents review and updating, using the format of 
attachment 4 to this exhibit B. Accompanying the notification will be a 
temporary acceptance sheet (Attachment 3 to this exhibit B) indicating 
to the manufacturer that the company models have temporary acceptance 
for 60 days. If the manufacturer provides evidence that a review is 
being processed by HUD, a maximum of an additional 90 days may be 
granted. Otherwise, the acceptance shall terminate on the last extension 
date and it will be necessary for the manufacturer to resubmit as if for 
initial acceptance.
    H. Distribute a list of added models, deleted models, or notice of 
deletion of any manufacturer's product to the County Offices and other 
State FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 Offices as 
necessary.
    I. Issue an initial supply of Manufacturer's and Builder's 
Certification forms (Attachment 5 to this exhibit B) to each existing 
and newly accepted manufacturer. Manufacturers are to duplicate this 
form as necessary in their market areas.
    J. Resolve any problems with the manufacturer, as reported by the 
County Office. Action may include coordination, FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 plant inspections or cancellation of 
acceptance letters when problems persist.
    VI. County Office Actions:
    A. When an application is received involving any of the 
manufacturer's products on the accepted list, the County Office FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 authorized personnel will:

[[Page 108]]

    1. Review the drawings and description of materials described in 
paragraphs A and B of attachment 1 to this exhibit B. The floor plans 
and elevations must be identifiable with the model listed in the 
accepted list issued by the State Office.
    2. Require the builder/dealer or manufacturer to provide any 
drawings necessary to adapt the house to the site conditions where the 
house will be located.
    3. Require site plan drawing such as those illustrated in 
attachments 1 and 2 to exhibit C of this subpart (available in any FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 office).
    4. Inspect and identify the model delivered against the 
manufacturer's certification and the accepted drawings and description 
of materials before the unit has been set on the foundation.
    5. Require the builder/dealer to certify that the work for which the 
builder/dealer is responsible has been erected in compliance with the 
applicable development standard. This certification will be completed on 
a copy of attachment 5 to this exhibit B, and filed in County Office 
case file.
    6. Observe any noncompliance with the applicable development 
standard or with paragraphs IV and V of this exhibit B. In this respect:
    a. Minor noncompliance will be resolved by the manufacturer through 
the builder/dealer. In cases where there is no builder/dealer, the 
County Office may resolve such issues with the manufacturer directly.
    b. Noncompliance that cannot be resolved at the County Office level 
will be reported to the State Office.
    7. Inspect manufactured housing according to Sec. 1924.8(d) of this 
subpart.
    8. Be aware that the accepted list may include many models from 
which loan applicants may choose. No changes from accepted model designs 
are permitted. The model selected by an applicant should be appropriate 
to the needs of that particular family in accordance with 7 CFR part 
3550.
    VII. Noncompliance Issues.
    A. When minor issues are noted, the County Office will attempt to 
resolve them as described above. If they cannot be resolved locally, 
they will be referred to the State Office. When any issues cannot be 
resolved at State Office level, the National Office Program Support 
Staff (PSS) will be contacted for guidance.
    B. The National Office PSS coordinating with HUD, will take the 
appropriate actions to resolve the issues reported.
    C. Manufacturers and builder/dealers must be aware that if the FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 inspector finds any of 
the following conditions, the inspector may refuse to accept the 
construction until corrections have been made:
    1. Evidence of noncompliance with any option of the method described 
in the HUD--SEB, RLA, or ALA.
    2. Faulty shop fabrication, including surface defects.
    3. Damage to shop fabricated items or materials due to 
transportation, improper storage, handling or assembly operation.
    4. Unsatisfactory field or site workmanship.
    VIII. Actions by Other State Offices. When a State Office receives a 
copy of the accepted list from the State Office in which a manufacturing 
plant is located, it will:
    A. Maintain a file, by manufacturer, of each accepted list of 
models.
    B. Provide copies of the accepted list of models to each County 
Office in the State.
    C. Request a copy of the drawings, description of materials, and 
thermal calculations to determine compliance with the thermal 
requirements for the county in which the house is to be located 
according to exhibit D of this subpart.
    D. Check to see that County Offices within the state will act as 
prescribed in paragraph VI of this exhibit B.
    E. When two or more State Offices have different interpretations of 
the acceptability of a particular model, there must be an agreement 
between the states so that they will have the same requirements. If the 
states cannot agree, the National Office PSS will be consulted for 
guidance.
    IX. Subsequent Review.
    FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 will make 
periodic reviews of houses, both site-built and houses manufactured 
offsite, to determine acceptability of the finished product. If, in the 
judgment of the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354, 
the product has failed to perform satisfactorily, acceptance may be 
withdrawn. The State Director will notify the manufacturer and/or the 
builder/dealer of the reasons for the withdrawal no later than the time 
of withdrawal. Negotiations for corrections will be carried out by the 
County Office with the assistance of the State Office or National 
Office, as necessary.
    X. Materials and Products Acceptance--Material Release Bulletins, 
Use of Materials Bulletins, Manufacturer's Instructions.
    A. The Materials Release (MR) and Use of Materials Bulletins (UM) 
provide for the national acceptance of specific nonstandard materials 
and products not covered in the current HUD MPS.
    B. When contractors or builders intend to use products or materials 
not listed as approved in the MPS, the FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 personnel reviewing or concerned with the 
approval of construction in which the product is to be used, will 
require the contractor or

[[Page 109]]

builder to furnish a Materials Release Bulletin or Use of Materials 
Bulletin on the materials or products. If the product has been accepted, 
the supplier should be able to obtain the bulletin for the contractor or 
builder from the manufacturer. These bulletins describe the products or 
materials limitations to use, method of installing or applying, approved 
type of fasteners, if used, etc. and will provide the contractor with 
instructions as to proper installation or application.
    C. When FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
personnel are unfamiliar with any materials or products which have been 
accepted in the MPS, they will request the contractor or builder to 
furnish the manufacturer's instructions to assure that the materials or 
products are properly installed or applied. Any questions on any product 
that cannot be resolved in the County Office should be referred to the 
State Office. When the question cannot be resolved at the State Office 
level, the National Office PSS should be consulted for guidance.
    XI. Manufactured Farm Service Buildings.
    A. When a loan application is received that involves a manufactured 
building or special equipment that cannot be completely inspected on the 
site, the local State Land Grant University recommendations should be 
requested.
    B. When the County Office questions the advisability of making a 
loan on a manufactured building, the State Office should also be 
consulted.
    C. The State Office should review and make recommendations to the 
County Office. If doubt still exists, the National Office PSS should be 
consulted for guidance.

 Attachment 1--Required Information for Acceptance of Modular/Panelized 
                              Housing Units

    The manufacturer or sponsor of modular/panelized housing units 
wishing to participate in the Farmers Home Administration (FmHA) or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 Rural Housing programs shall 
submit to the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
State Director having jurisdiction over the state in which the proposed 
housing is to be manufactured, two complete sets of the information 
listed below for evaluation. Submissions not including all the 
information requested will be returned.
    A. Statements:
    1. Name and location of organization, including titles and names of 
its principal officers.
    2. A brief description of plant facilities.
    3. Extent of intended market distribution, including a list of any 
other states in which units will be marketed.
    4. The method of quality control during site installation.
    5. A copy of the applicable current HUD Structural Engineering 
Bulletin (SEB), Regional Letter of Acceptance (RLA), or Area Letter of 
Acceptance (ALA).
    6. A current factory inspection report made within 6 months by HUD 
or HUD authorized agency.
    7. Name and address of any third party inspection agency.
    8. Location of nearest assembled product for inspection.
    9. Field manuals for site installation and/or set-up procedures.
    10. Specifications or descriptions of materials using either Form 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-2, (HUD-FHA 
Form 2005), ``Description of Materials,'' including sizes, species and 
grade of all building and finishing materials. All blanks should be 
filled and additional sheets may be attached as well as equipment 
manufacturer's brochures. Use an asterisk (*) to denote all items of 
onsite construction that will be provided by the builder-dealer. The 
builder-dealer must complete a form for the builder-dealer's portion of 
the work. Use N/A in any blank which is not applicable.
    11. Names and addresses of other public and private agencies which 
have rendered or been asked to render a technical suitability or 
acceptance determination with respect to the products or structural 
methods employed.
    12. Written certification that construction drawings and 
specifications conform with the applicable development standard.
    13. Any other pertinent information.
    14. An index of all documents submitted.
    B. Working Drawings. For emphasis as to the details required for 
modular/panelized housing proposals, the following items are listed in 
addition to and in more detail than the requirements in exhibit C of 
this subpart. In some cases, the drawing presentation sheets may be 
required to be reduced to 200 mm by 266 mm (8x10\1/2\ inches) sheet 
size:
    1. Foundation and/or Basement Plan. This plan shall include 
anchorage details, exterior and interior dimensions, typical footings, 
wall thickness, pilaster sizes and locations, column or pier sizes and 
locations and girders required to support the structures. Show location 
of all equipment (furnace, water heater, laundry tubs, sump, etc.) floor 
drains, electrical outlets, electrical entrance panels, and all doors 
and windows or crawl space vents with all sizes indicated.
    2. Floor Plans of all levels. Show square footage of each habitable 
room with square footage of each area of natural light and ventilation. 
In addition, a design sketch scaled properly to illustrate a typical 
furniture arrangement for all habitable levels is required to indicate 
intended occupancy functions of the design. A window and door schedule 
should also be provided indicating glazed size, sash size, and thermal 
conductance of each type.

[[Page 110]]

    3. All exterior elevations including opening and sizes; wall finish 
materials, flashing, finish grades intended, depth of footings when 
known, finish floor, ceiling heights, roof slope, location of 
downspouts, gutters, vents for both structural spaces and for equipment. 
Indicate construction joint locations and details of connections between 
sections, modules or components.
    4. Building cross sections showing size and spaces of all framing 
members from lowest member (bottom of footing) to highest point of roof 
(ridge) plus;
    (a) Type of material and method of application of all covering 
materials, such as subflooring, combination subflooring and 
underlayment, sheathing, interior and exterior finishes;
    (b) Complete details including computations of trussed rafter 
systems with the architect/engineer's stamp of those responsible for the 
design.
    (c) Details of insulation and vapor barrier installation and attic 
ventilation. If the thermal characteristics to be provided are 
determined according to optional method for overall structure 
performance allowed in exhibit D of this subpart, the submission and 
complete engineering calculations with all details of construction shall 
be sent to Administrator, Attn. PSS, FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 Washington, DC 20250, for analysis as prescribed in 
paragraph IV C of exhibit D of this subpart.
    (d) Special details as necessary to show any special features of 
construction, including method of fabricating, erection, joining, and 
finishing of all elements; and
    (e) Details and sections of stairways including all critical 
dimensions, such as, riser, run and headroom.
    5. Interior elevations of kitchen cabinets and bathroom elevations 
with schedule of all shelf, counter-top and drawer footage. Indicate 
whether kitchen cabinets are to be custom made for each model or made 
for any model by a cabinet manufacturing company.
    6. Plumbing schematics, including pipe materials, sizes and plumbing 
code compliance.
    7. Heating plan, including heat loss of each room, is needed for 
heating systems, sizings and capacities, forced air, electric baseboard, 
or electric space heaters and, if applicable, heat gain. For forced air 
systems, include supply and return duct layout and location of 
appropriate diffusers.
    8. Electrical plan, including circuit chart or diagram.
    9. Any other pertinent facts or drawings that will better explain 
why and how certain unusual materials or structural methods are 
employed.

                              Attachment 2

John Dough Manufacturing Company,
3444 Residence Avenue,
Elkton, Indiana 00051.

    Dear Sirs: Athough the documents submitted to this office have only 
received a cursory review, they appear to be in substantial compliance 
to qualify your firm for the type of acceptance indicated on the 
attached list.
    The acceptance being issued is subject to this letter of conditions, 
compliance with HUD Handbook 4950.1 Technical Suitability of Products 
Program Technical and Processing Procedures, compliance with Farmer Home 
Administration (FmHA) or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354) 
Thermal Performance Construction Standards, and compliance with the 
conditions set forth in the HUD acceptance document, if applicable, 
whose number appears on the acceptance.
    The manufacturer and the authorized builder-dealer bear the 
responsibility of complying with the above, the exhibits submitted and 
the applicable development standards.
    The manufacturer and/or builder-dealer also shall:
    1. Provide positive identification of the modular unit by model, 
date of manufacture and factory in which the unit was manufactured.
    2. Furnish with each home to be financed by FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 in ------(State)------, a written 
certificate (Attachment 5 to this exhibit B) endorsed by the builder-
dealer certifying that all requirements have been satisfied.
    3. Furnish the local FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 County Supervisor with a complete set of drawings including site 
plans, description of materials, structural engineering bulletins when 
applicable in the state, and documentation relating to the manufacture, 
transportation, erection, and installation for each model of modular/
panelized housing to be financed in the county. Electrical, plumbing and 
heating plans must be furnished for each model in addition to the basic 
drawings. Floor plans and elevation drawings may vary from those listed 
in attachment 1 of exhibit B to FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 Instruction 1924-A to reflect each of the 
manufacturer's models provided they are in compliance with the 
applicable development standard and the FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 Thermal Performance Construction Standards and 
provided they have been accepted and listed in this state's approval of 
manufactured structures. No field alterations to the accepted models 
will be allowed.
    4. Furnish, when required by the County Supervisor, foundation 
drawings (including special foundation design considerations when the 
unit is to be erected in seismic zones 1, 2 or 3) adapting the modular 
home to

[[Page 111]]

any unusual site conditions needing information additional to that 
furnished by the standard drawings.
    5. Furnish the County Office with a copy of inspection reports of 
the manufacturing facilities immediately after the inspection reports 
have been completed.
    6. Allow FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
personnel to inspect the manufacturing facilities at any time and 
furnish all FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 State 
Offices, where acceptance has been obtained, with a copy of any FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 inspection reports 
immediately after the inspection reports have been completed.
    7. In the event there are major changes to the submitted drawings, 
obtain approval under the HUD Technical Suitability of Products Program 
and submit verification of this approval to the County Office for 
listing on the state's accepted list. Any modular home shipped with 
major changes incorporated, without such changes on file at the County 
Office may be rejected.

(Add state and local requirements appropriate to this letter of 
conditions.)
    This acceptance may be subject to corrective action when 
deficiencies are noted in the product, field inspections, manufacturing 
facilities, or when there is noncompliance with the provisions of the 
HUD Technical Suitability of Products Program.
    The inclusion of these models on the accepted list is based only on 
the material and structural aspects of the manufactured units. Final 
determination of acceptability rests with FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 personnel. Other factors relating to the 
property in its entirety such as appraisal, location, sustained market 
acceptance, architectural planning and appeal, thermal qualities, 
mechanical and electrical equipment, etc., must be considered in the 
final determination.
    Your cooperation in this acceptance program is appreciated.
     Sincerely,

State Director

                              Attachment 3

Date ------ File No. ------

              Acceptance of Modular/Panelized Housing Units

                     (Based on HUD Handbook 4950.1)

Manufacturer:

------ Acceptance Document ------
------ Type of Acceptance:
------ ---- Regular
------ ---- Temporary, Expires ------
Plant Locations:________________________________________________________
Date of Latest Plans
Reviewed________________________________________________________________
Date of Latest Factory
Inspection______________________________________________________________
Acceptance Document Review
Date____________________________________________________________________

 FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 Instruction 1924-
                              A, exhibit D

               Thermal Performance Construction Standards

State Office Review

(Exh. D, IV, C, 1, a or b)
National Office Review

(Exh. D, IV, C, 2)

Maximum Winter Degree Days for
State ------ Walls R ------
Glazing/Gross Wall Area Ratio ------%
Ceilings R ------
Glazing ------ Pane(s)
Floor R ------
Glazing ------ Pane(s)
Insulated Door ------
Wood and Storm ------
Insulated Door ------
Wood and Storm ------

Models Accepted:

                              Attachment 4

John Dough Manufacturing Company,
3444 Residence Avenue,
Elktown, Indiana 00051.

    Dear Sirs: As set forth in acceptance letters issued by this office, 
acceptance of modular/panelized homes in this state is based on HUD's 
Technical Suitability of Products Program and the conditions stated in 
the acceptance letter. Your file has been reviewed and the following has 
been noted.

----An inspection report of your manufacturing facilities is overdue. 
          Inspections are required twice yearly. The last inspection 
          report on file at this office is dated ------.
----Your Structural Engineering Bulletin No. ---- dated ---- has not 
          been reviewed by HUD. Reviews are generally required every 
          three years. Temporary acceptance will be considered when you 
          provide evidence that the review documents have been submitted 
          to HUD.
----The drawings being used for the construction of your homes are not 
          listed in your Structural Engineering Bulletins. Drawings used 
          in the field should be those upon which the Structural 
          Engineering Bulletin was issued.
----There have been ---- revisions to the development standards since --
          ----, the date of the last drawings we have on file for your 
          homes. It is recommended that you review the revisions to 
          ascertain whether your drawings need to be updated.


[[Page 112]]


    Please submit a written response and appropriate documents for the 
above items within ---- days, or your product will be removed from the 
accepted list until your firm can again qualify. If you have any 
problems furnishing the above within the time stated, please contact 
this office.
    We look forward to receiving the materials indicated so that your 
firm's listing may be continued.
     Sincerely,

State Director

                              Attachment 5

                      Certification by Manufacturer

Delivery location of structure

for component___________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________

This is to certify that
Model: ------------,
Serial <greek-i> ------------,
manufactured ------
(date) ------, 19 -- in
---- (location) ------
and being sold to ------
(name of ------------
builder-dealer or borrower) has been manufactured in accordance with 
drawings and specifications on file in the FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 State Office and that the construction complies 
with applicable development standards, except as modified by HUD 
Acceptance Document (SEB, RLA, ALA,)
NO. ------------,
dated --------,
and in compliance with the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 Thermal Performance Construction Standards.
________________________________________________________________________

Date
________________________________________________________________________

Signature of Authorized Official

________________________________________________________________________
Title

                     Certification by Builder-Dealer

------ (Name of
builder-dealer) ------
certifies that the foundation and other on-site work has been 
constructed in accordance with the drawings and specifications and the 
above structure or component has been erected, installed or applied in 
compliance with the applicable development standards.
    It is understood that the manufacturer's certification does not 
relieve the builder/dealer of responsibility under the terms of the 
builder's warranty required by the National Housing Act.
________________________________________________________________________
Date
________________________________________________________________________
Signature of Authorized Official
________________________________________________________________________
Title

[52 FR 8002, Mar. 13, 1987, as amended at 67 FR 78327, Dec. 24, 2002]


<R05>
    Sec. Exhibit C to Subpart A of Part 1924--Guide for Drawings and 
                             Specifications

    This exhibit applies to all new buildings to be constructed, 
including all single family housing and related facilities and, as 
applicable, farm housing and farm service buildings.

                               I. General

    The documents recommended in this exhibit correspond with the list 
of exhibits in Chapter 3 of the Department of Housing and Urban 
Development (HUD) ``Architectural Handbook for Building Single-Family 
Dwellings'' No. 4145.2. This exhibit may be used as a public handout and 
shall be used as a guide for drawings and specifications to be submitted 
in support of any type of application involving construction of major 
new buildings or extensive rehabilitation, alterations or additions to 
existing buildings. Descriptions of work for minor alterations or 
repairs need pertain only to work to be done and may be in narrative 
form when acceptable to the County Supervisor. Complete and accurate 
drawings and specifications are necessary:
    A. To determine the acceptability of the proposed development,
    B. To determine compliance with the applicable standards and codes,
    C. To prepare a cost estimate, and
    D. To provide a basis for inspections and the builder's warranty.

                  II. Drawings for a Specific Structure

    Drawings for individual single dwellings shall provide at least the 
following:
    A. Plot Plan. Refer to Example Plot Plan No. 1, attachment 1 to this 
exhibit C (available in any FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 office). Ratio: 1:240 (1<gr-thn-eq> = 20[foot]) (at scale, 
1<gr-thn-eq> = 20[foot] or \1/16\<gr-thn-eq> = 1[foot] 0<gr-thn-eq> 
minimum):
    1. Lot and block number.
    2. Dimensions of plot and north point.
    3. Dimensions of front, rear and side yards.
    4. Location and dimensions of garage, carport and other accessory 
buildings.
    5. Location and sizes of walks, driveways and approaches.
    6. Location and sizes of steps, terraces, porches, fences and 
retaining walls.
    7. Location and dimensions of easements and established setback 
requirements, if any.
    8. Elevations at the following points: (a) first floor of dwelling 
and floor of garage,

[[Page 113]]

carport and other accessory building; (b) finish curb or crown of street 
at points of extension of lot lines; (c) finish grade elevation at each 
principal corner of structure; (d) finish grade at bottom of drainage 
swales at extension of each side of structure as feasible.
    9. The following additional elevations, as applicable, if the 
topography of the site or the design of the structure is such that 
special grading, drainage or foundations may be necessary. Examples are 
irregular or steeply sloping sites, filled areas on sites, or multi-
level structure designs; (a) finish and existing grade elevations at 
each corner of the plot; (b) existing and finish grade at each principal 
corner of dwelling; (c) finish grade at both sides of abrupt changes of 
grade such as retaining walls, slopes, etc.; (d) other elevations that 
may be necessary to show grading and drainage.
    10. Indication of type and approximate location of drainage swales.
    11. When an individual water supply and/or sewage system is 
proposed, drawings, specifications and other items prescribed in 
paragraph V of this exhibit.
    B. Floor Plans.
    1. Scale, 1:50 (\1/4\<gr-thn-eq> = 1[foot] 0<gr-thn-eq>).
    2. Floor plan of each floor and basement, if any. Show typical 
furniture locations to suggest intended use of each habitable space.
    3. Plan of all attached terraces and porches, and of garage or 
carport.
    4. If dwelling is of crawl-space type, a separate foundation plan. 
Slab-type foundation may be shown on sections.
    5. Direction, size and spacing of all floor and ceiling framing 
members, girders, columns or piers.
    6. Location of all partitions and indication of door sizes, and 
direction of door swing.
    7. Location and size of all permanently installed construction and 
equipment such as kitchen cabinets, closets, storage shelving, plumbing 
fixtures, water heaters, etc. Details of kitchen cabinets may be on 
separate drawing.
    8. Location and symbols of all electrical equipment, including 
switches, outlets, fixtures, etc.
    9. Heating system on separate drawing, or when it may be shown 
clearly it may be part of the floor or basement plan showing: (a) layout 
of system; (b) location and size of ducts, piping, registers, radiators, 
etc.; (c) location of heating unit and room thermostat; (d) total 
calculated heat loss of dwelling including heat loss through all 
vertical surfaces, ceiling and floor. When a duct or piped distribution 
system is used, calculated heat loss of each heated space is required.
    10. Cooling system, on separate drawings or, as part of heating 
plan, floor or basement plan showing: (a) layout of system; (b) location 
and size of ducts, registers, compressors, coils, etc.; (c) heat gain 
calculations, including estimated heat gain for each space conditioned; 
(d) model number and Btu capacity of equipment or units in accordance 
with applicable Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Institute (ARI) or 
American Society of Refrigerating Engineers (ASRE) Standard; (e) Btu 
capacity and total kilowatt (KW) input at stated local design 
conditions; (f) if room or zone conditioners are used, provide location, 
size and installation details.
    C. Exterior Elevations.
    1. Scale, 1:50 (\1/4\<gr-thn-eq> = 1[foot] 0<gr-thn-eq>). 
Elevations, other than main elevation, which contain no special details 
may be drawn at 1:100 (\1/8\<gr-thn-eq> = 1[foot] 0<gr-thn-eq>).
    2. Front, rear and both side elevations, and elevations of any 
interior courts.
    3. Windows and doors--indicate size unless separately scheduled or 
shown on floor plan.
    4. Wall finish materials where more than one type is used.
    5. Depth of wall footings, foundations, or piers, if stepped or at 
more than one level.
    6. Finish floor lines.
    7. Finish grade lines at buildings.
    D. Details and Sections.
    1. Section through exterior wall showing all details of construction 
from footings to highest point of road. Where more than one type of wall 
material is used, show each type. Scale 1:25 (\3/8\<gr-thn-eq> = 1[foot] 
0<gr-thn-eq>) minimum.
    2. Section through any portion of dwelling where rooms are situated 
at various levels or where finished attic is proposed, Scale, 1:50 (\1/
4\<gr-thn-eq> = 1[foot] 0<gr-thn-eq>) minimum.
    3. Section through stair wells, landings, and stairs, including 
headroom clearances and surrounding framing. Scale, 1:50 (\1/
4\<gr-thn-eq> = 1[foot] 0<gr-thn-eq>) minimum.
    4. Details of roof trusses, if proposed, including connections and 
stress or test data with seal of architect or engineer responsible. 
Scale of connections, 1:25 (\3/8\<gr-thn-eq> = 1[foot] 0<gr-thn-eq>) 
minimum.
    5. Elevation and section through fireplace. Scale, 1:25 (\3/
8\<gr-thn-eq> = 1[foot] 0<gr-thn-eq>) minimum.
    6. Elevations and section through kitchen cabinets, indicating 
shelving. Scale, 1:50 (\1/4\<gr-thn-eq> = 1[foot] 0<gr-thn-eq>) minimum.
    7. Sections and details of all critical construction points, 
fastening systems, anchorage methods, special structural items or 
special millwork. Scale as necesaary to provide information, 1:25 (\3/
8\<gr-thn-eq> = 1[foot] 0<gr-thn-eq>) minimum.

                III. Master Drawings for Group Structures

    Drawings for a group of structures (such as for several conditional 
commitments) may be submitted in lieu of drawings for each individual 
property when a number of applications are simultaneously submitted 
involving repetition of the same type structure.
    A. Master plot plan shall include the following:
    1. Scale which will provide the following information in a clear and 
legible manner.
    2. North point.
    3. Location and width of streets and rights-of-way.

[[Page 114]]

    4. Location and dimensions of all easements.
    5. Dimensions of each lot.
    6. Location of each dwelling on lot with basic dimensions.
    7. Dimensions of front, rear and side yards.
    8. Location and dimensions of garage, carports and other accessory 
buildings.
    9. Identification of each lot by number and indication of basic plan 
and elevation type.
    10. Location of walks, driveways and other permanent improvements.
    B. Typical plot plan for each basic type dwelling may be submitted 
in lieu of fully detailing each lot on master plot plan, when topography 
and lot arrangements present no individual planning or construction 
problems.
    1. Information not shown on the typical plot plan shall be included 
on the master plot plan.
    2. Typical plot plans shall not be used for corner lots, lots with 
irregular boundaries, lots involving pronounced topographic variations 
or other lots where individual detailing is necessary.
    3. Location of dwelling on typical lot and full dimensions.
    4. Location and dimensions of all typical improvements, such as 
garage, carport, accessory buildings, walks, drives, steps, porches, 
terraces, trees, shrubs, retaining walls, fences, etc.
    C. Grading may be shown on separate grading plan or on the master 
plot plan. Scale shall be sufficiently large to provide the following 
information in clear and legible manner:
    1. Contours of existing grade at intervals of not more than 1.524 m 
(5 feet). Intervals less the 1.524 m (5 feet) may be required when 
indicated by the character of the topography.
    2. Location of house and accessory buildings on each lot.
    3. Identification of each lot by number.
    4. Elevations in accordance with individual plot plan including 
bench mark and datum or, in lieu of finish grade elevations, contours of 
proposed finish grading may be submitted. Contour intervals selected 
shall be appropriate to the topography of the site.
    5. Lot grading shall be shown by indicating protective slopes and 
approximate location of drainage swales.
    6. Location of drainage outfall, if any drainage is not to a street.
    D. Floor plans, elevations, sections and details shall be submitted 
for each basic plan. Alternate elevations to basic plan may be shown at 
scale, 1:100 (\1/8\<gr-thn-eq> = 1[foot] 0<gr-thn-eq>).

                           IV. Specifications

    Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-2, 
``Description of Materials,'' or other acceptable and comparable 
descriptions of all materials forms shall be submitted with the 
drawings. The forms shall be completed in accordance with the 
instructions on Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 1924-2 to describe the materials to be used in the construction.
    A. Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 1924-2 
may be reproduced if size, format and printed text are identical to the 
current official form. When it is reproduced, the following deletions 
must be made:
    1. All lines indicating FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 form numbers or other Government agency initials and/or 
numbers, and
    2. The United States Government Printing Office (GPO) imprint and 
reference number.
    B. The material identification shall be in sufficient detail to 
fully describe the material, size, grade and when applicable, 
manufacturer's model or identification numbers. When necessary, 
additional sheets must be attached as well as manufacturer's 
specification sheets for equipment and/or special materials, such as 
aluminum siding or carpeting.

         V. Individual Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Systems

    When an individual water and/or sewage disposal system is proposed, 
the following additional information must be submitted:
    A. Approval and recommendations of other authorities.
    1. A written opinion by the health authority having jurisdiction 
that the site is suitable and acceptable for the proposed systems(s) 
and,
    2. If available, a soils report from the local USDA-Soil 
Conservation Service and any recommendations they may have.
    3. Approval of appropriate environmental control authority.
    4. A signature of the health authority on the plot plan indicating 
approval of the design of the proposed system.
    B. Plot Plan. Refer to Example Plot Plan No. 2, attachment 2 to this 
exhibit C (available in any FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 office).
    1. Location and size of septic tank, distribution box, absorption 
field or bed, seepage pits and other essential parts of the sewage 
disposal system and distance to all individual wells, open streams or 
drainageways.
    2. Location of well, service line and other essential parts of the 
water supply system and distance to other wells and/or sewage disposal 
systems.
    3. Exact location of individual systems (water or sewage) on 
adjacent properties and description of system, if available.
    C. Construction details of all component parts of individual water 
supply and sewage disposal systems shall clearly indicate material, 
equipment and construction. Extra

[[Page 115]]

sheets and drawings should be added as necessary to fully explain the 
proposed installation.


<R05>
     Sec. Exhibit D to Subpart A of Part 1924--Thermal Performance 
                         Construction Standards

                               I. Purpose

    This exhibit prescribes thermal performance construction standards 
to be used in all housing loan and grant programs. These requirements 
shall supersede the thermal performance requirements in any of the 
development standards in Sec. 1924.4(h) of this subpart.

                               II. Policy

    All loan or grant applications involving new construction (except 
for new Single Family Housing (SFH)) and all applications for 
conditional commitments (except for new SFH) shall have drawings and 
specifications prepared to comply with paragraphs IV A or C and IV D of 
this exhibit. All new SFH construction shall have drawing and 
specifications prepared to comply with paragraph IV F of this exhibit. 
All existing dwellings to be acquired with FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 loan funds shall be considered in accordance 
with paragraph IV B or C of this exhibit.

                            III. Definitions

    A. British thermal unit (Btu) means the quantity of heat required to 
raise the temperature of one pound (.4535 Kg.) of water by one degree 
Fahrenheit (F). For example, one Btu is the amount of heat needed to 
raise the temperature of one pound of water from 59 degrees F to 60 
degrees F.
    B. Glazing is the material set into a sash or door when used as a 
natural light source and/or for occupant's views of the outdoors.
    C. ``R'' value, thermal resistence, is a unit of measure of the 
ability to resist heat flow. The higher the R value, the higher the 
insulating ability.
    D. ``U'' value is the overall coefficient of heat transmission and 
is the combined thermal value of all the materials in a building 
section. U is the reciprocal of R. Thus U=1/R or R=1/U or 1/C where C is 
the thermal conductance and is the unit of measure of the rate of heat 
flow for the actual thickness of a material one square foot in area at a 
temperature of one degree Fahrenheit. The lower the U value, the higher 
the insulating ability.
    E. Winter degree-day is a unit based on temperature difference and 
time. For any one day, when the mean temperature is less than 65 degrees 
F (18.3 degrees Celsius), there are as many degree-days as the number of 
degrees difference between the mean temperature for the day and 65 
degrees F. The daily mean temperature is computed as half the total of 
the daily maximum and daily minimum temperatures.
    F. CABO Model Energy Code, 1992 Edition (MEC-92)--This code sets 
forth the minimum energy/thermal requirements for the design of new 
buildings and structures or portions thereof and additions to existing 
buildings. The MEC is maintained by the Council of American Building 
Officials (CABO).

                        IV. Minimum Requirements

    A. All multifamily dwellings to be constructed with FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 loan and/or grant funds and 
all repair, remodeling, or renovation work performed on single family 
and multifamily dwellings with FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 loan and/or grant funds shall be in conformance with the 
following, except as provided in paragraphs IV C 3 and IV D of this 
exhibit:

         New Construction--Maximum U Values for Ceiling, Wall And Floor Section of Various Construction
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                        Ceilings              Floors     Glazing
       Winter degree days \1\             \2\       Walls      \3\         \4\               Doors \5\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1000 or less........................         0.05     0.08       0.08        1.13  .............................
1001 to 2500........................          .04      .07        .07         .69  .............................
2501 to 4500........................          .03      .05        .05         .69  Storm door if hollow core
                                                                                    door or if over 25% glass.
4501 to 6000........................          .03      .05        .05         .47  Storm Door.
6001 or more........................         .026      .05        .05         .47  Storm Door.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note. U values are not adjusted for framing. Values calculated for components may be rounded. For example, a
  total R Value of 18.88 converts to a U value of .0529 rounded to .05.
\1\ Winter degree-days may be obtained from the ASHRAE Handbook; the ``NAHB Insulation Manual for Homes/
  Apartments''; local utilities; and the National Climatic Center, Federal Building, Asheville, NC. Manuals are
  available from NAHB RF, Rockville, MD 20850, or NMWIA, 382 Springfield Avenue, Summit, NJ 07901. Other sources
  of degree day data may be used if available from a recognized authority.
\2\ Insulation must be continuous (i.e. no gaps) above all ceiling joists. In pitched roof construction,
  compression of insulation at the outside building walls is permitted to allow a 1<gr-thn-eq> ventilation space
  under the roof sheathing. For any loose fill insulation, a baffle must be provided. Raised trusses are not
  required.
\3\ For floors of heated spaces over unheated basements, unheated garages or unheated crawl spaces, the U value
  of floor section shall not exceed the value shown. A basement, crawl space, or garage shall be considered
  unheated unless it is provided with a positive heat supply to maintain a minimum temperature of 50 degrees F.
  Positive heat supply is defined by ASHRAE as ``heat supplied to a space by design or by heat losses occurring
  from energy-consuming systems or components associated with that space.''

[[Page 116]]

 
 AWhere the walls of an unheated basement or crawl space are insulated in lieu of floor insulation, the total
  heat loss attributed to the floor from the heated area shall not exceed the heat loss calculated for floors
  with required insulation.
 AInsulation may be omitted from floors over heated basement areas or heated crawl spaces if foundation walls
  are insulated. The U value of foundation wall sections shall not exceed the value shown. This requirement
  shall include all foundation wall area, including header joist (band joist), to a point 50 percent of the
  distance from a finish grade to the basement floor level. Equivalent Uo configurations are acceptable.


 Maximum U Values of the Foundation Wall Sections of Heated Basement Not
         Containing Habitable Living Area or Heated Crawl Space
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Winter degree-days (65 F base)         Maximum U value       Glazing*
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2500 or less......................  No requirement..........        1.13
2501 to 4500......................  0.17....................        1.13
4501 or more......................  0.10....................         .69
------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Glazing in heated basement shall be limited to 5 percent of floor area
  unless alternative Uo combination is documented.
\4\ Sliding glass doors are considered as glazing. The glazing value is
  for glass only. Glazing shall be limited to 15 percent of the gross
  area of all exterior walls enclosing heated space, except when
  demonstrated that the winter daily solar heat gain exceeds the heat
  loss and the glass area is properly screened from summer solar heat
  gain.
\5\ 1\3/4\ inch metal-faced door systems with rigid insulation core and
  durable weatherstripping providing a ``U'' value equivalent to a wood
  door with storm door and an infiltration rate no greater than .50 cfm
  per foot of crack length tested according to ASTM E-283 at 1.567 psf
  of air pressure, may be substituted for a conventional door and storm
  door. All doors shall be weatherstripped. Any glazed areas must be
  double-glazed.


       Minimum R Values of Perimeter Insulation for Slabs-on-Grade
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                Minimum R values*
    Winter degree-days (65 F base)     ---------------------------------
                                          Heated slab     Unheated slab
------------------------------------------------------------------------
500 or less...........................             2.8  ................
1000..................................             3.5  ................
2000..................................             4.0               2.5
3000..................................             4.8               2.8
4000..................................             5.5               3.5
5000..................................             6.3               4.2
6000..................................             7.0               4.8
7000..................................             7.8               5.5
8000..................................             8.5               6.2
9000..................................             9.2               6.8
10000 or greater......................            10.0               7.5
------------------------------------------------------------------------
*For increments between degree days shown, R values may be interpolated.

    B. All existing dwellings to be purchased with RH loan and grant 
funds shall be insulated in accordance with the following:

       Existing Construction--Maximum U Values for Ceiling, Wall and Floor Section of Various Construction
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    Walls     Floors
       Winter degree days \1\           Ceilings     \2\      \3,4\      Glazing             Doors \5\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1000 or less........................         0.05  .......       0.08        1.13  .............................
1001 to 2500........................          .04  .......        .07         .69  .............................
2501 to 4500........................          .03  .......        .05         .69  Storm door if hollow core
                                                                                    door or if over 25% glass.
4501 to 6000........................          .03  .......        .05         .69  Storm Door.
6001 to 7000........................         .026  .......        .05         .69  Storm Door.
7001 or more........................         .026  .......        .05         .69  Storm Door.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note. U values are not adjusted for framing. Values calculated for components may be rounded. For example, a
  wall section with a total R Value of 18.88 converts to a U value of .0529 rounded to .05.
\1\ Winter degree days may be obtained from the ASHRAE Handbook; the ``NAHB Insulation Manual for Homes/
  Apartments;'' local utilities; and the National Climatic Center, Federal Building, Asheville, NC. Manuals are
  available from NAHB RF, Rockville, MD 20850, or NMWIA, 382 Springfield Avenue, Summit, NJ 07901. Other sources
  of degree day data may be used if available from a recognized authority.
\2\ Walls shall be insulated as near to new construction standards as economically feasible. Any exterior wall
  framing exposed during repair or rehabilitation work shall have vapor barrier installed and be fully
  insulated.
\3\ For floors of heated spaces over unheated basements, unheated garages or unheated crawl spaces the U value
  of floor section shall not exceed the value shown.
A basement, crawl space or garage shall be considered unheated unless it is provided with a positive heat supply
  to maintain a minimum temperature of 50 degrees F. Positive heat supply is defined by ASHRAE as ``heat
  supplied to a space by design or by heat losses occurring from energy-consuming systems or components
  associated with that space.''
Where the walls of an unheated basement or crawl space are insulated in lieu of floor insulation, the total heat
  loss attributed to the floor from the heated area shall not exceed the heat loss calculated for floors with
  required insulation.

[[Page 117]]

 
Insulation may be omitted from floors over heated basement areas or heated crawl spaces if foundation walls are
  insulated. The U value of foundation wall sections shall not exceed the value shown. This requirement shall
  include all foundation wall area, including header joist (band joist), to a point 50 percent of the distance
  from a finish grade to the basement floor level. Equivalent Uo configurations are acceptable.


 Maximum U Values of the Foundation Wall Sections of Heated Basement Not
         Containing Habitable Living Area or Heated Crawl Space
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Winter degree days (65 F base)         Maximum U value       Glazing*
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2500 or less......................  No requirement..........        1.13
2501 to 4500......................  0.17....................        1.13
4501 or more......................  0.10....................         .69
------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Glazing in heated basement shall be limited to 5 percent of floor area
  unless alternative Uo combination is documented.
\4\ Slab edge insulation should be provided wherever practical in areas
  of 2500 or more winter degree-days. Rigid insulation placed on the
  exterior face of the slab shall be protected by a durable and weather
  resistant material.
\5\ Storm doors are not required for double doors, sliding doors or
  others where installation would be economically infeasible. 1\3/4\
  inch metal-faced door systems with rigid insulation core and durable
  weatherstripping providing a ``U'' value equivalent to a wood door
  with storm door and an infiltration rate no greater than .50 cfm per
  foot of crack length, tested according to ASTM E-283 at 1.567 psf of
  air pressure may be substituted for a conventional door and storm
  door. All doors shall be weatherstripped.

    C. Optional Standards
    Housing design not in compliance with the requirements of paragraph 
IV A or B of this exhibit may be approved in accordance with the 
provisions of this paragraph. Requests for acceptance proposed under 
paragraph C 1 of this exhibit, must be approved by the State Director. 
Requests for acceptance of site-built housing proposed under paragraph C 
2 of this exhibit must be approved by the Administrator. Requests for 
acceptance of manufactured housing proposed under paragraph C 2 of this 
exhibit may be approved by the State Director. All submissions of 
proposed options to the State Director or Administrator shall contain 
complete descriptions of materials, engineering data, test data (when U 
values claimed are lower than the ASHRAE Handbook of Fundamentals), and 
calculations to document the validity of the proposal. All data and 
calculations will be based upon the current edition of the ASHRAE 
Handbook of Fundamentals or other universally accepted data sources.

    1. Overall ``U'' values for enveloped components. The following 
requirements shall be used in determining acceptable options to the 
requirements of paragraphs IV A and IV B of this exhibit.
    a. Uo (gross wall)--Total exterior wall area (opaque wall and window 
and door) shall have a combined thermal transmittance value (Uo value) 
not to exceed the values shown in attachment 1 to this exhibit D 
(available in any FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
office). Equation 1 in attachment 1 shall be used to determine 
acceptable combinations to meet the requirements.
    b. Uo (gross ceiling)--Total ceiling area (opaque ceiling and 
skylights) shall have a combined thermal transmittance value (Uo value) 
not to exceed the values shown in attachment 2 to this exhibit D 
(available in any FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
office). Equation 2 in attachment 2 shall be used to determine 
acceptable combinations to meet the requirements.
    2. Overall structure performance. The following requirements shall 
be used in determining acceptable options to the requirements of 
paragraphs IV A and B of this exhibit.
    a. The methodology must be cost effective to the energy user, and 
must not adversely affect the structural capacity, durability or safety 
aspects of the structure.
    b. All data and calculations must show valid performance comparisons 
between the proposed option and a structure comparable in size, 
configuration, orientation and occupant usage designed in accordance 
with paragraphs IV A or B. Structures may be considered for FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 loan consideration which can 
be shown by accepted engineering practice to have energy consumption 
equal to or less than those which would be attained in a representative 
structure utilizing the requirements of paragraphs IV A or B.
    3. Special consideration for seasonally occupied farm labor housing. 
The following sets forth the minimum acceptable options to the 
requirements of paragraphs IV A or B of this exhibit for seasonally 
occupied housing serving as security for farm labor housing loans and 
grants.
    a. When the period of occupancy does not encounter 500 or more 
heating degree-days (HDD) as determined by an average of the previous 10 
years based upon local climatological data published by the National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Environmental Data Service, the 
standards of paragraphs IV A or B will not apply.
    b. When the period of use exceeds 500 HDD, the 10-year average value 
for the period of occupancy shall be used to determine the degree to 
which the thermal insulation requirements of paragraphs IV A or B shall 
apply.
    c. If mechanical cooling is provided and the period of occupancy 
encounters more

[[Page 118]]

than 700 cooling degree-days (CDD), as determined by an average of the 
previous 8 years based upon local climatological data published by the 
same source cited in paragraph IV C3a above, the thermal insulation 
requirements for 1,000 and less degree-days as stated in paragraph IV A 
or B shall apply.
    D. Energy efficient construction practices. This section prescribes 
those items of design and quality control which are necessary to 
guarantee the energy efficiency of homes built according to the 
standards of this exhibit. Also included are recommendations for extra 
energy efficiency in dwellings. This section does not apply to new SFH 
construction.
    1. Infiltration. a. Requirements: All construction shall be 
performed in such a manner as to provide a building envelope free of 
excessive infiltration.
    (i) Caulking and sealants. Exterior joints around windows and door 
frames, between wall cavities and window or door frames, between wall 
and foundation, between wall and roof, between wall panels, at 
penetrations of utility services through walls, floors and roofs, and 
all other openings in the exterior envelope shall be caulked, gasketed, 
weatherstripped, or otherwise sealed. Caulking shall be silicone rubber 
base or butyl rubber base, conforming to Federal Specifications TT-S-
1543 and TT-S-1657 respectively, or materials demonstrating equivalent 
performance in resilience and durability.
    (ii) Windows shall comply with ANSI 134.1, NWMA 15-2; the air 
infiltration rate shall not exceed 0.5 ft 3/min per ft. of sash crack.
    (iii) Sliding glass doors shall comply with ANSI 134.2, NWM 15-3; 
the air infiltration rate shall not exceed .5 ft 3/min per square ft. of 
door area.
    (iv) All insulation placed in open cavity walls shall be installed 
so that all space behind electrical switches and receptacles, plumbing, 
ductwork and other obstructions in the cavity are insulated as 
completely as possible. Insulation shall be omitted on the side facing 
the conditioned area; however, the vapor barrier in walls must not be 
cut or destroyed.
    b. Recommendations: (i) Wrap outside corners of wall sheathing with 
15 lb. asphalt impregnated building felt before siding application.
    (ii) Utilize vestibules for entry doors, especially those facing 
into the direction of winter wind.
    (iii) Install plumbing, mechanical and electrical components in 
interior partitions as much as possible. All water piping should be 
insulated from freezing temperatures.
    2. Heating and/or Cooling Equipment. a. Requirements: All mechanical 
equipment for heating and/or cooling habitable space shall be designed 
to provide economy of operations.
    (i) All space heating equipment (including fireplaces) requiring 
combustion air shall be sealed combustion types, or be located in a 
nonconditioned area (such as unheated basements) or adequate combustion 
air must be provided from outside the conditioned space.
    (ii) All ductwork shall be designed and installed to minimize 
leakage. All metal to metal connections shall be mechanically joined and 
taped.
    b. Recommendations: (i) Whenever possible, locate ductwork inside of 
conditioned areas in dropped ceilings, interior partitions or other 
similar areas.
    (ii) Locate outside cooling units in areas not subject to direct 
sunlight or heat buildup.
    3. Vapor Barrier. a. Requirements: Adequate vapor barriers must be 
provided adjacent to the interior finish material of the wall or other 
closed envelope components which do not have ventilation space on the 
non-conditioned side of the insulation.
    (i) A vapor barrier at the inside of the wall or other closed 
envelope component must have a permeability (perm) rating less than that 
of any other material in the component and in no case have a perm rating 
greater than one. All vapor barriers must be sealed around all openings 
in the interior surface. Vapor barriers are not required in ceilings and 
floors. Continuous vapor barriers on ceilings, walls, and floors require 
adequate moisture vapor control in the conditioned space.
    (ii) All vapor producing or exhaust equipment shall be ducted to the 
outside and equipped with dampers. This equipment includes rangehoods, 
bathroom exhaust fans and clothes dryers. If a dwelling design proposes 
the use of windows to satisfy the kitchen and/or bathroom ventilation 
requirements of the development standards, the incorporation of 
dehumidification equipment should be considered in accordance with 
paragraph IV D 3 b. Exhaust of any equipment shall not terminate in an 
attic or crawl space.
    b. Recommendation: Forced air heating/cooling systems should include 
humidification/dehumidification systems where conditions indicate.
    E. [Reserved]
    F. New SFH construction. New SFH construction shall meet the 
requirements of CABO Model Energy Code, 1992 Edition (MEC-92).
    G. New manufactured housing.
    The Uo Value Zone indicated on the ``Heating Certificate'' for 
comfort heating shall be equal to or greater than the HUD Zone listed in 
the following table:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             FMHCSS (HUD
          RHS climate zones (winter degree days)              code) Uo
                                                             value zones
------------------------------------------------------------------------
0-1000....................................................            1

[[Page 119]]

 
1001-2500.................................................            2
2501-4500.................................................            2
4501-6000.................................................            3
<ls-thn-eq> 6000..........................................            3
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Example: If a manufactured home is to be located in a geographic 
area having between 2501 and 4500 RHS winter degree days, the Agency 
will accept a Uo value Zone 2 unit or Zone 3 unit constructed to the HUD 
FMHCSS.

    If a central air conditioning system is provided by the home 
manufacturer, a ``Comfort Cooling Certificate'' must be permanently 
affixed to an interior surface of the unit that is readily visible. This 
certificate may be combined with the heating certificate on the data 
plate.
    V. General Design Recommendations:
    A. Orient homes with greatest glass area facing south with adequate 
overhangs to control solar gain during non-heating periods. Examples of 
proper roof overhangs are given in attachment 3 to this exhibit D 
(available in any FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
office).
    B. Arrange plantings with evergreen wind buffers on north side and 
deciduous trees on south.
    C. Whenever possible, orient entry door away from winter winds.
    D. Design house with simple shape to minimize exterior wall area.
    E. Minimize glass areas within constraints of required light and 
ventilation, applicable safety codes and other appropriate 
consideration.
    F. Minimize the amount of paved surface adjacent to the structure 
where heat gain is not desirable.
    VI. State Supplements: State supplements or policies will not be 
issued or adopted to either supplement or set requirements different 
from those of this exhibit without the prior written approval of the 
National Office.

[52 FR 8002, Mar. 13, 1987, as amended at 54 FR 6874, Feb. 15, 1989; 59 
FR 43723, Aug. 25, 1994; 64 FR 48085, Sept. 2, 1999]

    Effective Date Note: At 72 FR 70221, Dec. 11, 2007, exhibit D to 
subpart A of part 1924 was amended by removing the last sentence in 
paragraph II, paragraph IV B, and the words ``or B'' in paragraphs IV C 
introductory text and IV C 3c, and by revising the words ``paragraphs IV 
A and IV B'' in paragraph IV C 1 to read ``paragraph IV A,'' the words 
``paragraphs IV A and B'' in paragraph IV C 2 to read ``paragraph IV 
A,'' and the words ``paragraphs IV A or B'' in the first and last 
sentences of paragraph IV C 2b, and in paragraphs IV C 3 introductory 
text, IV C 3a and IV C 3b to read ``paragraph IV A,'' effective January 
10, 2008.


<R05>
   Sec. Exhibit E to Subpart A of Part 1924--Voluntary National Model 
                             Building Codes

    The following documents address the health and safety aspects of 
buildings and related structures and are voluntary national model 
building codes as defined in Sec. 1924.4(h)(2) of this subpart. Copies 
of these documents may be obtained as indicated below:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Building code                Plumbing code              Mechanical code             Electrical code
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
BOCA Basic/National Building  BOCA Basic/National         BOCA Basic/National         National Electrical Code
 Code \1\.                     Plumbing Code \1\.          Mechanical Code \1\.        \5\
Standard Building Code \2\..  Standard Plumbing Code \2\  Standard Mechanical Code    ..........................
                                                           \2\.
Uniform Building Code \3\...  Uniform Plumbing Code \3\.  Uniform Mechanical Code     ..........................
                                                           \3\.
CABO One and Two Family       ..........................  ..........................  ..........................
 Dwelling Code \4\.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club
  Hills, Illinois 60477.
\2\ Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213-1206.
\3\ International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California 90601.
\4\ Council of American Building Officials, 5203 Leesburg Pike, Falls Church, Virginia 22041.
\5\ National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02269.


<R05>
         Sec. Exhibit F to Subpart A of Part 1924--Payment Bond

KNOW ALL PERSONS BY
THESE PRESENTS: that
________________________________________________________________________
(Name of Contractor)
________________________________________________________________________
(Address of Contractor)
a ----------------,
(Corporation, Partnership or Individual)
hereinafter called
PRINCIPAL and
________________________________________________________________________
(Name of Surety)
hereinafter called SURETY, are held and firm
bound unto______________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
(Name of Owner)
________________________________________________________________________
(Address of Owner)


[[Page 120]]


hereinafter called OWNER and the United States of America acting through 
the Farmers Home Administration or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 hereinafter referred to as GOVERNMENT, and unto all persons, 
firms, and corporations who or which may furnish labor, or who furnish 
materials to perform as described under the contract and to their 
successors and assigns in the total aggregate penal sum of ------, ----
-- Dollars ($------) in lawful money of the United States, for the 
payment of which sum well and truly to be made, we bind ourselves, our 
heirs, executors, administrators, successors, and assigns, jointly and 
severally, firmly by these presents.

THE CONDITION OF THIS OBLIGATION is such that whereas, the PRINCIPAL 
entered into a certain contract with the OWNER, dated the -------------- 
day of ----------------19----, a copy of which is hereto attached and 
made a part hereof for the construction of:

________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________

NOW, THEREFORE, if the PRINCIPAL shall promptly make payment to all 
persons, firms, and corporations furnishing materials for or performing 
labor in the prosecution of the WORK provided for in such contract, and 
any authorized extension or modification thereof, including all amounts 
due for materials, lubricants, oil, gasoline, coal and coke, repairs on 
machinery; equipment and tools, consumed or used in connection with the 
construction of such WORK, and for all labor cost incurred in such WORK 
including that by a SUBCONTRACTOR, and to any mechanic or materialman 
lienholder whether it acquires its lien by operation of State or Federal 
law; then this obligation shall be void, otherwise to remain in full 
force and effect.
    PROVIDED, that beneficiaries or claimants hereunder shall be limited 
to the SUBCONTRACTORS, and persons, firms, and corporations having a 
direct contract with the PRINCIPAL or its SUBCONTRACTORS.
    PROVIDED, FURTHER, that the said SURETY for value received hereby 
stipulates and agrees that no change, extension of time, alteration or 
addition to the terms of the contract or to the WORK to be performed 
thereunder or the SPECIFICATIONS accompanying the same shall in any way 
affect its obligation on this BOND, and it does hereby waive notice of 
any such change, extension of time, alteration or addition to the terms 
of this contract or to the WORK or to the SPECIFICATIONS.
    PROVIDED, FURTHER, that no suit or action shall be commenced 
hereunder by any claimant: (a) Unless claimant, other than one having a 
direct contract with the PRINCIPAL (or with the GOVERNMENT in the event 
the GOVERNMENT is performing the obligations of the OWNER), shall have 
given written notice to any two of the following: The PRINCIPAL, the 
OWNER, or the SURETY above named within ninety (90) days after such 
claimant did or performed the last of the work or labor, or furnished 
the last of the materials for which said claim is made, stating with 
substantial accuracy the amount claimed and the name of the party to 
whom the materials were furnished, or for whom the work or labor was 
done or performed. Such notice shall be served by mailing the same by 
register mail or certified mail, postage prepaid, in an envelope 
addressed to the PRINCIPAL, OWNER, or SURETY, at any place where an 
office is regularly maintained for the transaction of business, or 
served in any manner in which legal process may be served in the state 
in which the aforesaid project is located, save that such service need 
not be made by a public officer. (b) After the expiration of one (1) 
year following the date of which PRINCIPAL ceased work on said CONTRACT, 
it being understood, however, that if any limitation embodied in the 
BOND is prohibited by any law controlling the construction hereof, such 
limitation shall be deemed to be amended so as to be equal to the 
minimum period of limitation permitted by such law.
    PROVIDED, FURTHER, that it is expressly agreed that the BOND shall 
be deemed amended automatically and immediately, without formal and 
separate amendments hereto, upon amendment to the Contract not 
increasing the contract price more than 20 percent, so as to bind the 
PRINCIPAL and the SURETY to the full and faithful performance of the 
Contract as so amended. The term ``Amendment'', wherever used in this 
BOND and whether referring to this BOND, the contract or the loan 
Documents shall include any alteration, addition, extension or 
modification of any character whatsoever.
    PROVIDED, FURTHER, that no final settlement between the OWNER or 
GOVERNMENT and the CONTRACTOR shall abridge the right of any benficiary 
hereunder, whose claim may be unsatisfied.
    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, this instrument is executed in [number] 
counterparts, each one of which shall be deemed an original, this the --
-- day of ------.
    ATTEST:
________________________________________________________________________

Principal
________________________________________________________________________
(Principal) Secretary

(SEAL)

By ------(s)
________________________________________________________________________
(Address)
________________________________________________________________________
Witness as to Principal

[[Page 121]]

________________________________________________________________________
(Address)
________________________________________________________________________
Surety

ATTEST:
________________________________________________________________________
Witness as to Surety
________________________________________________________________________
(Address)
By______________________________________________________________________
 Attorney-in-Fact
________________________________________________________________________
(Address)

    Note. Date of BOND must not be prior to date of Contract.
    If CONTRACTOR is partnership, all partners should execute BOND.
    Important: Surety companies executing BONDS must appear on the 
Treasury Department's most current list (Circular 570 as amended) and be 
authorized to transact business in the state where the project is 
located.


<R05>
       Sec. Exhibit G to Subpart A of Part 1924--Performance Bond

KNOW ALL PERSONS BY THESE
PRESENTS: that__________________________________________________________

________________________________________________________________________
(Name of Contractor)

________________________________________________________________________
(Address of Contractor)

________________________________________________________________________
 (Corportion, Partnership, or Individual)
hereinafter called PRINCIPAL, and

________________________________________________________________________
(Name of Surety)

________________________________________________________________________
(Address of Surety)

hereinafter called SURETY, are held and firmly bound unto
________________________________________________________________________

________________________________________________________________________
(Name of Owner)

________________________________________________________________________
(Address of Owner)

hereinafter called OWNER, and the United States of America acting 
through the Farmers Home Administration or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 hereinafter referred to as the GOVERNMENT in the 
total aggregate penal sum of
________________________________________________________________________
Dollars ($------)

in lawful money of the United States, for the payment of which sum well 
and truly to be made, we bind ourselves, our heirs, executors, 
administrators, successors, and assigns, jointly and severally, firmly 
by these presents.
    THE CONDITION OF THIS OBLIGATION is such that whereas, the PRINCIPAL 
entered into a certain contract with the OWNER, dated the ---- day of --
---- 19 --, a copy of which is hereto attached and made a part hereof 
for the construction of:

________________________________________________________________________

________________________________________________________________________
    NOW, THEREFORE, if the PRINCIPAL shall well, truly and faithfully 
perform its duties, all the undertakings, covenants, terms, conditions, 
and agreements of said contract during the original term thereof, and 
any extensions thereof which may be granted by the OWNER, or GOVERNMENT, 
with or without notice to the SURETY and during the guaranty period and 
if the PRINCIPAL shall satisfy all claims and demands incurred under 
such contract, and shall fully indemnify and save harmless the OWNER and 
GOVERNMENT from all costs and damages which it may suffer by reason of 
failure to do so, and shall reimburse and repay the OWNER and GOVERNMENT 
all outlay and expense which the OWNER and GOVERNMENT may incur in 
making good any default, then this obligation shall be void, otherwise 
to remain in full force and effect.
    PROVIDED, FURTHER, that the liability of the PRINCIPAL AND SURETY 
hereunder to the GOVERNMENT shall be subject to the same limitations and 
defenses as may be available to them against a claim hereunder by the 
OWNER, provided, however, that the GOVERNMENT may, at its option, 
perform any obligations of the OWNER required by the contract.
    PROVIDED, FURTHER, that the said SURETY, for value received hereby 
stipulates and agrees that no change, extension of time, alteration or 
addition to the terms of the contract or to WORK to be performed 
thereunder or the SPECIFICATIONS accompanying same shall in any way 
affect its obligation on this BOND, and it does hereby waive notice of 
any such change, extension of time, alteration or addition to the terms 
of the contract or to the WORK or to the SPECIFICATIONS.
    PROVIDED, FURTHER, that it is expressly agreed that the BOND shall 
be deemed amended automatically and immediately, without formal and 
separate amendments hereto, upon amendment to the Contract not 
increasing the contract price more than 20 percent, so as to bind the 
PRINCIPAL and the SURETY to the full and faithful performance of the 
CONTRACT as so amended. The term ``Amendment'', wherever used in this 
BOND, and whether referring to this BOND, the Contract or the Loan 
Documents shall include any alteration, addition, extension, or 
modification of any character whatsoever.
    PROVIDED, FURTHER, that no final settlement between the OWNER or 
GOVERNMENT and the PRINCIPAL shall abridge the right of the other 
beneficiary hereunder,

[[Page 122]]

whose claim may be unsatisfied. The OWNER and GOVERNMENT are the only 
beneficiaries hereunder.

    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, this instrument is executed in [Number] 
counterparts, each one of which shall be deemed an original, this the --
-- day of ------.

ATTEST:

Principal

________________________________________________________________________
(Principal) Secretary

(SEAL)

________________________________________________________________________

Witness as to Principal

________________________________________________________________________

(Address)

By ----------(s)

________________________________________________________________________

(Address)

________________________________________________________________________

________________________________________________________________________
Surety

ATTEST:

________________________________________________________________________
Witness as to Surety

________________________________________________________________________
(Address)
By______________________________________________________________________
 Attorney-in Fact
________________________________________________________________________
(Address)
________________________________________________________________________

________________________________________________________________________


<R05>
  Sec. Exhibit H to Subpart A of Part 1924--Prohibition of Lead-Based 
                                 Paints

                               I. Purpose

    This exhibit prescribes the methods to be used to comply with the 
requirements of the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act, Public 
Law 91-695, as amended, (42 U.S.C. 4801 et seq.) and the amendment to 
section 501 (3) of Public Law 91-695 (42 U.S.C. 4841 (3)) as amended by 
the National Consumer Health Information and Health Promotion Act of 
1976, Public Law 94-317.

                               II. Policy

    The Farmers Home Administration (FmHA) or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 shall not permit the use of lead-based paint on 
applicable surfaces of any housing or buildings purchased, repaired, or 
rehabilitated for human habitation with financial assistance provided by 
this agency. Paints used on applicable surfaces shall not contain more 
than 0.06 percent lead by weight calculated as lead metal in the total 
nonvolatile content of liquid paints or in the dried film of paint 
already applied.

                            III. Definitions

    A. Housing and buildings mean any house, apartment, or structure 
intended for human habitation. This includes any institutional structure 
where persons reside, such as an orphanage, boarding school, dormitory, 
day care center or extended care facility, college housing, domestic or 
migratory labor housing, hospitals, group practice facilities, community 
facilities, and business or industrial facilities.
    B. Applicable surfaces means all interior surfaces, whether 
accessible or not, and those exterior surfaces which are readily 
accessible to children under 7 years of age, such as stairs, decks, 
porches, railings, windows, and doors.
    C. Lead-based paint means any paint containing more than .5 of 1 
percentum lead by weight, or with respect to paint manufactured after 
June 22, 1977, lead-based paint containing more than six one-hundredths 
of 1 percentum lead by weight.

                            IV. Requirements

    A. All new housing and buildings shall comply with paragraph II of 
this exhibit H.
    B. For all existing housing and buildings built after 1950, on which 
a loan is closed after July 19, 1978, FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 requires that the applicant, borrower or tenant be 
notified of the potential hazard of lead-based paints, of the symptoms 
and treatment of lead poisoning, and of the importance and availability 
of maintenance and removal techniques for eliminating such hazards. This 
will be accomplished by providing each applicant, borrower and/or tenant 
with a copy of attachment 1 to this exhibit H, ``Lead-based Paint 
Hazards, Symptoms, Treatment and Techniques for Eliminating Hazards,'' 
available in any FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
County Office. Copies of attachment 1 may be obtained by the County 
Supervisor from the Finance Office, 1520 Market Street, St. Louis, MO 
63103.
    C. For all existing housing or buildings built before 1950 on which 
a loan is closed after July 19, 1978, FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 requires that the applicant, borrower and/or tenant 
be notified as in paragraph IV B and a copy of attachment 2 to this 
exhibit H, ``Caution Note on Lead-Based Paint Hazard,'' available in any 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 County Office, 
shall be delivered to the hands of the applicant, borrowers and/or 
tenant.
    D. For all property transfers and inventory property sales, 
attachments 1 and 2 to this

[[Page 123]]

Exhibit H (available in any FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 office) shall be handed to the purchaser by the FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 representative.
    E. All inventory housing or buildings built before 1950 to be 
repaired, renovated, or rehabilitated shall have tests for lead content, 
and where found to be hazardous, shall have any interior lead-based 
paint removed entirely. Loose or cracked surfaces shall be cleaned down 
to the base surface before repainting with a paint containing not more 
than six one-hundredths of 1 percentum lead by weight in the total 
nonvolatile content of the paint or the equivalent measure of lead in 
the dried film of paint already applied or both. Contracting officers 
shall include the following provision prohibiting the use of lead-based 
paint in all contracts and subcontracts for construction or 
rehabilitation of housing or buildings:

                      Lead-Based Paint Prohibition

    No lead-based paint containing more than .5 of 1 percentum lead by 
weight (calculated as lead metal) in the total nonvolatile content of 
the paint, or the equivalent measure of lead in the dried film of paint 
already applied, or both, or with respect to paint manufactured after 
June 22, 1977, no lead-based paint containing more than .06 of 1 
percentum lead by weight (calculated as lead metal) in the total 
nonvolatile content of the paint, or the equivalent measure of lead in 
the dried film of paint already applied, or both, shall be used in the 
construction or rehabilitation of residential structures under this 
contract or any subsequent subcontractors.
    Authority: This amendment is made under provisions of 5 U.S.C. 301, 
40 U.S.C. 486 (c).
    Done at ----------------, -------- this ------------ day of --------
------------, 19----.
----------------------------____________________________________________
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 Representative

                               V. Summary

    Section 401 of the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act as 
amended by the National Consumer Health Information and Health Promotion 
Act of 1976, Pub. L. 94-317, provides a requirement that each federal 
agency issue regulations and to take such other steps necessary to 
prohibit the use of lead-based paint on all applicable surfaces in 
Federal and Federally-assisted construction or rehabilitation of 
residential structures. The Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act, 
Pub. L. 91-695, January 13, 1971, provides for grants to units of 
general local government in any state for the purpose of detecting and 
treating incidents of lead-based paint poisoning. Title II of this Act 
also provides for grants to the same units to identify those areas of 
risk including testing to detect the presence of lead-based paint on 
surfaces of residential housing.


<R05>
 Sec. Exhibit I to Subpart A of Part 1924--Guidelines for Seasonal Farm 
                              Labor Housing

                               Section 100

    General--This exhibit sets forth the guidelines and minimum 
standards for planning and construction of new Labor Housing (LH) that 
will be occupied on a seasonal basis. Rehabilitation LH projects will be 
in substantial conformance with these guidelines and standards. A 
``seasonal basis'' is defined as 6 months or less per year. Seasonal 
housing for the farmworker need not be convertible to year-round 
occupancy; however, the living units shall be designed for the intended 
type of tenant, the time of occupancy, the location, the specific site, 
and the planned method of operation. It is important that the design of 
the LH site and buildings will help to create a pleasing lifestyle which 
will promote human dignity and pride among its tenants.

                               Section 200

    Codes and Regulations--Compliance is required with National, state 
and local codes or regulations affecting design, construction, 
mechanical, electrical, fire prevention, sanitation, and site 
improvement.

                               Section 300

                                Planning

    300-1 Complete architectural/engineering services in accordance with 
this subpart will be required if an LH grant is involved or the LH loan 
will involve more than four individual family units, or any number of 
group living units, or dormitory units accommodating 20 or more persons.
    300-2 Buildings and site design shall provide for a safe, secure, 
economical, healthful, and attractive living facility and environment 
suited to the needs of the domestic farm laborer and his/her family.
    300-3 At least 5 percent of the individual family units in a 
project, or one unit, whichever is greater, and all common use 
facilities will be accessible to or adaptable for physically handicapped 
persons. This requirement may be modified if a recipient/borrower shows, 
through a market survey acceptable to FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354, that a different percentage of accessible or 
adapatable units is more appropriate for a particular project and its 
service area.

                               Site Design

    301-1 General--The site design shall be arranged to utilize and 
preserve the favorable

[[Page 124]]

features and characteristics of the property and to avoid or minimize 
the potential harmful effect of unfavorable features. Particular 
attention is directed to Sec. 1944.164 (l), (m) and (n) of subpart D of 
part 1944 of this chapter with reference to compliance with subpart G of 
part 1940 of this chapter. Some of the features which must be considered 
are the topography, drainage, access, building orientation to sun and 
breezes; and advantageous features, such as vegetation, trees, good 
views, etc. or disadvantageous features, such as offensive odors, 
noxious plants, noise, dust, health hazards, etc.
    301-2 Drainage--Surface and subsurface drainage systems shall be 
provided in accordance with the applicable development standard and 
subpart C of part 1924 of this chapter.
    301-3 Water and Sewage Disposal--Water supply and sewage disposal 
installations shall comply with subpart C of part 1924 of this chapter, 
the applicable development standard and all governing state and local 
department of health requirements. Where environmentally and 
economically feasible, the LH facility shall connect to pubic water and 
waste disposal systems.
    301-4 Electrical--Adequate electrical service shall be provided for 
exterior and interior lighting and for the operation of equipment.
    301-5 Vehicular Access and Parking.
    301-5.1 Safe and convenient all-weather roads shall be provided to 
connect the site and its improvements to the off-site public road.
    301-5.2 All-weather drives and parking shall be provided for 
tenants, and for trucks and buses as needed within the site. Driveways, 
parking areas and walkway locations shall be in substantial conformance 
with the applicable development standard.
    301-6 Walks:
    301-6.1 Walks shall be provided for safe convenient access to all 
dwellings and for safe pedestrian circulation throughout the development 
between locations and facilities where major need for pedstrian access 
can be anticipated, such as laundry, parking to dwelling units, common 
dining rooms, etc.
    301-6.2 Walkways shall be hard surface, such a concrete, asphalt, or 
stablized gravel, and shall be adequately drained.
    301-7 Building Location:
    301-7.1 Side and rear yards and distances between buildings shall 
conform to the applicable development standard.
    301-8. Garbage and Refuse:
    301-8.1 Garbage and refuse containers for individual units are 
required and shall be stored on durable functional racks or shall be 
located in a central screened area with easily cleaned surfaces. Single 
containers for multiple units shall be screened and in locations 
designed to accommodate collection vehicle functions.
    301-9 Fencing:
    301-9.1 Fencing used in the site design for project privacy or 
building security shall be harmonious in appearance with other fences 
and surrounding facilities which fall within the same view.
    301-10 Outdoor living:
    301-10.1 All public areas where pedestrian use can be anticipated 
after sunset shall be adequately lighted for security purposes, such as 
walkways to common use facilities--laundry, dining halls, building 
entrances, parking areas, etc.
    301-11 Planting and Landscaping:
    301-11.1 Planting and lawns or ground covers shall be provided as 
required to protect the site from erosion, control dust, for active and 
passive recreation areas, and provide a pleasant environment.

                             Building Design

    302-1.1 Living Units Design:
    302-1.1 Individual Family Unit--One family or extended family to a 
unit which shall contain adequate space for living, dining, kitchen, 
bath and bedrooms. Multifamily type units are required whenever possible 
for economy of site and building construction.
    a. The minimum total net living unit size shall be 400 square feet. 
This size assumes occupancy of four persons. Units planned for 
additional occupants shall include an additional 60 square feet of 
living area per person.
    b. A living/dining area shall be provided to accommodate a table and 
chairs with adequate dining and circulation space for the intended 
number of occupants. The living/dining area should be combined with the 
kitchen area.
    c. The kitchen shall contain a sink, cooking range and refrigerator. 
A minimum free countertop area of six square feet is required. A minimum 
of 40 square feet of shelf area is required.
    d. Each bathroom shall contain adequate space and circulation for a 
bathtub and/or shower, water closet and lavatory. Access to the bathroom 
shall not be through another bedroom in dwelling units containing more 
than one bedroom.
    e. Bedroom areas separate from living areas are required. The design 
of the unit shall provide a minimum of 50 square feet of sleeping area 
per intended occupant including storage. Housing for families with 
children shall have a separate bedroom or sleeping area for the adult 
couples. A two foot by two foot shelf with a two foot long clothes 
hanging rod is required for each occupant.
    302-1.2 Group Living Unit--A living unit designed for the occupancy 
of more than one family or for separate occupancy of male and/or female 
groups. Common bath spaces shall be contained in the same building. 
Group living units for families shall have separate bedrooms for each 
adult couple.

[[Page 125]]

    a. The design of the unit shall provide for a minimum of 620 square 
feet of total net living area for eight persons and an additional 60 
square feet for each additional occupant. Additional area shall be 
planned for a second bathroom when anticipated occupancy will exceed 
eight persons, or if it will be occupied by persons of both sexes.
    b. The kitchen shall contain an adequate sink, cooking range, 
refrigerator, and space the size of which is commensurate with the needs 
of the group living unit. A minimum of free countertop area of eight 
square feet is required. A minimum of 50 square feet of shelf area is 
required.
    c. Refer to paragraph 302-1.1 b for living/dining requirements.
    d. Each bathroom shall contain adequate space and circulation for 
comfortable access to, and use of, fixtures which will include a bathtub 
and/or shower, water closet and lavatory. In no case shall minimum 
fixtures be less than that required per paragraph 302-1.3 c below.
    e. Refer to paragraph 301-1.1 e for bedroom requirements.
    302.1.3 Dormitory Living Unit--A building which provides common 
sleeping quarters for persons of the same sex and may or may not contain 
kitchen and/or dining facilities in the same building as the sleeping 
quarters.
    a. The design of areas for sleeping purposes, using single beds, 
shall provide for not less than 72 square feet per occupant including 
storage.
    b. The design of areas for sleeping purposes, using double bunk 
beds, shall provide for not less than 40 square feet per occupant. 
Triple bunk beds will not be allowed.
    c. The design of each dormitory building must include a water closet 
and a bathtub or shower for each 12 occupants, and a lavatory for each 8 
persons. Urinals may be substituted for men's water closets on the basis 
of one urinal for one water closet, up to maximum of one-third of the 
required water closets.
    d. Adequate kitchen and dining facilities must be provided which may 
be in the dormitory building or detached at a distance of not more than 
200 feet from the sleeping quarters. In either case, the space must 
contain adequate cooking ranges, refrigerators, sinks, countertop, food 
storage shelves, tables and chairs, and circulation space. These 
facilities will comply with the requirements of the ``Food Service 
Sanitation Ordinance and Code,'' part V of the ``Food Service Sanitation 
Manual,'' U.S. Public Health Service Publication 934 (1965).
    302-2 Other Facilities:
    302-2.1 General--Other facilities, authorized by subpart D of part 
1944 of this chapter, needed by farm workers may be provided in several 
ways: part of a living unit, located in the project, or, with the 
exception of laundry facilities, available nearby.
    302-2.2 Laundry Facilities--Laundry facilities shall be required on-
site. Drying yards shall be provided if dryer units are not provided. 
The design of washing facilities shall plan for a minimum rate of one 
washer for each 20 occupants. One drying unit may be provided for every 
two washers, if automatic dryers are customarily provided for rental 
housing in the community. Laundry facilities shall have adequate space 
for loading the units, circulation, and clothes folding.
    302-2.3 Office and Maintenance--An office and maintenance space 
shall be provided or available, commensurate with the number of living 
units served, and shall meet the criteria of the FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 Manual of Acceptable Practices. If 
necessary, the maintenance space shall have sufficient area to 
accommodate furniture storage.
    302-2.4 Child Care Center--Where feasible, a child care center may 
be included to provide supervised activity and safety for children while 
the parents work. Supervisors and workers for such centers are sometimes 
enlisted on a volunteer basis and the cost borne by nonprofit 
associations or community organizations. Grants are sometimes available 
through Federal or state programs. Consequently, the design of the child 
care center should meet the requirements of those sources providing 
organizational personnel and/or financing.
    302-2.5 Manager's Dwelling--If a manager's dwelling unit is to be 
provided as a part of the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 loan or grant, it will meet these guidelines. However, if it is 
necessary to provide a year-round caretaker/manager dwelling unit with 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 loan or grant 
funds, it will meet the applicable development standard.
    302-2.6 Recreation--Outdoor recreation space is required and shall 
be commensurate with the needs of the occupants. Active and passive 
recreation areas will be provided which may consist of outdoor sitting 
areas, playfields, tot lots and play equipment.

                          General Requirements

    303-1 Materials and Construction--All materials and their 
installation in a LH facility shall meet the applicable development 
standard. Any exceptions to these requirements for materials and their 
installation must be obtained with the approval of the FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 National Office. Material 
should be selected that is durable and easily cleaned and maintained.
    303-2 Fire Protection--Fire protection and egress shall be provided 
to comply with the applicable development standard.
    303-3 Light, Ventilation, Screening--Natural light and ventilation 
requirements as specified in the applicable development

[[Page 126]]

standard shall be followed. Screening of all exterior openings is 
required.
    303-4 Ceiling Heights--Ceiling heights of habitable rooms shall be a 
minimum of seven feet six inches clear, and seven feet in halls or baths 
in dwelling units. Public rooms shall have a minimum of eight feet clear 
ceiling height. Sloping ceilings shall have at least seven feet six 
inches for \1/2\ the room with no portion less than five feet in height.
    303-5 Heating and Cooling--Heating and cooling and/or air 
circulation equipment shall be installed as needed for the comfort of 
the tenants, considering the climate and time of year the facility will 
be in operation. Maximum feasible use of passive solar heating and 
cooling techniques shall be required. All equipment installed will be in 
accordance with the applicable development standard to protect the 
health and safety of occupants.
    303-6 Plumbing--Plumbing materials and their installation shall meet 
the applicable development standard. Hot water will be required to all 
living units, baths, kitchens and laundry facilities.
    303-7 Insulation, Thermal Standards, Winterization--Insulation will 
be required where either heating or cooling is provided as per paragraph 
303-5 above or when climatic conditions dictate a need for insulation. 
Insulation Standards will comply with exhibit D, paragraph IV C 3, of 
this subpart, or the state insulation standards, whichever are the more 
stringent.
    303-8 Electrical--Electrical design, equipment and installation 
shall comply with the requirements of the latest edition of the National 
Electrical Code, and the applicable development standard for materials 
and their installation. Individual family units may be separately 
metered; other types of dwelling units may be separately metered as 
required.
    303-9 Security and Winterization--Adequate management and physical 
measures will be provided as necessary to protect the facility during 
off-season periods, including adequate heating and insulation as 
required.

[52 FR 8002, Mar. 13, 1987, as amended at 52 FR 19283, May 22, 1987; 58 
FR 38922, July 21, 1993]


<R05>
   Sec. Exhibit J to Subpart A of Part 1924--Manufactured Home Sites, 
 Rental Projects and Subdivisions: Development, Installation and Set-Up

Part A--Introduction
Part B--Construction and Land Development
Part C--Drawings, Specifications, Contract Documents and Other 
          Documentation
Part D--Inspection of Development Work

                          Part A--Introduction

    I. Purpose and Scope. This exhibit describes and identifies 
acceptable site development, installation and set-up practices and 
concepts for manufactured homes. It is intended for FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 field personnel, builders, 
developers, sponsors, and others participating in FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 housing programs.
    This exhibit applies to all manufactured homes (except those 
referenced in exhibit B of this subpart) on scattered sites or in rental 
projects and subdivisions and covers the requirements for design and 
construction of manufactured home communities. FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 may approve alternatives or substitutes 
if it finds the proposed design satisfactory for the proposed use, and 
if the materials, installation, device, arrangement, or method of work 
is at least equivalent to that prescribed in this exhibit considering 
quality, strength, effectiveness, durability, safety and protection of 
life and health.
    FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 will require 
satisfactory evidence to be submitted to substantiate claims made 
regarding the use of any proposed alternative.
    II. Background. FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 has authority to make (1) section 502 Rural Housing (RH) loans with 
respect to manufactured homes and lots, and (2) section 515 Rural Rental 
Housing (RRH) loans with respect to manufactured home rental projects.
    The manufactured home must be constructed in conformance with the 
Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standard (FMHCSS) and 
be permanently attached to a site-built permanent foundation which meets 
or exceeds the Minimum Property Standards (MPS) for One- and Two-Family 
Dwellings or Model Building Codes acceptable to FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354. The manufactured home must be 
permanently attached to that foundation by anchoring devices adequate to 
resist all loads identified in the MPS. This includes resistance to 
ground movements, seismic shaking, potential shearing, overturning and 
uplift loads caused by wind. Note that anchoring straps or cables 
affixed to ground anchors other than footings will not meet these 
requirements.
    Subpart G of part 1940 of this chapter applies on scattered sites, 
in subdivisions and rental projects to the development, installation and 
set-up of manufactured homes. To determine the level of environmental 
analysis required for a particular application, each manufactured home 
or lot involved shall be considered as equivalent to one housing unit or 
lot as these terms are used in Sec. Sec. 1940.310-1940.312 as well as 
in any other sections of subpart G of part 1940 of this chapter. The 
implementation of FmHA or its successor

[[Page 127]]

agency under Public Law 103-354 environmental policies and the 
consideration of important land use impacts are of particular relevance 
in the review of proposed manufactured home sites and in achieving the 
two purposes highlighted below. Because the development, installation 
and set-up of manufactured home communities, including scattered sites, 
rental projects, and subdivisions, differ in some requirements from 
conventional site and subdivision development, two of the purposes of 
this exhibit are to:
    A. Encourage economical and orderly development of such communities 
and nearby areas, and
    B. Promote the safety and health of residents of such communities.
    Therefore, this exhibit identifies those required standards and 
regulations and suggested guidelines for eliminating and preventing 
health and safety hazards and promoting the economical and orderly 
development and utilization of land for planning and development of 
manufactured home communities. The exhibit also provides the 
requirements for meeting the following:
    A. Resistance to Wind. Foundations and anchorages shall be designed 
to resist wind forces specified in American National Standards Institute 
(ANSI) A-58.1-1982 for the geographic area in which the manufactured 
home will be sited;
    B. Proper Installation. The manufacturer's installation instructions 
provided with each manufactured home shall contain instructions for at 
least one site-built foundation with interior and/or perimeter supports. 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 field office 
personnel shall review to determine its adequacy as security for an FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 loan only, the 
foundation design concept for compliance with this exhibit, the FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354/MPS and any Model Building 
Code acceptable to FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
in that particular geographic area; and
    C. Proper Foundation Design. Manufactured homes shall be installed 
on a foundation system which is designed and constructed to sustain, 
within allowable stress and settlement limitations, all applicable 
loads. Any foundation and anchorage system or method of construction to 
be used should be analyzed in accordance with well-established 
principles of mechanics and structural engineering.
    III. Definitions. For the purpose of this exhibit the following 
definitions apply:
    Accessory Building or Structure.
    A subordinate building or structure which is an addition to or 
supplements the facilities provided by a manufactured home.
    Anchoring Systems. An approved system for securing the manufactured 
home to the ground or foundation system that will, when properly 
designed and installed, resist overturning and lateral movement of the 
home from wind forces.
    Contiguous. Sharing a boundary, adjoining or adjacent. A lot or 
subdivision is considered to be contiguous to other lots or subdivisions 
if it is adjoining, touching or adjacent.
    Federal manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards 
(FMHCSS). A 1976 federal standard, commonly known as the HUD Standard, 
for the construction, design and performance of a manufactured home 
which meets the needs of the public including the need for quality, 
durability and safety. Units conforming to the FMHCSS are certified by 
an affixed label that reads as follows:

    AS EVIDENCED BY THIS LABEL NO. -------- THE MANUFACTURER CERTIFIES 
TO THE BEST OF THE MANUFACTURER'S KNOWLEDGE AND BELIEF THAT THIS 
MANUFACTURED HOME HAS BEEN INSPECTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE REQUIREMENTS 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT AND IS CONSTRUCTED IN 
CONFORMANCE WITH THE FEDERAL MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY 
STANDARDS IN EFFECT ON THE DATE OF MANUFACTURE. SEE DATA PLATE.

    Manufactured Home. A structure which is built to the Federal 
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards and FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354's thermal requirements. It is 
transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is 
ten body feet or more in width, and when erected on site is four hundred 
or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent foundation when 
connected to the required utilities. It is designed and constructed for 
permanent occupancy by a single family and contains permanent eating, 
cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities. The plumbing, heating, and 
electrical systems are contained in the structure.
    Manufactured Home Community. A parcel or contiguous parcels of land 
which contains two or more manufactured home sites available to the 
general public for occupancy. Sites and units may be for rent, or sites 
may be sold for residential occupancy (as in a subdivision).
    Manufactured Home Rental Project. A parcel or multiple parcels of 
land which have been so designated and improved to contain manufactured 
homes with sites available for rent.
    Manufactured Home Site. A designated parcel of land in a 
manufactured home rental project, subdivision or scattered site designed 
for the accommodation of a unit and its accessory structures for the 
exclusive use of the occupants.

[[Page 128]]

    Manufactured Home Subdivisions. Five or more contiguous (developed 
or undeveloped) lots, or building sites that meet the requirements of 
subpart C of part 1924 of this chapter.
    Permanent Perimeter Enclosure. A permanent perimeter structural 
system completely enclosing the space between the floor joist of the 
manufactured home and the ground. If separate from the foundation 
system, the permanent perimeter enclosure shall be secured to the 
perimeter of the manufactured home, properly ventilated and accessible 
and constructed of materials that conform to the FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 adopted MPS requirements for 
foundations.
    Pier Support System. Consists of footings, piers, caps, leveling 
spacers, or approved prefabricated load bearing devices.
    Related Facilities. Any nonresidential structure or building used 
for rental housing related purposes.
    Site-Built Permanent Foundation System. A foundation system 
(consisting of a combination of footings, piers, caps and shims and 
anchoring devices or required structural connections) which is designed 
and constructed to support the unit and sustain, within allowable stress 
and settlement limitations, all applicable loads specified in ANSI 
A58.1-1982. All loads shall be transferred from the manufactured home to 
the earth at a depth below the established frost line without exceeding 
the safe bearing capacity of the supporting soil.
    Set-Up. The work performed and operations involved in the placement 
of a manufactured home on a foundation system, to include installation 
of accessories or appurtenances and anchoring devices, and when local 
regulations permit, connection of utilities, but excluding preparation 
of the site.
    IV. Compliance with Local Regulations. These requirements do not 
replace site development standards established by local law, ordinances, 
or regulations. Whenever such local standards contain more stringent 
provisions than any of the site development, installation and set-up 
minimums of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354, the 
more stringent standards shall govern.
    V. Applicable Standards, Regulations and Manuals. A. Manufactured 
housing to be financed by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 must comply with the following standards:
    1. Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, 24 
CFR part 3280, mandated by Congress under title VI of the Federal 
Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, except for Sec. 
3280.506, ``Heat Loss,'' of subpart F, ``Thermal Protection,'' to part 
3280.
    2. Foundation requirements of the Minimum Property Standards as 
adopted by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 or a 
Model Building Code acceptable to FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354.
    3. [Reserved]
    4. Uniform Federal Accessibility Standard (UFAS).
    5. ANSI A58.1-1982, Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other 
Structures.
    B. Manufactured housing to be financed by FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 shall comply with all applicable FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 regulations, including but 
not limited to the following:
    1. Subpart C of part 1924 of this chapter, ``Planning and Performing 
Development Work.''
    2. Subpart A of part 1924, exhibit D, ``Thermal Performance 
Construction Standards.''
    3. Subpart G of part 1940, ``Environmental Program.''
    4. 7 CFR part 3550, ``Direct Single Family Housing Loans and 
Grants.''
    5. Subpart E of part 1944, ``Rural Rental Housing Loan Policies, 
Procedures, and Authorizations.''
    The requirements of the above references have not been repeated in 
this exhibit. Those requirements contained above are either mandatory or 
minimums and every effort should be made by the applicant, builder-
developer or dealer-contractor to utilize higher standards, when 
appropriate.

                Part B--Construction and Land Development

    I. General Acceptability Criteria. The following criteria apply to 
development on scattered sites, in subdivisions and in rental project 
communities.
    A. A manufactured home development including a site, rental project 
or subdivision shall be located on property designated for that use, 
where designations exist, by the local jurisdiction.
    B. Conditions of soil, ground water level, drainage, flooding and 
topography shall not create hazards to the property and health or safety 
of the residents.
    C. The finished grade elevation beneath the manufactured home or the 
first flood elevation of the habitable space, whichever is lower, shall 
be above the 100-year return frequency flood elevation. This requirement 
applies wherever manufactured homes may be installed, not just in 
locations designated by the National Flood Insurance Program as areas of 
special flood hazards. The use of fill to accomplish this is a last 
resort. However, as stated in Sec. 1940.304 of subpart G of part 1940 
of this chapter, it is FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354's policy not to approve or fund any proposal in a 100-year 
floodplain area unless there is no practicable alternative to such a 
floodplain location.
    D. Essential service such as employment centers, shopping, schools, 
recreation areas,

[[Page 129]]

police and fire protection, and garbage and trash removal shall be 
convenient to the development and any site, community, or subdivision 
must meet the environmental and location requirements contained in 
subpart G of part 1940 of this chapter.
    E. Manufactured home sites, rental projects and subdivisions shall 
not be subject to any adverse influences of adjacent land uses. An 
adverse influence is considered as one that is out of the acceptable 
level or range of a recognizable standard or where no standard exists is 
considered a nuisance irrespective of a site being zoned for 
manufactured home use. Health, safety and aesthetic consequences of 
location shall be carefully assessed by inspection of the site prior to 
selection of development. Undesirable land uses sush as deteriorated 
residential or commercial areas and noxious industrial properties shall 
be avoided to ensure compatibility. Other undesirable elements such as 
heavily traveled highways, airport runways, railroad, or fire hazards 
and other areas subject to recognizably intolerable noise levels shall 
be avoided.
    F. The requirements for streets shall be those found in subpart C of 
part 1924 of this chapter.
    G. The site design and development shall be in accordance with sound 
engineering and architectural practices and shall provide for all 
utilities in a manner which allows adequate, economic, safe, energy 
efficient and dependable systems with sufficient easements for their 
required installation and maintenance.
    H. Utilities for each manufactured home site, rental housing project 
or subdivision shall be designed and installed in accordance with 
subpart C of part 1924 of this chapter; and the State health authority 
having jurisdiction, and all local laws and regulations requiring 
approval prior to construction.
    I. Exhibit C, section V of this subpart shall be complied with by 
the applicant, dealer-contractor or builder-developer for manufactured 
home projects with individual water supply and sewage disposal systems. 
This exhibit shall be used by the FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 County Supervisors, District Directors, and State 
Directors in reviewing submissions.
    J. During the planning, design, and construction of the foundation 
system and/or perimeter enclosure, provisions shall be made for the 
installation and connection of on-site water, gas, electrical and sewer 
systems, which are necessary for the normal operation of the 
manufactured home. Water and sewer system hookups shall be adequately 
protected from freezing.
    II. Development on Scattered Sites and in Subdivisions.--A. General. 
Scattered sites and subdivision developments will be planned and 
constructed in accordance with specific requirements of this subpart, 
subpart C of part 1924, and subpart G of part 1940 of this chapter, and 
the applicable FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354/MPS 
or Model Building Codes acceptable to FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354. Manufactured homes for development in a manufactured 
home community shall:
    1. Be erected with or without a basement on a site-built permanent 
foundation that meets or exceeds applicable requirements of the FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354/MPS for One- and Two-
Family Dwellings or Model Building Codes acceptable to FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354;
    2. Be permanently attached to that foundation by anchoring devices 
adequate to resist all loads identified in the FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 adopted MPS (this includes resistance to 
ground movements, seismic shaking, potential shearing, overturning and 
uplift loads caused by wind, etc.);
    3. Have had the towing hitch or running gear, which includes 
tongues, axles, brakes, wheels, lights and other parts of the chassis 
that operate only during transportation removed;
    4. Have any crawl space beneath the manufactured home properly 
ventilated and enclosed by a continuous permanent perimeter enclosure. 
If it is not the supporting foundation, designed to resist all forces to 
which it may be subject without transmitting to the building 
superstructure movements or any effects caused by frost heave, soil 
settlement (consolidation), or shrinking or swelling of expansive soils; 
and be constructed of materials that conform to FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 adopted MPS requirements for 
foundations;
    5. Have the manufactured home insulated to meet the energy 
conserving requirements contained in exhibit D of this subpart;
    6. Have a manufactured home site, site improvements, and all other 
features of the mortgaged property not addressed by the Federal 
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, meet or exceed 
applicable requirements of this subpart and subpart C of part 1924 of 
this chapter, the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
adopted MPS except paragraph 31-2.2 or a Model Building Code acceptable 
to FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354;
    7. Have had the manufactured unit itself braced and stiffened where 
necessary before it leaves the factory to eliminate racking and 
potential damage during transportation; and
    8. Be eligible for financing in accordance with the requirements of 
either section 502, or section 515 of FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354's Housing Program, for which purpose the beginning of

[[Page 130]]

construction will be the commencement of on-site work even though the 
manufactured home itself may have been produced and temporarily stored 
prior to the date of application for financing.
    B. Site Planning and Development. The site planning and development 
of manufactured home scattered sites and subdivisions shall also comply 
with the following:
    1. Arrangement of Structures and Facilities. The site, including the 
manufactured home, accessory structures, and all site improvements shall 
be harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to topography, the 
shape of the plot, and the shape, size and position of the unit. 
Particular attention shall be paid to use, appearance and livability.
    2. Adaptation to Site Assets. The manufactured home shall be fitted 
to the terrain with a minimum disturbance of the land. Existing trees, 
rock formations, and other natural site features shall be preserved to 
the extent practical. Favorable views or outlooks shall be emphasized by 
the plan.
    3. Site Plan. The site plan shall provide for a desirable 
residential environment which is an asset to the community in which it 
is located.
    4. Lot Size. The size of manufactured home lots (scattered sites and 
subdivision) shall be determined by 7 CFR part 3550 and subpart C of 
part 1924 of this chapter.
    C. Foundation Systems, Anchoring and Set-up.
    1. The foundation system shall be constructed in accordance with 
this subpart and one of the following: (a) The foundation system 
included in the manufacturer's installation instructions meeting FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354/MPS requirements, (b) the 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354/MPS 4900.1, which 
specifies performance requirements for foundations in section 600 
``General'' and paragraph 601-16 ``Foundations,'' or (c) an FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 recognized model building 
code.
    2. The manufactured home permanent foundation system shall 
constitute a permanent load bearing support system for the manufactured 
home. The manufacturer or applicant shall be permitted to design or 
specify the installation of a foundation system which meets FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354/MPS design requirements for 
foundations and the general requirements above.
    3. The applicant's responsibility for proper design and installation 
of the permanent foundation system, anchoring and set-up shall be in 
accordance with Sec. 1924.5(f)(1), of this subpart.
    4. The builder/developer of the manufactured home property, for 
proposed construction, shall submit with the application for financing 
by the applicant or for a conditional commitment design calculations, 
details and drawings for the installation, anchorage and construction of 
permanent foundation and perimeter enclosure to be used.
    III. Rental Housing Project Development. A. General. Manufactured 
housing rental developments shall be planned and constructed in 
accordance with requirements of subpart C of part 1924; this subpart; 
subpart G of part 1940, the FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354/MPS; and the requirements of subpart E of part 1944 of this 
chapter.
    B. Site Planning and Development. Site planning and development 
shall adapt to individual site conditions and the type of market to be 
served, reflect advances in site planning and development techniques, 
and be adaptable to the trends in design of the manufactured home. Site 
planning and development shall utilize existing terrain, trees, shrubs 
and rocks formations to the extent practicable. A regimental style site 
plan design should be avoided.
    C. Foundation Systems, Anchoring and Set-up. Foundation systems, 
anchoring and set/ups for manufactured home rental projects (site and 
home) developed under FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354 section 515 Rural Rental Housing program shall comply with the 
requirements of paragraphs II A and II C above.
    IV. Accessory Structures and Related Facilities. A. General. 
Accessory structures and related facilities are dependent upon the 
manufactured home and its environment.
    1. Accessory structures and related facilities shall be planned, 
designed and constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of 
this subpart; the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354/
MPS; and local criteria of the authority having jurisdiction.
    2. Accessory structures and related facilities shall be designed in 
a manner that will eliminate and prevent health and safety hazards and 
enhance the appearance of the manufactured home and its environment.
    3. Accessory structures and related facilities shall not obstruct 
required openings for light and ventilation of the manufactured home and 
shall not hamper installation and utility connections of the unit.
    B. Accessory Structures. 1. Accessory structures shall not include 
spaces for pantries, bath, toilet, laundries, closets or utility rooms.
    2. Accessory structures shall be carefully designed and constructed 
for the convenience and comfort of the manufactured home occupant. These 
features significantly affect the visual appearance of the community and 
influence livability.
    C. Related Facilities (Rental Housing Projects). 1. This includes 
those facilities as defined in Sec. Sec. 1944.205(i) and 1944.212(f) of 
subpart E of part 1944 of this chapter.

[[Page 131]]

    1. This includes those facilities as defined in Sec. 1944.212(e) of 
subpart E of part 1944 of this chapter.
    2. Related facilities built on-site must meet the FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354/MPS and subpart A of part 1924 
of this chapter or other building codes approved by FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354.
    3. Workmanship shall be of a quality equal to good standard 
practice. Material shall be of such kind and quality as to assure 
reasonable durability and economy of maintenance, all commensurate with 
the class of building under consideration.
    4. All members and parts of the construction shall be properly 
designed to carry all loads imposed without detrimental effect on finish 
or covering materials.
    5. The structure shall be adequately braced against lateral stresses 
and each member shall be correctly fitted and connected.
    6. Adequate precautions shall be taken to protect against fire and 
accidents.
    7. All related facilities which require accessibility to the 
handicapped must comply with the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standard 
(UFAS).
    V. Fire Protection and Safety. A. The design of the site plan for 
each manufactured community and scattered site shall meet the fire 
protection and safety requirements of the local authority responsible 
for providing the necessary fire protection services.
    B. All fire detection and alarm systems, and water supply 
requirements for fire protection for manufactured communities shall be 
in accordance with the local authority responsible for providing the 
necessary fire protection services.
    C. Any portion of a manufactured home shall not be closer than the 
local separation requirements of the development standard for side to 
side, end to end, and end to side siting. If the exposed composite wall 
and roof of two or more manufactured homes are proposed to be joined 
they shall be without openings and constructed of materials which will 
provide a minmum one-hour fire rating each, or the manufactured homes 
are separated by a one-hour fire rated barrier designed and approved for 
such installation and permitted by the authority having jurisdiction.
    D. Manufactured homes shall not be positioned vertically (stacked) 
with one over the other in whole or in part without the specific 
approval of the authority having jurisdiction.

     Part C--Drawings, Specifications, Contract Documents and Other 
                              Documentation

    I. General. Adequate site development and foundation installation 
drawings and specfications shall be provided by the applicant or dealer-
contractor to FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 to 
fully describe the construction and other development work. These 
documents shall be provided according to the requirements of Sec. 
1924.5(f)(1) of this subpart. Contract documents will be prepared in 
accordance with Sec. 1924.6 and, in the case of multiple family housing 
construction and development, Sec. 1924.13 of this subpart.
    A. The documents recommended shall be used as a guide for drawings 
and specifications to be submitted in support of all types of loan and/
or grant applications involving manufactured homes. Adequate and 
accurate drawings and specifications are necessary to:
    1. Determine the acceptability of the physical environment and 
improvements,
    2. Determine compliance with the applicable standards and codes,
    3. Review cost estimates, and
    4. Provide a basis for financing, inspections, and the warranty.
    B. Detailed floor plans, drawings and specifications are not 
required for any manufactured home to be installed on a scattered site, 
in a subdivision or rental housing project. However, a schematic floor 
plan should be submitted by the applicant when applying for FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 financing. The unit must have 
an affixed label as specified in exhibit D of this subpart indicating 
that the unit is constructed to the FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 thermal requirements for the appropriate winter 
degree days. This will indicate that the manufacturer certifies that the 
unit has been properly inspected and it meets the FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 Thermal Performance Construction 
Standard.
    C. For proposed construction, the builder or dealer-contractor shall 
submit with the loan or grant application design calculations, details 
and drawings for the installation, anchorage and construction of the 
permanent foundations and perimeter enclosure to be used. Drawings and 
specifications for foundation systems will be reviewed and examined by 
either the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 County 
Supervisor, District Director, or State Architect/Engineer for 
foundation support locations, loads and connection requirements 
specified by the manufacturer as a basis for evaluating foundation 
compliance with the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354/MPS or Model Building Code, and for determining design suitability 
for soil conditions. Drawings and specifications will also be examined 
by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 to determine 
compliance with all other on-site features not covered by the FMHCSS.
    D. Foundation design sections and details of all critical 
construction points systems, anchorage methods, and structural items

[[Page 132]]

shall be scaled as necessary to provide all appropriate information 1:30 
(3/8<gr-thn-eq>=1[foot]-0<gr-thn-eq>) minimum.
    II. Scattered Sites. Drawings for single family manufactured housing 
shall be submitted by the applicant in addition to the requirements of 
paragraph I above and the requirements of paragraphs II A and D-7 of 
exhibit C of this subpart.
    III. Subdivisions. Subpart C of part 1924 of this chapter will be 
used in preparing and providing supporting documents.
    IV. Rental Housing Projects. Subpart C of part 1924 of this chapter 
will be used in preparing and providing supporting documents.
    V. Specifications. A. Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 424-2, ``Description of Materials,'' or other acceptable and 
comparable descriptions of all materials used for site development, 
foundation installation and the permanent perimeter enclosure shall be 
submitted with the drawings by the applicant.
    B. The material identification information shall be in sufficient 
detail to fully describe the material, size and grade. Where necessary, 
additional sheets shall be attached as well as manufacturer's 
specification sheets for equipment and/or special materials.

                 Part D--Inspection of Development Work

    I. General. The following policies will govern the inspection of all 
manufactured housing development work. This includes scattered sites, 
subdivisions, rental housing projects and all accessory structures and 
related facilities unless otherwise indicated.
    II. Inspections. A. The responsibility for frequency and propose of 
inspections shall be in accordance with Sec. 1924.9(b) (1), (2) and (3) 
of this subpart. The inspection requirements of Sec. 1924.13 apply to 
the planning and conduct of construction work on all 515 housing 
developments that are more extensive in scope and more complex in nature 
than those involving an individual manufactured housing unit. The Stage 
2 inspection customary for site-built housing when the building is 
enclosed is not required for manufactured homes.
    The Stage 2 inspection for manufactured homes will be made within 
two working days after erection or placement on the foundation to 
determine compliance with accepted installation drawings and 
specifications for installation and set-up and to verify that the 
correct unit is on the site.
    Stages 2 and 3 inspections for manufactured homes may be combined 
when authorized by the State Director.
    B. The borrower will join the County Supervisor or the District 
Director in making periodic inspections as often as possible and always 
for the final inspection.
    C. The borrower should be encouraged to make enough periodic visits 
to the site to be familiar with the progress and performance of the work 
in order to protect the borrower's interest. If the borrower observes or 
otherwise becomes aware of any fault or defect in the work or 
nonconformance with the contract documents, the borrower should give 
prompt written notice thereof to the dealer-contractor and a copy of the 
notice to the appropriate County Supervisor or District Director.
    D. During inspection, it will generally be infeasible to determine 
whether a manufactured unit erected on a site was properly braced and 
stiffened during transportation. Inspectors should examine these units 
to determine that there is no obvious damage or loosening of fastenings 
that may have occurred during transportation. The dealer-contractor must 
warrant these units against such damage, which should protect FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354's interest.
    III. Warranty Plan Coverage. The warranty requirements for all 
development work shall be in accordance with Sec. 1924.9(d) of this 
subpart and 7 CFR part 3550, subpart B.

[51 FR 41603, Nov. 18, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 19283, May 22, 1987; 53 
FR 2156, Jan. 26, 1988; 67 FR 78327, Dec. 24, 2002]


<R05>
  Sec. Exhibit K to Subpart A of Part 1924--Classifications for Multi-
                 Family Residential Rehabilitation Work

                               I. General

    This exhibit distinguishes between what FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 considers maintenance and repair work, moderate 
rehabilitation and substantial rehabilitation. In all cases, the 
building or project to be rehabilitated shall be structurally sound. The 
applicant shall have a structural analysis of the existing building made 
to determine the adequacy of all structural systems for the proposed 
rehabilitation.

                             II. Definitions

    Maintenance and Repair--Work involved in the selective replacement 
and general maintenance and repair of certain materials, appliances or 
components of an existing residential building.
    Moderate Rehabilitation--All work directly involved in the 
rearrangement of interior space, the replacement of finish materials or 
components of the electrical, plumbing, heating or conveyance systems of 
an existing multi-family residential building. Work and improvements are 
considered to be more than routine maintenance and repair.
    Substantial Rehabilitation--All work directly involved in the 
rearrangement of interior space that involves alteration of load bearing 
partitions and columns; the replacement of the electrical, plumbing, 
heating or conveyance systems; and the addition to and/

[[Page 133]]

or major conversion of existing multi-family residential buildings or 
other building structures.
    Moderate rehabilitation and repair shall not be limited to building 
changes for cosmetic or convenience purposes. In all cases moderate 
rehabilitation shall involve a minimum of three (3) components of 
building rehabilitation listed as moderate. Unless combined with other 
improvements in a project that are considered to be moderate or 
substantial rehabilitation the items identified as maintenance and 
repair are considered to be cosmetic and convenience changes.
    When a rehabilitation project consists of both moderate and 
substantial rehabilitation components, those substantial rehabilitation 
components shall be in accordance with FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354's development standards and local codes and 
regulation requirements. Where the majority of project components of 
building rehabilitation are considered substantial the project shall be 
considered in the substantial rehabilitation category.
    Those site components of rehabilitation such as landscaping, 
grading, drainage, fencing, parking areas, recreation areas, water and 
waste disposal systems, etc., whether considered either maintenance and 
repair, moderate rehabilitation or substantial rehabilitation shall be 
in accordance with FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354's development standards for site development work; all local codes 
and regulation requirements; and sound engineering and architectural 
practices.
    Any alteration of a structure listed or eligible for listing on the 
National Register of Historic Places may be considered either moderate 
or substantial rehabilitation; however, it shall conform first to the 
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines 
for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings and then to FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354's requirements. In cases where the 
Secretary of the Interior's standards cannot be met, rehabilitation will 
conform to the agreed upon approaches, treatments and techniques 
resulting from the consultation process between FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354, the borrower, the State Historic 
Preservation Officer and the Advisory Council of Historic Preservation.

         III. Components of Multi-Family Building Rehabilitation

    The components of multi-family building rehabilitation necessary and 
generally considered by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 to be either maintenance and repair, moderate rehabilitation or 
substantial rehabilitation include but are not limited to those listed 
in the following chart.

                               Components of Multi-Family Building Rehabilitation
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Maintenance     Moderate       Substantial
                             Components                               and repair  rehabilitation  rehabilitation
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Air conditioning...................................................           o   ..............  ..............
Appliance replacement or repair....................................           o   ..............  ..............
Cabinet replacement or repair......................................           o   ..............  ..............
Carpeting..........................................................           o   ..............  ..............
Caulking...........................................................           o   ..............  ..............
Ceiling framing....................................................           o   ..............  ..............
Clothes closets or shelving improvements...........................           o   ..............  ..............
Door repair........................................................           o   ..............  ..............
Drywall repair.....................................................           o   ..............  ..............
Gutters and downspouts.............................................           o   ..............  ..............
Hardware replacement or repair.....................................           o   ..............  ..............
Kitchen cabinet improvement........................................           o   ..............  ..............
Lighting fixture replacement or repair.............................           o   ..............  ..............
Mail boxes.........................................................           o   ..............  ..............
Painting...........................................................           o   ..............  ..............
Paneling...........................................................           o   ..............  ..............
Partition repair...................................................           o   ..............  ..............
Roof repair........................................................           o   ..............  ..............
Signage............................................................           o   ..............  ..............
Stair repair.......................................................           o   ..............  ..............
Tile work..........................................................           o   ..............  ..............
Wallpapering.......................................................           o   ..............  ..............
Window shades and curtains.........................................           o   ..............  ..............
Door replacement...................................................  ...........             o    ..............
Drywall replacement................................................  ...........             o    ..............
Elevator components replacement....................................  ...........             o    ..............
Exterior entrance redesign, relocation.............................  ...........             o    ..............
Finish flooring materials..........................................  ...........             o    ..............
Flashing...........................................................  ...........             o    ..............
Furnace replacement................................................  ...........             o    ..............
Gas pipes..........................................................  ...........             o    ..............
Insulation.........................................................  ...........             o    ..............
Lath and plaster replacement.......................................  ...........             o    ..............
New shingles or roof replacement...................................  ...........             o    ..............
Partition (nonbearing) replacement, or relocation..................  ...........             o    ..............
Plumbing fixture replacement.......................................  ...........             o    ..............
Pointing...........................................................  ...........             o    ..............
Porch and steps alterator or replacement...........................  ...........             o    ..............
Stair replacement, or relocation...................................  ...........             o    ..............
Storm windows and weatherstripping.................................  ...........             o    ..............
Subfloor material replacement......................................  ...........             o    ..............
Trim--exterior and interior........................................  ...........             o    ..............
Window replacement.................................................  ...........             o    ..............
New or alteration to the:
    Mechanical system..............................................  ...........  ..............             o
    Soil pipes.....................................................  ...........  ..............             o
    Vent pipes.....................................................  ...........  ..............             o
    Waste pipes....................................................  ...........  ..............             o

[[Page 134]]

 
Alteration or replacement of structural components:
    Beams..........................................................  ...........  ..............  ..............
    Chimneys and vents.............................................  ...........  ..............             o
    Columns and post...............................................  ...........  ..............             o
    Electrical service--replacement or new.........................  ...........  ..............             o
    Elevator replacement...........................................  ...........  ..............             o
    Exterior walls.................................................  ...........  ..............             o
    Floor construction.............................................  ...........  ..............             o
    Footing........................................................  ...........  ..............             o
    Foundation wall................................................  ...........  ..............             o
    Foundation waterproofing.......................................  ...........  ..............             o
    Interior walls.................................................  ...........  ..............             o
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Moderate repair and rehabilitation shall not be limited to building 
changes for cosmetic purposes. In all cases moderate rehabilitation 
shall involve a minimum of three (3) components of building 
rehabilitation listed as moderate. Unless combined with other 
improvements in a project that are considered to be moderate or 
substantial rehabilitation the items identified as maintenance and 
repair are considered to be cosmetic and convenience changes.


<R05>
Sec. Exhibit L to Subpart A of Part 1924--Insured 10-Year Home Warranty 
                            Plan Requirements

                               I. Purpose

    In recent years, numerous third-party home warranty plans have been 
developed offering new homeowners varying degrees of protection against 
builder default and/or major structural defects in their homes. This 
exhibit establishes the criteria and procedures by which a warranty plan 
is found acceptable for new construction of single family homes financed 
by Farmers Home Administration (FmHA) or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354. An acceptable warranty plan will:
    A. Assure that FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
borrowers receive adequate warranty coverage,
    B. In certain circumstances, eliminate the requirement for FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 personnel to make the 
first two construction inspections, and
    C. Permit a loan up to the market value of the security (less the 
unpaid principal balance and past due interest of any other liens 
against the security), even though FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 personnel may not have performed period inspections 
during construction.

                     II. Types of Warranty Companies

    A. An insured warranty company is underwritten by an insurance 
carrier, licensed to operate as an insurer by the states where the 
warranty company plans to operate, and has an acceptable rating from a 
nationally recognized rating company such as A.M. Best Company.
    B. A risk retention group is an insurer which is licensed in one 
state and is authorized, under the Products Liability Risk Retention Act 
of 1981, to issue its policies in all states. This authority is not 
challenged by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354; 
however, there remains some question as to the legal propriety of a 10-
year insured warranty insurer to be a risk-retention group. If at some 
future time any state insurance commission or regulatory agency 
challenges the legal authority of such group, FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 will reconsider its acceptance of the 
group.
    C. Individual state warranty plans, such as that offered by the 
State of New Jersey, are backed by the full faith and credit of the 
state government.

                         III. Plan Requirements

    To be considered acceptable, a warranty plan must include the 
following features:
    A. The entire cost (fee, premium, etc.) of the coverage is prepaid 
and coverage automatically transfers to subsequent owners without 
additional cost.
    B. The coverage is not cancellable by the warrantor (builder), 
warranty company or insurer.
    C. The coverage age includes at least the following:
    (1) For one year from the effective date, any defects caused by 
faulty workmanship of defective materials.
    (2) During the second year after the effective date, the warranty 
continues to cover the wiring, piping and duct work of the electrical, 
plumbing, heating and cooling systems, plus the items in (3).
    (3) During the third through the tenth years, the warranty continues 
to cover major structural defects. A major structural defect is actual 
damage to the load-bearing portion of the home including damage due to 
subsidence, expansion or lateral movement of the soil (excluding 
movement caused by flood or earthquake) which affects its load-bearing 
function and which vitally effects or is imminently likely to affect use 
of the home for residential purposes.
    D. A system is provided for complaint (claims) handling which 
includes a conciliation and, if necessary to resolve matters in

[[Page 135]]

dispute, arbitration arranged by the American Arbitration Association or 
similar organization.
    E. A construction inspection plan is required if FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 is to eliminate the first two 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 inspections or 
permit a full market value loan when FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 inspections are not conducted.

                       IV. Information for Review

    A. Companies submitting warranty plans for a determination of 
acceptability must support requests with the following information.
    (1) Evidence that the insured warranty company has met the 
applicable state licensing and/or regulatory requirements in the state 
in which the company plans to operate.
    (2) Evidence that the insurance carrier underwriting the warranty 
plan is licensed to operate as an insurer in the states in which the 
company plans to operate and has an acceptable rating from a nationally 
recognized company such as A.M. Best Company.
    (3) State warrenty plan agencies will provide evidence that the plan 
is backed by the full faith and credit of the state.
    (4) A full description of the warranty plan including information on 
the fees, builder and home registration procedures, required 
construction standards, construction inspection procedures, coverage 
provided and claims procedures.
    (5) A sample copy of the warranty information and/or policy which is 
provided to the homeowner.
    (6) Suggested means by which FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 field offices can readily assure that the builder is 
a member in good standing prior to loan approval and that a warrant will 
be issued upon the completion of construction prior to the final release 
of funds.
    B. Submission and Acceptance:
    (1) Insured warranty companies, except those operating as risk 
retention groups, and state warranty plan agencies will submit their 
requests and supporting information to the FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 State Director in the state in which they plan 
to operate. State Directors will determine the acceptability of insured 
warranty plans and state warranty plans in their jurisdictions, notify 
the company or agency of the decision in writing and notify field 
offices by issuance of a State Supplement including the names and 
addresses of acceptable warranty companies and any other pertinent 
information.
    (2) Warranty companies claiming authority as risk retention groups 
will submit their requests and supporting information including 
certification that it has complied with all requirements of the Products 
Liability Risk Retention Act of 1981 (Pub. L. 97-45) and information 
indicating the state in which it is licensed, information to the FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 National Office, Single 
Family Housing Processing Division. The National Office will determine 
the acceptability of the warranty of a risk retention group, notify the 
company of the decision in writing and notify field offices by issuance 
of an attachment to this exhibit.

                         V. Warranty Performance

    A. County Supervisors will report inadequate warranty performance 
through their District Director to the State Director. State Directors 
will review the situation, assist in resolving any problems and, if 
necessary, initiate action under subpart F of part 1942 of this chapter. 
State Directors will inform, by memorandum, the Director, Single Family 
Housing Processing Division, National Office, of any problems with 
warranty performance and if any debarment action is initiated.
    B. State Directors will annually monitor each warranty company and/
or its insurer to assure continued compliance with state licensing and/
or regulatory requirements.

               Attachment 1--Acceptable Warranty Companies

    The warranty companies listed below claim authority to act as a risk 
retention group under the Products Liability Risk Retention Act of 1981 
and as such, to operate in all States to provide 10-year home 
warranties. This authority remains subject to future challenges by any 
State insurance commissioner or regulatory agency; however, until such 
challenge is made, FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
accepts their warranty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
             Name and address                     Area of operation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Home Owners Warranty Corporation/HOW        All States.
 Insurance Company, 11 North Glebe Road,
 Arlington, Virginia 22201, (703) 516-4100.
Home Buyers Warranty, 89 Liberty Street,    All States.
 Asheville, North Carolina 22801,
 Telephone: (704) 254-4478.
Residential Warranty Corporation, P.O. Box  All States.
 641, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania 17108-0641,
 Telephone: 1-800-247-1812.
Manufactured Housing Warranty Corporation,  All States.
 P.O. Box 641, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania
 17108-0641, Telephone: 1-800-247-1812.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[52 FR 8002, Mar. 13, 1987, as amended at 56 FR 29167, June 26, 1991]

Subpart B [Reserved]

[[Page 136]]


<R04>
         Subpart C_Planning and Performing Site Development Work

    Source: 60 FR 24543, May 9, 1995, unless otherwise noted.

    Editorial Note: Nomenclature changes to subpart C appear at 61 FR 
2899, Jan. 30, 1996.


<R05>
Sec. 1924.101  Purpose.

    This subpart establishes the basic Rural Housing Service (RHS) 
policies for planning and performing site development work. It also 
provides the procedures and guidelines for preparing site development 
plans consistent with Federal laws, regulations, and Executive Orders.


<R05>
Sec. 1924.102  General policy.

    (a) Rural development. This subpart provides for the development of 
building sites and related facilities in rural areas. It is designed to:
    (1) Recognize community needs and desires in local planning, 
control, and development.
    (2) Recognize standards for building-site design which encourage and 
lead to the development of economically stable communities, and the 
creation of attractive, healthy, and permanent living environments.
    (3) Encourage improvements planned for the site to be the most cost-
effective of the practicable alternatives. Encourage utilities and 
services utilized to be reliable, efficient, and available at reasonable 
costs.
    (4) Provide for a planning process that will consider impacts on the 
environment and existing development in order to formulate actions that 
protect, enhance, and restore environmental quality.
    (5) No site will be approved unless it meets the requirements of 
this part and all state and local permits and approvals in connection 
with the proposed development have been obtained.
    (b) Subdivisions. RHS does not review or approve subdivisions. Each 
site approved by RHS must meet the requirements of Sec. 1924.115, on a 
site by site basis.
    (c) Development related costs--(1) Applicant. The applicant is 
responsible for all costs incurred before loan or grant closing 
associated with planning, technical services, and actual construction. 
These costs may be included in the loan or grant as authorized by RHS 
regulations.
    (2) Developer. The developer is responsible for payment of all costs 
associated with development.


<R05>
Sec. 1924.103  Scope.

    This subpart provides supplemental requirements for Rural Rental 
Housing (RRH) loans, Rural Cooperative Housing (RCH) loans, Farm Labor 
Housing (LH) loans and grants, and Rural Housing Site (RHS) loans. It 
also provides a site development standard, as indicated in exhibit B of 
FmHA Instruction 1924-C (available in any RHS field office), which 
supplements this subpart to provide the minimum for the acceptability of 
development. All of this subpart applies to Single Family Housing unless 
otherwise noted. All of this subpart also applies to Multiple Family 
Housing except Sec. Sec. 1924.115 and 1924.120, and any paragraph 
specifically designated for Single Family Housing only. In addition, RHS 
will consult with appropriate Federal, state, and local agencies, other 
organizations, and individuals to implement the provisions of this 
subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 1924.104  Definitions.

    As used in this subpart:
    Applicant. Any person, partnership, limited partnership, trust, 
consumer cooperative, corporation, public body, or association that has 
filed a preapplication, or in the case of RHS programs that do not 
require a preapplication, an official application, with RHS in 
anticipation of receiving or utilizing RHS financial assistance.
    Community. A community includes cities, towns, boroughs, villages, 
and unincorporated places which have the characteristics of incorporated 
areas with support services such as shopping, post office, schools, 
central sewer and water facilities, police and fire protection, 
hospitals, medical and pharmaceutical facilities, etc., and are easily 
identifiable as established concentrations of inhabited dwellings and 
private and public buildings.

[[Page 137]]

    Developer. Any person, partnership, public body, or corporation who 
is involved with the development of a site which will be financed by 
RHS.
    Development. The act of building structures and installing site 
improvements on an individual dwelling site, a subdivision, or a 
multiple family tract.
    Multiple Family Housing. RHS RRH loans, RCH loans, LH loans and 
grants, and RHS loans.
    Single Family Housing. RHS Rural Housing loans for individuals for 
construction of, repair of, or purchase of a dwelling to be occupied by 
one household.
    Site. A parcel of land proposed as a dwelling site, with or without 
development.
    Site approval official. The RHS making the determination that a site 
meets the requirements in this subpart to be acceptable for site loans. 
(See Sec. 1924.120.)
    Street surfaces. Streets may be hard or all-weather surfaced.
    (1) Hard surface--a street with a portland cement concrete, 
asphaltic concrete, or bituminous wearing surface or other hard surfaces 
which are acceptable and suitable to the local public body for use with 
local climate, soil, gradient, and volume and character of traffic.
    (2) All-weather--a street that can be used year-round with a minimum 
of maintenance, such as the use of a grader and minor application of 
surface material, and is acceptable and suitable to the local public 
body for use with local climate, soil, gradient, and volume and 
character of traffic.
    Subdivision. Five or more contiguous (developed or undeveloped) lots 
or building sites. Subdivisions may be new or existing.


<R05>
Sec. 1924.105  Planning/performing development.

    (a) General. Planning is an evaluation of specific development for a 
specific site. Planning must take into consideration topography, soils, 
climate, adjacent land use, environmental impacts, energy efficiency, 
local economy, aesthetic and cultural values, public and private 
services, housing and social conditions, and a degree of flexibility to 
accommodate changing demands. All planning and performing development 
work is the responsibility of the applicant or developer. All 
development will be arranged and completed according to applicable 
local, state, or Federal regulations including applicable health and 
safety standards, environmental requirements, and requirements of this 
subpart. When a public authority requires inspections prior to final 
acceptance, written assurance by the responsible public authority of 
compliance with local, city, county, state or other public codes, 
regulations, and ordinances is required prior to final acceptance by 
RHS.
    (1) [Reserved]
    (2) Technical Services. [Reserved]
    (i) [Reserved]
    (ii) An applicant or developer for a Multiple Family Housing project 
or a Single Family Housing site which requires technical services under 
Sec. 1924.13(a), must contract for the technical services of an 
architect, engineer, land surveyor, landscape architect, or site 
planner, as appropriate, to provide complete planning, drawings, and 
specifications. Such services may be provided by the applicant's or 
developer's ``in house'' staff subject to RHS concurrence. Technical 
services must be performed by professionals who are qualified and 
authorized to provide such services in the state in which the project 
would be developed. All technical services must be provided in 
accordance with the requirements of professional registration or 
licensing boards. At completion of all construction or completion of a 
phase or phases of the total project, the persons providing technical 
services under this section must notify the RHS field office in writing 
that all work has been completed in substantial conformance with the 
approved plans and specifications.
    (iii) For developments not specifically required to have technical 
services under paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section, such services may 
be required by the state director when construction of streets or 
installation of utilities is involved.
    (3) Drawings, specifications, contract documents, and other 
documentations. Adequate drawings and specifications must be provided by 
the applicant or

[[Page 138]]

developer to RHS in sufficient detail to fully and accurately describe 
the proposed development. Contract documents must be prepared in 
accordance with Sec. 1924.6 or, in the case of more complex 
construction, Sec. 1924.13.
    (b) Single Family Housing. Proposals for development of individual 
dwelling sites must meet the following requirements:
    (1) Site development design requirements. Exhibit B (available in 
any RHS field office) will be used as a minimum by applicants or 
developers in preparing proposals and supporting documents for Single 
Family Housing loans, in addition to specific requirements made in this 
subpart.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (c) Multiple Family Housing. Exhibit C (available in any RHS office) 
should be used as a guide by the applicant or developer in preparing a 
proposal and supporting documents for multiple family housing projects.


<R05>
Sec. 1924.106  Location.

    (a) General. It is RHS's policy to promote compact community 
development and not to approve sites located in floodplains, on 
wetlands, or on important farmlands, unless there is no practical 
alternative. Furthermore, RHS will not finance development on locations 
that adversely affect properties which are listed or are eligible for 
listing on the National Register of Historic Places, located within the 
Coastal Barrier Resource System, or on a barrier island. (Environmental 
requirements are found in 7 CFR part 1940, subpart G.) In order to be 
eligible for RHS participation:
    (1) The site must be located in an eligible area as defined in the 
program regulations under which the development is being funded or 
approved.
    (2) The site must comply with the applicable environmental laws, 
regulations, Executive Orders, and subpart G of part 1940.
    (b) Single Family Housing. In addition to the general requirements 
in paragraph (a) of this section, sites must provide a desirable, safe, 
functional, convenient, and attractive living environment for the 
residents.
    (c) Multiple Family Housing. Multiple family housing projects shall 
be located in accordance with the requirements in paragraph (r) of Sec. 
1944.215. Locating sites in less than desirable locations of the 
community because they are in close proximity to undesirable influences 
such as high activity railroad tracks; adjacent to or behind industrial 
sites; bordering sites or structures which are not decent, safe, or 
sanitary; or bordering sites which have potential environmental concerns 
such as processing plants, etc., is not acceptable. Screening such sites 
does not make them acceptable. Sites which are not an integral part of a 
residential community and do not have a reasonable access, either by 
location or terrain, to essential community facilities such as water, 
sewerage, schools, shopping, employment opportunities, medical 
facilities, etc., are not acceptable.


<R05>
Sec. 1924.107  Utilities.

    All development under this subpart must have adequate, economic, 
safe, energy efficient, dependable utilities with sufficient easements 
for installation and maintenance.
    (a) Water and wastewater disposal systems--(1) Single Family 
Housing. If sites are served by central water or sewer systems, the 
systems must meet the requirements of paragraphs (a)(2) (i) and (ii) of 
this section. If sites have individual water or sewer systems, they must 
meet the requirements of the state department of health or other 
comparable reviewing and regulatory authority and the minimum 
requirements of exhibit B (available in any RHS field office), 
paragraphs V and VI. Sites in subdivisions of more than 25 dwelling 
units on individual systems, or sites that do not meet the requirements 
of exhibit B, paragraphs V and VI, must have state director concurrence.
    (2) Multiple Family Housing. Proposals processed under this 
paragraph shall be served by centrally owned and operated water and 
wastewater disposal systems unless this is determined by RHS to be 
economically or environmentally not feasible. All central systems, 
whether they are public, community, or private, shall meet the design 
requirements of the state department of health or other comparable 
reviewing and regulatory authority. The regulatory authority

[[Page 139]]

will verify in writing that the water and wastewater systems are in 
compliance with the current provisions of the Safe Drinking Water Act 
and the Clean Water Act, respectively.
    (i) Sites which are not presently served by a central system, but 
are scheduled for tie-in to the central system within 2 years, should 
have all lines installed during the initial construction. Such sites 
must have an approved interim water supply or wastewater disposal system 
installed capable of satisfactory service until the scheduled tie-in 
occurs.
    (ii) In addition to written assurance of compliance with state and 
local requirements, there must be assurance of continuous service at 
reasonable rates for central water and wastewater disposal systems. 
Public ownership is preferred whenever possible. In cases where interim 
facilities are installed pending extension or construction of permanent 
public services, the developer must assume responsibility for the 
operation and maintenance of the interim facility or establish an entity 
for its operation and maintenance which is acceptable to the local 
governing body. If a system is not or will not be publicly owned and 
operated, it must comply with one of the following:
    (A) Be an organization that meets the ownership and operating 
requirements for a water or wastewater disposal system that RHS could 
finance under 7 CFR part 1942, subpart A or be dedicated to and accepted 
by such an organization.
    (B) Be an organization or individual that meets other acceptable 
methods of ownership and operation as outlined in HUD Handbook 4075.12, 
``Ownership and Organization of Central Water and Sewerage Systems.'' 
RHS should be assured that the organization has the right, in its sole 
discretion, to enforce the obligation of the operator of the water and 
sewerage systems to provide satisfactory continuous service at 
reasonable rates.
    (C) Be adequately controlled as to rates and services by a public 
body (unit of Government or public services commission).
    (iii) Multiple family developments of more than 25 units with 
individual system must have national office concurrence.
    (A) [Reserved]
    (B) Supporting information for the proposed individual water 
systems, covering the following points:
    (1) In areas where difficulty is anticipated in developing an 
acceptable water supply, the availability of a water supply will be 
determined before closing the loan.
    (2) Documentation must be provided that the quality of the supply 
meets the chemical, physical, and bacteriological standards of the 
regulatory authority having jurisdiction. The maximum contaminant levels 
of U.S. EPA shall apply. Individual water systems must be tested for 
quantity and bacteriological quality. Where problems are anticipated 
with chemical quality, chemical tests may be required. Chemical tests 
would be limited to analysis for the defects common to the area such as 
iron and manganese, hardness, nitrates, pH, turbidity, color, or other 
undesirable elements. Polluted or contaminated water supplies are 
unacceptable. In all cases, assurance of a potable water supply before 
loan closing is required.
    (C) Supporting information for individual wastewater disposal 
systems with subsurface discharge provided by a soil scientist, 
geologist, soils engineer, or other person recognized by the local 
regulatory authority. This data must include the following:
    (1) Assurance of nonpollution of ground water. The local regulatory 
authority having jurisdiction must be consulted to ensure that 
installation of individual wastewater systems will not pollute ground 
water sources or create other health hazards or otherwise violate State 
water quality standards.
    (2) Records of percolation tests. Guidance for performing these 
tests is included in the EPA design manual, ``Onsite Wastewater 
Treatment and Disposal Systems'' and the minimum RHS requirements are in 
exhibit B, paragraph VI. (These may be waived by the state director when 
the state has established other acceptable means for allowing onsite 
disposal.)
    (3) Determination of soil types and description. The assistance of 
the SCS

[[Page 140]]

or other qualified persons should be obtained for soil type 
determination and a copy of its recommendations included in the 
documentation.
    (4) Description of ground water elevations, showing seasonal 
variations.
    (5) Confirmation of space allowances. An accurate drawing to 
indicate that there is adequate space available to satisfactorily locate 
the individual water and wastewater disposal systems; likewise, 
documented assurance of compliance with all local requirements. 
Structures served by wastewater disposal systems with subsurface 
discharge require larger sites than those structures served by another 
type system.
    (6) Description of exploratory pit observations, if available.
    (D) Supporting information for individual wastewater disposal 
systems with surface discharge covering the following points:
    (1) Effluent standards issued by the appropriate regulatory agency 
that controls the discharge of the proposed individual systems. 
Assurance from this regulatory agency that the effluent standards will 
not be exceeded by the individual systems being proposed must be 
included.
    (2) Program of maintenance, parts, and service available to the 
system-owner for upkeep of the system.
    (3) A plan for local inspection of the system by a responsible 
agency with the authority to ensure compliance with health and safety 
standards.
    (b) Electric service. The power supplier will be consulted by the 
applicant to assure that there is adequate service available to meet the 
needs of the proposed site. Underground service is preferred.
    (c) Gas service. Gas distribution facilities, if provided, will be 
installed according to local requirements where adequate and dependable 
gas service is available.
    (d) Other utilities. Other utilities, if available, will be 
installed according to local requirements.


<R05>
Sec. 1924.108  Grading and drainage.

    (a) General. Soil and geologic conditions must be suitable for the 
type of construction proposed. In questionable or unsurveyed areas, the 
applicant or developer will provide an engineering report with 
supporting data sufficient to identify all pertinent subsurface 
conditions which could adversely affect the structure and show proposed 
solutions. Grading will promote drainage of surface water away from 
buildings and foundations, minimize earth settlement and erosion, and 
assure that drainage from adjacent properties onto the development or 
from the development to adjacent properties does not create a health 
hazard or other undesirable conditions. Grading and drainage will comply 
with exhibit B, paragraphs III and IV, of this subpart.
    (b) Cuts and fills. Development requiring extensive earthwork, cuts 
and fills of 4 feet or more shall be designed by a professional 
engineer. Where topography requires fills or extensive earthwork that 
must support structures and building foundations, these must be 
controlled fills designed, supervised, and tested by a qualified soils 
engineer.
    (c) Slope protection. All slopes must be protected from erosion by 
planting or other means. Slopes may require temporary cover if exposed 
for long periods during construction.
    (d) Storm water systems. The design of storm water systems must 
consider convenience and property protection both at the individual site 
level and the drainage basin level. Storm water systems should be 
compatible with the natural features of the site. In areas with 
inadequate drainage systems, permanent or temporary storm water storage 
shall be an integral part of the overall development plan. Design of 
these facilities shall consider safety, appearance, and economical 
maintenance operations.


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 1924.109-1924.114  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1924.115  Single Family Housing site evaluation.

    (a) Site review. The site approval official will evaluate each site 
(developed or undeveloped) to determine acceptance for the program. 
Information on the site will be provided by the appraiser or site 
approval official on a form provided by RHS and available in any RHS 
field office.

[[Page 141]]

    (b) Site access. Each site must be contiguous to and have direct 
access from:
    (1) A hard surfaced or all weather road which is developed in full 
compliance with public body requirements, is dedicated for public use, 
and is being maintained by a public body or a home owners association 
that has demonstrated its ability or can clearly demonstrate its ability 
to maintain the street; or
    (2) An all weather extended driveway which can serve no more than 
two sites connecting to a hard surface or all weather street or road 
that meets the requirements of paragraph (b)(1); or
    (3) A hard surfaced street in a condominium or townhouse complex 
which:
    (i) Is owned in common by the members or a member association and is 
maintained by a member association that has demonstrated its ability or 
can clearly demonstrate its ability to maintain the street; and
    (ii) Connects to a publicly owned and dedicated street or road.
    (c) Exceptions to street requirements. A site not meeting the 
conditions in paragraph (b) of this section will be acceptable if:
    (1) The applicant is a builder for a conditional commitment (a loan 
will not be approved until the site meets the conditions in paragraph 
(b) of this section), or the builder posts an irrevocable performance 
and payment bond (or similar acceptable assurance) that assures the site 
approval official that the site will be developed to meet the conditions 
in paragraph (b) of this section; or
    (2) The site is recommended by the site approval official and 
approved by the state director. A request for state director approval 
must justify that it is in the best interest of both the government and 
the applicant to approve the site.
    (d) Site layout. (1) Sites shall be surveyed and platted. Permanent 
markers shall be placed at all corners.
    (2) Sites shall meet all requirements of state and local entities 
and RHS.
    (e) Covenants, conditions and restrictions. Sites in subdivisions 
shall be protected by covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs) to 
preserve the character, value, and amenities of the residential 
community and to avoid or mitigate potential environmental impacts 
unless, an exception is granted by RHS after considering the suitability 
of local ordinances, zoning, and other land use controls.
    (1) CC&Rs shall be recorded in the public land records and 
specifically referenced in each deed.
    (2) The intent of the CC&Rs is to assure the developers that the 
purchasers will use the land in conformance with the planned objectives 
for the community. In addition, the CC&Rs should assure the purchasers 
that the land covered by the CC&Rs will be used as planned and that 
other purchasers will use and maintain the land as planned to prevent 
changes in the character of the neighborhood that would adversely impact 
values or create a nuisance.


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 1924.116-1924.118  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1924.119  Site Loans.

    Subdivisions approved under subpart G of part 1822 (FmHA Instruction 
444.8) or exhibit F of subpart I of part 1944 (available in any RHS 
field office), will meet the general requirements of this subpart to 
insure lots in the subdivision will meet the requirements of Sec. 
1924.115.


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 1924.120-1924.121  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1924.122  Exception authority.

    The Administrator of RHS may in individual cases, make an exception 
to any requirement or provision of this subpart or address any omission 
of this subpart which is not inconsistent with the authorizing statute 
or other applicable law if the Administrator determines that application 
of the requirement or provision would adversely affect the Government's 
interest. The Administrator will exercise this authority upon the 
written request of the state director or the appropriate program 
assistant administrator. Requests for exceptions must be supported with 
documentation to explain the adverse effect on the Government, proposed 
alternative courses of action, and show how the adverse effect will be 
eliminated or minimized if the exception is granted.

[[Page 142]]


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 1924.123-1924.149  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1924.150  OMB Control Number.

    The reporting requirements contained in this subpart have been 
approved by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and have been 
assigned OMB control number 0575-0164. Public reporting burden for this 
collection of information is estimated to vary from 5 minutes to 10 
minutes per response, with an average of .13 hours per response, 
including time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data 
sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and 
reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this 
burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, 
including suggestions for reducing this burden to the Department of 
Agriculture, Clearance Officer, OIRM, Ag Box 7630, Washington, DC 20250; 
and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project 
(OMB <greek-i>0575-0164), Washington, DC 20503.


<R05>
           Sec. Exhibit A to Subpart C of Part 1924 [Reserved]


<R05>
   Sec. Exhibit B to Subpart C of Part 1924--Site Development Design 
                              Requirements

    This exhibit prescribes site development requirements to be used in 
developing residential sites in all housing programs. These requirements 
cover only those areas which involve health and safety concerns. They 
are not intended to cover all aspects of site development. Applicants 
and developers are expected to follow local practice, as a minimum, in 
all areas of site development not addressed in this exhibit. When State, 
local, or other requirements are applicable in addition to FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354's requirements, the most 
stringent requirement shall apply.
    Proper integration of the natural features of a site with the 
manmade improvements is one of the most critical aspects of residential 
development. Poor site planning in large scale subdivisions, rental 
projects and individual sites, has resulted in a loss of valuable 
private and public natural resources and caused economic burdens and 
conditions unsuitable for healthy and pleasant living. Proper site 
design can preserve desirable natural features of the site, minimize 
expenses for streets and utilities, and provide a safe and pleasant 
living environment.

                            Table of Contents

                               I. Streets

A. Types
    1. Collector Streets
    2. Local Streets
B. Design Features
    1. Emergency Access
    2. Cul-de-sacs
    3. Intersection Angle
    4. Intersection Sight Distance
C. Street Geometry
    1. Definitions
    2. Design Requirements
D. Construction

                           II. Walks and Steps

A. Walks
B. Exterior Steps Not Contiguous to Dwelling or Building
    1. Flight
    2. Risers and Treads
    3. Landings
    4. Handrails

                              III. Grading

A. Compaction
B. Gradients

                              IV. Drainage

A. General
    1. Collection and Disposal
    2. Concentrated Flow
B. Drainage Design and Flood Hazard Exposure
    1. Storm Frequences
    2. Street Drainage
    3. Foundation Drainage
C. Primary Storm Sewer
    1. Pipe Size
    2. Minimum Gradient
    3. Easements
D. Drainage Swals and Gutters
    1. Design
    2. Easements
E. Downspouts
    1. Outfall
    2. Piped Drainage
F. Storm Inlets and Catch Basins
    1. Openings
    2. Access
G. Drywells

                         V. Water Supply Systems

A. Individual Water Systems
    1. General
    2. Well Location
    3. Well Construction
    4. Pumps and Equipment
    5. Storage Tanks
B. Community Water Systems
    1. Definition
    2. Design

                     VI. Wastewater Disposal Systems

A. Individual Wastewater Disposal Systems

[[Page 143]]

    1. General
    2. Percolation Tests
    3. Subsurface Absorption Systems
B. Community Wastewater Disposal Systems
    1. Definition
    2. Design

                               I. Streets

    A. Types--1. Collector streets. Collector streets are feeder streets 
which carry traffic from local streets to the major system of arterial 
streets and highways. They include the principal entrance streets of 
residential developments and streets for circulation within such 
developments.
    2. Local streets. Local streets are minor streets used primarily for 
access to abutting properties. These include drives serving multi-family 
housing units.
    B. Design Features--1. Emergency Access. Access for fire equipment 
and other emergency vehicles shall be within 100 feet of main building 
entrances.
    2. Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sac streets shall have a turn-around with an 
outside roadway diameter of at least 80 feet, and a right-of-way 
diameter of at least 100 feet.
    3. Intersection Angle. Streets shall be laid out to intersect as 
nearly as possible at right angles and no street shall intersect any 
other street at an angle less than 75 degrees. Curb radii shall be a 
minimum of 20 feet for street intersections.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC22SE91.000

    4. Intersection Sight Distance. Adequate distances must be 
maintained at intersections. Vehicles must be visible when within 75 
feet of the centerlines of uncontrolled intersecting streets.
    C. Street Geometry--1. Definitions. The definitions in Sections 
I.C.1.a and I.C.1.b. apply to the requirements in Section I.C.2.
    a. Terrain Classifications.
    (1) Ordinary--Slope less than 8%.
    (2) Rolling--Slope range of 8% to 15%.
    (3) Hilly--Slope greater than 15%.
    b. Development Density (Number of Lots). (Land Area minus 
Undeveloped Areas greater than Average Lot Size)
    (1) Low--Less than 2 lots per acre.
    (2) Medium--2 to 6.0 lots per acre.
    (3) High-More than six lots per acre.
    2. Design Requirements. Collector streets and local streets shall 
comply with the requirements in tables 1 and 2 unless an exception is 
granted by the State Director. These requirements may need modification 
in localities having winter icing conditions.

                                         Table 1--Pavement Widths (feet)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                       Development density
                Street type                      On-street parallel parking     --------------------------------
                                                                                    Low       Medium      High
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Collector..................................  Prohibited........................         26         32         36
Collector..................................  No Restrictions...................         36         36         40
Local......................................  Prohibited........................         18         18         20
Local......................................  Partial, One Side \1\.............         18         20         26
Local......................................  Partial, One Side \1\.............         22         26         32
Local......................................  Total, One Side \2\...............         22         26         26
Local......................................  Total, Both Sides \2\.............         26         32         36
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(\1\) At least one parking space per dwelling is provided off-street.
(\2\) No parking spaces are provided off-street.


[[Page 144]]


                      Table 2--Street Design (feet)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                     Terrain
                                        --------------------------------
                                          Ordinary   Rolling     Hilly
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Collector street:
  (a) Minimum centerline radius of             300        225        150
   curvature...........................
  (b) Minimum sight distance...........        250        200        150
  (c) Minimum right-of-way width.......         60         60         60
(2) Local Street:
  (a) Minimum centerline radius of             200        150        100
   curvature...........................
  (b) Minimum sight distance...........        200        150        100
  (c) Minimum right-of-way width \1\...         50         50         50
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(\1\) For cul-de-sac streets, the minimum right-of-way width is 40 feet.

    D. Construction. Street configuration and wearing surfaces must 
provide safe and economical access to all building sites. The design and 
construction of the street shall be appropriate for all anticipated 
traffic, climatic and soil conditions. Streets shall meet or exceed all 
local, county, and State requirements.

                           II. Walks and Steps

    A. Walks. Where walks are provided, they shall be located to assure 
a minimum vertical clearance of 7 feet from all permanent or temporary 
obstructions. Walks shall have a slip resistant surface.
    B. Exterior Steps Not Contiguous to Dwelling or Building--1. Flight. 
a. Single steps or flights of steps exceeding a vertical height of 12 
feet shall not be accepted.
    b. Steps shall be set back from an intersecting walk or drive a 
minimum of 1 foot at a retaining wall and 2 feet at slopes.
    2. Risers and Treads. a. Risers shall be a maximum of 6 inches, a 
minimum of 3 inches and uniform throughout the flight.
    b. Treads shall be a minimum of 12 inches and uniform throughout the 
flight.
    c. Treads shall have a slip resistant surface.
    d. Treads shall be pitched appropriately to ensure drainage.
    3. Landings. a. Minimum length shall equal 3 feet or walk width 
whichever is greater.
    b. A change in direction in a flight of stairs shall be accomplished 
only at a landing or by a winder which has a tread width at a point 18 
inches from the converging end, equal to the full straight stair tread 
width.
    4. Handrails. Stairways having a flight rise exceeding 30 inches 
shall have a 36 inch high handrail located on one side for stairs 5 feet 
or less in width and on both sides of stairways over 5 feet wide.

                              III. Grading

    A. Compaction--All fill for street or home construction shall have 
compaction of not less than 95 percent maximum density, as determined by 
proctor or other accepted testing methods. Maximum thickness of 
compaction layers shall be 6 inches except where compaction equipment of 
demonstrated capability is used under the direction of a qualified soils 
engineer. Earth fill used to support a building foundation shall be a 
controlled fill which is designed, supervised, and tested by a qualified 
soils engineer in accordance with good practice.
    B. Gradients. Grading design shall be arranged to assure safe and 
convenient all-weather pedestrian and vehicular access to residential 
buildings and to all other necessary site facilities. Site grading shall 
be designed to establish building floor elevations and ground surface 
grades which allow drainage of surface water away from buildings and 
adjacent sites. Grading design shall conform with tables 3 and 4.

                Table 3--Access and Parking Gradients \1\
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     Minimum               Maximum
                             -------------------------------------------
                                          Crown or              Crown or
                                Center     cross      Center     cross
                                 line      slope       line      slope
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Streets.....................        0.5        1.0       14.0        5.0
Street Intersections........        0.5        1.0     \2\5.0        5.0
Driveways (\3\).............        .05        1.0       14.0        5.0
Sidewalks (\4\):
    Concrete................  .........        0.5
    Bituminous..............  .........        1.0
    Building Entrances &            1.0  .........       12.0        5.0
     Short Walks............
    Main Walks..............        0.5  .........       10.0        5.0

[[Page 145]]

 
    Adjoining Steps.........  .........  .........        2.0
    Landings................  .........        1.0
    Stepped Ramp Treads.....        1.0  .........        2.0        5.0
Parking.....................  .........        0.5        5.0        5.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Approximate Equivalents .5%=\1/16\<gr-thn-eq> ft., 1.0=\1/8\<gr-thn-
  eq> ft., 2.0%=\1/4\<gr-thn-eq> ft., 5.0%=\5/8\<gr-thn-eq> ft.,
  10.0%=1\1/4\<gr-thn-eq> ft., 12.0%=1\1/2\<gr-thn-eq> ft., 21%=2\5/
  8\<gr-thn-eq> ft.
\2\ Grades approaching intersections shall not exceed 5 percent for a
  distance of not less than 100 feet from the centerline of the
  intersection.
\3\ Vertical transitions shall percent contact of car undercarriage of
  bumper with driveway surface.
\4\ Five percent maximum for major use by elderly tenants.


                      Table 4--Slope Gradients \1\
                              [In percent]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                     Minimum    Maximum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Slope Away From Foundations:
    Pervious Surfaces.............................    \2\ 5.0   \3\ 21.0
    Impervious Surfaces...........................     \2\1.0       21.0
                Pervious Surfaces:
    Ground Frost Area.............................        2.0
    Non-Ground Frost Areas........................     \4\1.0
Impervious Surfaces...............................        0.5
Slopes to be maintained by Machine................  .........    \3\33.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See table 3, footnote (1).
\2\ Minimum length of 10 feet or as limited by property lines.
\3\ Minimum length of 4 feet.
\4\ The minimum is 2.0% if the annual precipitation is more than 50
  inches.

                              IV. Drainage

    A. General--1. Collection and Disposal. Surface and subsurface 
drainage systems shall be provided, as appropriate, for collection and 
disposal of storm drainage and subsurface water. These systems shall 
provide for the safety and convenience of occupants. They shall protect 
dwellings, other improvements and useable lot areas from water damage, 
flooding, and erosion.
    2. Concentrated Flow. Where storm drainage flow is concentrated, 
permanently maintained facilities shall be provided to prevent 
significant erosion and other damage or flooding on site or on adjacent 
properties.
    B. Drainage Design and Flood Hazard Exposure--1. Storm Frequency. 
Drainage facilities shall be designed for a 10 year storm frequency of 
24-hour duration. Full potential development of all contributing areas 
shall be used as a basis for this determination.
    2. Street Drainage. Streets shall be useable during runoff 
equivalent to a 10-year return frequency. Where drainage outfall is 
inadequate to prevent runoff equivalent to a 10-year return frequency 
from ponding over 6 inches deep, streets shall be made passable for 
local commonly used emergency vehicles during runoff equivalent to a 25-
year return frequency except where an alternative access street not 
subject to such ponding is available.
    3. Foundation Drainage. Appropriate crawl space and foundation 
drainage shall be provided for the removal of subsurface moisture.
    C. Primary Storm Sewer--1. Pipe Size. Pipe size for the primary 
storm sewer (any storm sewer or inlet lateral located in a street or 
other public right-of-way) shall have an inside diameter based on design 
analysis but not less than 15 inches. Where anticipated runoff from the 
five-year return frequency rainfall will not fill a 15 inch pipe, a 
primary storm sewer system usually is unnecessary.
    2. Minimum Gradient. Minimum gradient shall be selected to provide 
for self-scouring of the conduit under low-flow conditions and for 
removal of sediments foreseeable from the drainage area.
    3. Easements. Easements for storm sewers shall be a minimum of 10 
feet in width.
    D. Drainage Swals and Gutters--1. Design. Paved gutters shall have a 
minimum grade of 0.5 percent. Paved gutters and unpaved drainage swales 
shall have adequate depth and width to accommodate the maximum 
foreseeable runoff without overflow. Swales and gutters shall be seeded, 
sodded, sprigged or paved as appropriate to minimize potential erosion. 
Side slopes shall be no steeper than 2:1.
    2. Easements. Surface channels shall have an easement which is at 
least the width of the channel plus 10 feet.

[[Page 146]]

    E. Downspouts--1. Outfall. Where downspouts are provided, they shall 
either be connected to an available storm sewer, provided with suitable 
splash blocks, or empty at acceptable locations onto paved areas so that 
water drains away from buildings. Downspouts shall not connect to 
sanitary sewers.
    2. Piped Drainage. Piped roof drainage from buildings shall be 
connected to available storm sewers or empty at locations where no 
erosion or other damage will be caused.
    F. Storm Inlets and Catch Basins--1. Openings. Where inlets are 
accessible to small children, openings shall have one dimension limited 
to 6 inch access. Inlet openings in paved areas shall be designed to 
avoid entrapment or impedence of bicycles, baby carriages, etc.
    2. Access. Access for cleaning shall be provided to all inlet boxes 
and catch basins.
    G. Drywells--Drywells for the disposal of water from foundation 
drains, crawl spaces, and other small quantity sources shall be 
permissible where the bottom of drywells project into strata of 
undistributed porous soil at a level where the bottom of the drywell 
will be above the ground water table at its highest seasonal elevation.

                         V. Water Supply Systems

    A. Individual Water Systems--1. General. a. In this subpart, an 
individual water system is a system which serves fewer customers or 
connections than the lower threshold for community systems stated in the 
Safe Drinking Water Act.
    b. The system for an individual household should be capable of 
delivering a sustained flow of 5 gpm. A system supplying water to 
multiple household shall be designed by a Professional Engineer and have 
sufficient capacity to serve estimated demand. A test of at least 4 
hours duration shall be conducted to determine the yield and maximum 
drawdown for all wells developed as part of an individual water system. 
This test may be waived by the State Office based on the hydrologic and 
geologic conditions in the area.
    c. Water that requires continual or repetitive treatment to be safe 
bacterially is not acceptable.
    d. After installation, the system should be disinfected in 
accordance with the recommendations of the health authority. In the 
absence of a health authority, system cleaning and disinfection should 
conform with the current EPA Manual of Individual Water Supply Systems.
    e. Any method for individual water supply contained herein which is 
not permitted by the local health authority having jurisdiction shall 
not be used.
    2. Well Location--a. A well located within the foundation walls of a 
dwelling is not acceptable except in arctic and sub-arctic regions.
    b. Water which comes from soil formation which may be polluted or 
contaminated or is fissured or creviced or which is less than 20 feet 
below the natural ground surface (subject to the requirements of the 
local health authority) is not acceptable.
    c. Individual water supply systems are not acceptable for individual 
lots in areas where chemical soil poisoning is practiced if the 
overburden of soil between the ground surface and the water bearing 
strata is coarse-grained sand, gravel, or porous rock, or is creviced in 
a manner which will permit the recharge water to carry the toxicants 
into the zone of saturation.
    d. Table 5 shall be used in establishing the minimum acceptable 
distances between wells and sources of pollution located on either the 
same or adjoining lots. These distances may be increased by either the 
health authority having jurisdiction or the FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 State Director.

               Table 5--Distance From Source of Pollution
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Minimum
                                                              horizontal
                    Source of pollution                        distance
                                                                (feet)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Property Line..............................................           10
Septic Tank................................................           50
Absorption field...........................................       \1\100
Seepage pit................................................       \1\100
Absorption Bed.............................................       \1\100
Sewer Lines w/Permanent Watertight Joints..................           10
Other Sewer Lines..........................................           50
Chemically Poisoned Soil...................................       \1\100
Dry Well...................................................           50
Other......................................................      (\2\)--
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Notes:
\1\ The horizontal distance between the sewage absorption system and the
  well, or the chemically poisoned soil and the well, may be reduced to
  50 feet only where the ground surface is effectively separated from
  the water bearing formation by an extensive, continuous impervious
  strata of clay, hard-pan, or rock. The well shall be constructed so as
  to prevent the entrance of surface water and contaminants.
\2\ Other sources of pollution could be fuel oil or gasoline storage
  tanks, farm yards or chemical storage tanks, etc. The well should be
  separated from these sources of pollution a distance recommended by
  the local health authority.

    3. Well Construction--a. The well shall be constructed to allow the 
pump to be easily placed and to function properly.
    b. All drilled wells shall be provided with a sound, durable and 
watertight casing capable of sustaining the loads imposed. The casing 
shall extend from a point several feet below the water level at drawdown 
or from an impervious strata above the water level, to 12 inches above 
either the ground surface or the pump room floor. The casing shall be 
sealed at the upper opening.
    c. Bored wells shall be lined with concrete, vitrified clay, or 
equivalent materials.
    d. The space between the casing or liner and the wall of the well 
hole shall be sealed with cement grout.

[[Page 147]]

    e. The well casing shall not be used to convey water except under 
positive pressure. A separate drop pipe shall be used for suction line.
    f. When sand or silt is encountered in the water-bearing formation, 
the well shall either be gravel packed, or a removable strainer or 
screen shall be installed.
    g. The surface of the ground above and around the well shall be 
graded to drain surface water away from the well.
    h. Openings in the casing, cap, or concrete cover for the entrance 
of pipes, pump or manholes, shall be made watertight.
    i. If a breather is provided, it shall extend above the highest 
level to which surface water may rise. The breather shall be watertight, 
and the open end shall be screened and positioned to prevent entry of 
dust, insects and foregin objects.
    4. Pumps and Equipment--a. Pumps shall be capable of delivering the 
volume of water required herein under normal operating pressures within 
the living unit. Well pump capacity shall not exceed the output of the 
well.
    b. Pumps and equipment shall be mounted to be free of objectionable 
noises, vibrations, flooding, pollution, and freezing.
    c. Suction lines shall terminate below maximum drawdown of the water 
level in the well.
    d. Horizontal segments of suction line shall be placed below the 
frost line in a sealed casing pipe or in at least 4 inches of concrete. 
The distance from suction line to sources of pollution shall be not less 
than shown in table 5.
    5. Storage Tanks--a. A system for an individual household shall 
include a pressure tank having a minimum capacity of 42-gallons. 
However, prepressured tanks and other pressurizing devices are 
acceptable provided that delivery between pump cycles equals or exceeds 
that of a 42 gallon tank. Storage capacity on a system for multiple 
households must be sufficient to meet estimated peak demands.
    b. Tanks shall be equipped with a clean-out plug at the lowest 
point, and if pressurized, a suitable pressure relief valve.
    c. When additional storage is necessary because the well yield will 
not meet the system peak demands, all nonpressurized intermediate tanks 
shall be designed and installed in a manner that will prevent the 
pollution or degradation of the water supply.
    B. Community Water Systems--1. Definition. In this subpart, a 
community water system is a system which meets the definition in the 
Safe Drinking Water Act.
    2. Design. A community water system shall be designed by a 
qualified, professional engineer licensed in the state in which the 
water system will be located. Community water systems shall comply with 
all Federal and State laws.

                     VI. Wastewater Disposal Systems

    Each dwelling shall be provided with a water-carried system adequate 
to dispose of domestic wastes in a manner which will not create a 
nuisance, contaminate any existing or prospective water source or water 
supply, or in any way endanger the public health.
    A. Individual Wastewater Disposal Systems--1. General. a. In this 
subpart, an individual wastewater disposal system is a sewage disposal 
system which serves only 1 dwelling unit.
    b. When service from an acceptable public or community system is not 
available or feasible, and ground water and soil conditions are 
acceptable, an individual system may be used.
    c. Each individual wastewater disposal system shall consist of a 
house sewer, a pretreatment unit (e.g., septic tank, individual package 
treatment plant), and acceptable absorption system (subsurface 
absorption field, seepage pit(s), or subsurface absorption bed). The 
system shall be designed to receive all sanitary sewage (bathrooms, 
kitchen and laundry) from the dwelling, but not footing or roof 
drainage. It shall be designed so that gases generated anywhere in the 
system can easily flow back to the building sewer stack.
    2. Percolation Tests--a. Percolation tests are required unless a 
waiver is granted by the National Office. Waivers may be granted on a 
statewide or local basis in cases where an onsite evaluation of soils 
would be performed by a qualified soil technician, soil scientist, or 
engineer. Requests for waivers must describe the qualifications of the 
person evaluating the soils and discuss the criteria to be used in 
designing the absorption system.
    b. In uniform soils one percolation test shall be made within each 
area proposed for an absorption system. If significant soil variations 
are encountered or expected, additional tests shall be made for each 
variation.
    c. Percolation tests shall be conducted in accordance with good 
practice. Guidance for performing these tests is included in the EPA 
design manual, ``Onsite Wastewater Treatment and Disposal Systems.''
    3. Subsurface Absorption System--a. Where percolation rates, soil 
characteristics and site conditions are acceptable, an absorption system 
may be installed in an area which is well drained, has an acceptable 
slope, and is acceptable for excavation.
    b. Soils with percolation rates less than 1 minute per inch may be 
used if the soil is replaced with a layer of loamy or fine sand at least 
2 feet thick. (Refer to the EPA Design Manual, ``Onsite Wastewater 
Treatment and Disposal System''.)
    c. Soils with percolation rates greater than 60 minutes per inch are 
not acceptable for subsurface wastewater disposal systems.

[[Page 148]]

    B. Community Wastewater Disposal Systems--1. Definition. In this 
subpart, a community wastewater disposal system is any wastewater 
disposal system which serves more than 1 dwelling unit.
    2. Design. A community wastewater disposal system shall be designed 
by a qualified, professional engineer licensed in the state in which the 
system will be located.

[52 FR 19284, May 22, 1987]


<R05>
 Sec. Exhibit C to Subpart C of Part 1924--Checklist of Visual Exhibits 

            and Documentation for RRH, RCH, and LH Proposals

                     U.S. Department of Agriculture

  Farmers Home Administration or its successor agency under Public Law 
                                 103-354

    This exhibit lists visual exhibits and documentation necessary for 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 to properly 
evaluate proposed development. Intermediate consultation by the 
applicant, builder-developer and others hereafter referred to as the 
sponsor with the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
District or State Offices should be as frequent as necessary to reduce 
chances of misunderstandings and limit the amount of non-productive time 
and expense for all parties concerned.
    I. Preapplication Submission Documents: The sponsor will submit the 
following information to the District Director to determine feasibility 
of the project and general conformance with FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 policy:
    A. Form 1940-20, ``Request for Environmental Information.'' Portions 
of the form must be completed when the submission contains more than 4 
dwelling units and the entire form must be completed when the submission 
contains more than 25 dwelling units. The form and guidance concerning 
assembly of the information is available at any FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 office.
    B. Location Map. A general site location map of the area indicating 
the adjacent land zoning and uses, the present and future access roads 
to the site as well as the proximity to shopping, schools, churches, and 
major transportation facilities with note of traffic volumes. If a 
satisfactory map of the locality is not available, a clear and 
preferably scaled rough sketch map that provides the required 
information will be sufficient.
    C. Property Survey Map. A current survey map of the project site 
showing the boundaries as well as all existing known features 
specifically including utilities, easements, access roads, floodplains, 
drainageways, rock outcroppings and wooded areas or specimen trees. If a 
current survey does not exist, the most accurate document which is 
available will be submitted.
    D. Soils Map and Report. A complete soils map and report, including 
``site specific'' interpretations and recommendations, from the local or 
county representative of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil 
Conservation Service (SCS) Office will be included with the location and 
feasibility submission. A determination of whether or not any lands 
described in USDA Regulation 9500-3 are impacted by the proposed 
development should also be included. The local SCS office may provide 
recommendations for the development of suitable drainage and landscaping 
plans later in the planning process.
    E. Market survey. A market survey will be submitted in accordance 
with the requirements of the respective loan program as indicated in 
part 1944, subparts D and E of this chapter.
    F. Request for Exceptions. Any need for State or National Office 
exception(s) should be identified at this stage in the processing. 
Appropriate exception(s) should be requested and obtained before 
proceeding to the preliminary submission.
    G. Other. The applicant will need to submit any additional 
information that may be needed as indicated in subpart D or exhibit A-7 
of subpart E of part 1944 of this chapter. This may include but is not 
limited to:
    1. Schematic design drawings showing the proposed plot plan, typical 
unit plans, and elevations. If available, the proposed preliminary 
drawings and specifications may be submitted. This would be of 
assistance if it is determined that the loan must receive National 
Office authorization.
    2. Type of construction.
    3. The total number of living units and the number of each type of 
living unit proposed.
    4. Type of utilities such as water, sewer, gas, and electricity and 
whether each is public, community, or individually owned.
    II. Application Submission Documents: After it is determined by FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 that the project is 
feasible and the location conforms with the intent of the funding 
program, the sponsor will submit the following information to the 
District Director in addition to those materials submitted previously.
    A. Property Survey. A survey (where 1 inch represents no more than 
100 feet) of the property lot showing the exact boundaries and corners 
of the property accompanied by a written description of said boundaries. 
Also, locations of predominant features such as utilities, easements, 
access points, floodplains, drainageways, rock outcroppings and wooded 
areas or specimen trees affecting the proposed development must be 
included. This document shall bear the seal of a professional licensed 
to provide surveying services in the State in which the project will be

[[Page 149]]

located. This survey could be a part of item D below.
    B. Topographic Map. An accurate topographic map showing existing and 
proposed contours with a scale compatible with the size of the project. 
The site shall be shown at a reasonable scale with 5-foot contour 
intervals. Where the site is unusually level or steep, the contour 
intervals may be varied accordingly.
    C. Preliminary Site Plan. A line drawing, to scale, showing proposed 
street locations with profiles and widths, lot layouts, major 
drainageways, and other development planned. Preliminary sections and 
details shall be provided for the street construction, curbs and 
gutters, drainageways, and other physical improvements.
    D. Preliminary Dwelling Drawings and Specifications. Drawings of the 
dwelling units, preliminary floor plans and specifications, elevations 
and sample site plans showing the placement of the individual buildings 
should be submitted.
    E. Statement of Planning and Zoning Compliance. Local, county and 
State approvals as applicable. If change of zoning or variance is 
required, the status of the variance or change of zoning shall be 
documented.
    F. Technical Service Contracts. Executed contracts for the 
professional services of an architect, engineer, land surveyor, 
landscape architect, site planner and/or soil engineer will be submitted 
as appropriate for the planning of the proposed development.
    G. Utility Approvals. Statements of approval and feasibility for 
utility systems as follows:
    1. Verification of adequate capacity and approval to tie-in with 
local existing water, wastewater disposal, electric, telephone, and 
other utility systems, as appropriate.
    2. Tentative approval of local or State health authority for 
individual water and/or wastewater disposal systems when it is clear 
that central systems are unfeasible at this time. Use Sec. 
1924.108(a)(5) of this subpart when preparing information required.
    H. Facility Acceptance. Evidence that the appropriate public body is 
willing to accept and maintain streets, common areas, lighting, fire 
hydrants, sidewalks, drainageways, and utilities, as appropriate, when 
dedicated to said body.
    I. Preliminary Specifications. Outline specifications describing all 
the proposed materials to be used and how they are to be applied. These 
are only the materials used in the land development and construction of 
the streets, drainage, and utility work.
    J. Incremental Slopes Plan. If areas of common slope are not 
identified elsewhere in adequate detail, this information should be 
provided in a separate plan.
    K. Preliminary Grading Plan. This plan will indicate degree of work 
required to provide positive drainage of all building sites and control 
measures to be taken to eliminate soil erosion. Dwelling locations may 
be shown if they can be predetermined.
    L. Other. The applicant will need to submit any additional 
information that may be needed as indicated in the respective loan 
program regulations as indicated in part 1944, subparts D and E and part 
1822, subpart F of this chapter (FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 Instruction 444.7). This may include but not be 
limited to:
    1. A detailed trade-item cost breakdown of the project for such 
items as land and right-of-way, building construction, equipment, 
utility connections, architectural/engineering and legal fees, and both 
on- and off-site improvements. The cost breakdown also should show 
separately the items not included in the loan, such as furnishings and 
equipment. This trade-item cost breakdown should be updated just prior 
to loan approval.
    2. Information on the method of construction, on the proposed 
contractor if a construction contract is to be negotiated and on the 
architectural, engineering, and legal services to be provided.
    3. For all projects containing over four units the applicant will 
submit an Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing Plan for approval by FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 in accordance with 
Sec. 1901.203 of subpart E to part 1901 of this chapter. The 
Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing Plan must be prepared in a complete, 
meaningful, responsive and detailed manner.
    4. A description and justification of any related facilities 
(including but not limited to workshops, community buildings, recreation 
center, central cooking and dining facilities, or other similar 
facilities to meet essential needs) to be financed wholly or in part 
with loan funds.
    III. Technical Documents Necessary for the Obligation of Funds. All 
decisions regarding the conceptual design of the proposed project should 
be made prior to this submission. This effort is mainly to demonstrate 
that those agreed upon concepts have been transformed into construction 
documents and the necessary approvals have been granted. All items 
requiring revision or more detailed information as determined by the 
review of the preliminary submission will be resolved before the sponsor 
prepares the final submission. All documents shall be executed in a 
professional manner and shall carry the appropriate designation 
attesting to the professional qualifications of the architect, engineer, 
land surveyor or site planner. All documents will be accurately drawn at 
an appropriate scale.

[52 FR 19284, May 22, 1987, as amended at 56 FR 2202, Jan. 22, 1991]

[[Page 150]]

Subparts D-E [Reserved]


<R04>
     Subpart F_Complaints and Compensation for Construction Defects

    Source: 56 FR 40241, Aug. 14, 1991, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1924.251  Purpose.

    This subpart contains policies and procedures for receiving and 
resolving complaints concerning the construction of dwellings and 
construction, installation and set-up of manufactured homes (herein 
called ``units''), financed by the Farmers Home Administration (FmHA)or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354, and for compensating 
borrowers for structural defects under section 509(c) of the Housing Act 
of 1949, as amended. Provisions of this subpart do not apply to 
dwellings financed with guaranteed section 502 loans.


<R05>
Sec. 1924.252  Policy.

    FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 is responsible 
for receiving and resolving all complaints concerning the construction 
of dwellings and the construction, installation and set-up of units 
financed by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354. FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 must determine whether 
defects are structural or non-structural. If the defect is structural 
and is covered by the builder's/dealer-contractor's (the ``contractor'') 
warranty, the contractor is expected to correct the defect. If the 
contractor cannot or will not correct the defect, the costs of 
correcting the defect may be paid by the Government, or the borrower may 
be compensated for correcting the defect, under the provisions of this 
subpart. If the defect is non-structural but is covered under the 
provisions of the contractor's warranty or independent home warranty, 
the contractor is still expected to correct the defect. FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 will assist the borrower in 
obtaining assistance through the independent home warranty company's 
and/or manufacturer's complaint resolution process. However, if the 
contractor cannot or will not correct a non-structural defect covered 
under the provisions of the contractor's warranty, the Government will 
not pay the costs for correcting the defect, nor will the borrower be 
compensated for doing so.


<R05>
Sec. 1924.253  Definitions.

    As used in this subpart, the following definitions apply:
    (a) Newly constructed dwelling. One which:
    (1) Is financed with a section 502 insured loan;
    (2) Was constructed substantially or wholly under the contract 
method, or under a conditional commitment, or, as to only work performed 
by a contractor or covered by a manufacturer's warranty, under the 
mutual self-help program;
    (3) Was not more than one year old and not previously occupied as a 
residence at the time financial assistance was granted unless FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 has extended the 
conditional commitment issued on a newly constructed dwelling in 
accordance with 7 CFR part 3550; and
    (4) Had the required construction inspections performed by FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354, the Department of Housing 
and Urban Development (HUD), or the Veterans Administration (VA).
    (b) Newly constructed manufactured home (unit). One which:
    (1) Is financed with a section 502 insured loan;
    (2) Was not more than one year old and not previously occupied as a 
residence at the time financial assistance was granted; and
    (3) Is built to the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and 
Safety Standards (FMHCSS) and is certified by an affixed label as shown 
in exhibit J of subpart A of part 1924 of this chapter.
    (c) Non-structural defect. A construction defect which does not 
affect the overall useful life, habitability, or structural integrity of 
the dwelling or unit. Some non-structural defects may be covered under 
the contractor's warranty. Examples of non-structural defects include, 
but are not limited to:

[[Page 151]]

    (1) Cracks attributed to normal curing or settlement.
    (2) Cosmetic defects in cabinets, woodwork, floorcovering, 
wallcovering, ornamental trim, etc.
    (3) Improper or incomplete seeding or sodding of yard, or failure of 
trees, shrubs, grass and other landscaping items to thrive.
    (4) Improper grading of yard, unless the grade is causing damage 
which may lead to a structural defect.
    (d) Structural defect. A defect in the dwelling or unit, 
installation or set-up of a unit, or a related facility or a deficiency 
in the site or site development which directly and significantly reduces 
the useful life, habitability, or integrity of the dwelling or unit. The 
defect may be due to faulty material, poor workmanship, or latent causes 
that existed when the dwelling or unit was constructed. The term 
includes, but is not limited to:
    (1) Structural failures which directly and significantly affect the 
basic integrity of the dwelling or unit such as in the foundation, 
footings, basement walls, slabs, floors, framing, walls, ceiling, or 
roof.
    (2) Major deficiencies in the utility components of the dwelling or 
unit or site such as faulty wiring, or failure of sewage disposal or 
water supply systems located on the property securing the loan caused by 
faulty materials or improper installation.
    (3) Serious defects in or improper installation of heating systems 
or central air conditioning.
    (4) Defects in or improper installation of safety and security 
devices, such as windows, external doors, locks, smoke detectors, 
railings, etc., as well as failure to provide or properly install 
devices to aid occupancy of dwellings by handicapped individuals, where 
required.
    (5) Defects in or improper installation of protective materials, 
such as insulation, siding, roofing material, exterior paint, etc.

[56 FR 40241, Aug. 14, 1991, as amended at 67 FR 78327, Dec. 24, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 1924.254-1924.257  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1924.258  Notification of borrowers.

    FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 will notify by 
letter all borrowers who receive Section 502 RH financial assistance for 
a newly constructed dwelling or unit of the provisions of this subpart. 
Subsequent owners of eligible dwellings will also be notified in 
accordance with this section. Borrowers will be notified within 30 days 
after the loan is closed, or within 30 days after final inspection, 
whichever is later. This notification will contain information 
concerning time frames for filing claims under this subpart. FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 will also notify and advise 
borrowers of the construction defects procedure at any time construction 
defects are apparent within the statutory time frame and favorable 
results cannot be obtained from the contractor. This notification will 
be documented in the borrower's case file.


<R05>
Sec. 1924.259  Handling dwelling construction complaints.

    This section describes the procedure for handling construction 
defect complaints.
    (a) Each borrower who complains about construction defects will be 
requested to make a written complaint using a format specified by FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 (available in any FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 office). All known 
defects will be listed. An oral complaint may be accepted if making a 
written complaint will impose a hardship on the borrower. If an oral 
complaint is made, FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
will notify the contractor on behalf of the borrower.
    (b) The borrower will be informed that if, after 30 calendar days, 
the defects have not been corrected or other satisfactory arrangements 
made by the contractor, the borrower should notify FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 using a format specified by FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 (available in any FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 office).

[[Page 152]]

    (c) FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 will 
advise the contractor in writing of the borrower's complaint, the time 
and date of planned inspection by FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 personnel, and request that the contractor accompany 
the inspector and borrower on a joint inspection of the property in an 
attempt to resolve the complaint.
    (d) If, prior to the planned inspection, the contractor informs FmHA 
or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 that the alleged 
defect(s) has been or will be corrected within 30 calendar days, FmHA or 
its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 will notify the borrower.
    (e) If the case is not resolved as outlined in paragraph (d) of this 
section, FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 will:
    (1) [Reserved]
    (2) Notify the borrower, contractor and manufacturer, if applicable, 
in writing of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354's 
findings and who has been determined responsible for correcting the 
defect(s).
    (i) If the defects are determined to be covered under the 
contractor's warranty, FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 will advise the contractor that the repairs must be completed 
within 30 calendar days or other time period agreed to by the borrower, 
the contractor, and FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-
354.
    (ii) FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 will 
further advise the contractor and/or manufacturer that if the defect(s) 
are not corrected, the Government will consider compensating the 
borrower for the costs of correcting the defect(s). In such a case, the 
contractor and/or manufacturer may be liable for costs paid by the 
Government and may be subject to suspension and/or debarment pursuant to 
subpart M of part 1940 of this chapter (available in any FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 office). Even if the 
manufacturer is determined to be solely responsible for the defect, the 
contractor will still be held liable for correction of the defect.
    (3) Should a contractor refuse to correct a defect after being 
officially requested in writing to do so, FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 will promptly institute formal suspension and 
debarment proceedings against the contractor (as a company and as 
individual(s)) in accordance with subpart M of part 1940 of this chapter 
(available in any FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
office). The contractor's failure to reply to official correspondence or 
inability to correct a defect constitutes noncompliance.
    (4) If the contractor is willing to correct legitimate defects but 
the borrower refuses to permit this, FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 will document the facts in the borrower's case file. 
If the borrower chooses to file a claim for compensation for these 
defects, the circumstances of the borrower's refusal will be reviewed 
and may be sufficient grounds for disapproval of the claim.
    (f)-(h) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1924.260  Handling manufactured housing (unit) construction complaints.

    When a borrower who has purchased a manufactured home (or ``unit'') 
complains about construction defects, the borrower will be instructed to 
first contact the dealer-contractor from whom the unit was purchased. 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 will assist the 
borrower in obtaining assistance through the dealer-contractor's and/or 
HUD's complaint resolution process. If the dealer-contractor cannot 
resolve the complaint, the borrower should contact the appropriate State 
Administrative Agency (SAA) or HUD. If the complaint resolution process 
does not result in the correction of the defect, the borrower's 
complaint will be handled in accordance with Sec. 1924.259 of this 
subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 1924.261  Handling complaints involving dwellings covered by an independent or insured home warranty plan.

    Borrowers with complaints about dwellings covered by an independent 
or insured home warranty plan will be instructed to first contact the 
warranty

[[Page 153]]

company and follow the complaint resolution process for that company, 
with the assistance of FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354, if needed. If the complaint is not resolved in this manner, it 
will be handled under Sec. 1924.259 of this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 1924.262  Handling complaints involving dwellings constructed by the self-help method.

    When a borrower whose dwelling was constructed by the self-help 
method complains about construction defects, FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354 will determine whether the defect is the 
result of work performed by a contractor or work performed by the 
borrower under the guidance of the self-help group. Defects which are 
determined to be the responsibility of a contractor will be handled in 
accordance with Sec. 1924.259 of this subpart. Defects determined to be 
the result of work performed by the borrower are not eligible for 
compensation under this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 1924.263-1924.264  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1924.265  Eligibility for compensation for construction defects.

    (a) To be eligible for assistance under this subpart, the following 
criteria must be met:
    (1) The approval official, in consultation with the State Architect/
Engineer and/or Construction Inspector, must determine that:
    (i) The construction is defective in workmanship, material or 
equipment, or
    (ii) The dwelling or unit has not been built in substantial 
compliance with the approved drawings and specifications, or
    (iii) The dwelling or unit does not comply with the FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 construction standards in 
effect at the time the loan was approved or the conditional commitment 
was issued, or
    (iv) The property does not meet code requirements.
    (2) The claim must be for one or more of the following:
    (i) To pay for repairs;
    (ii) To compensate the owner for repairs;
    (iii) To pay emergency living or other expenses resulting from the 
defect; or
    (iv) To acquire title to property.
    (3) The dwelling or unit must be newly constructed as defined in 
Sec. 1924.253 of this subpart and financed with an insured Section 502 
RH loan.
    (4) The claim seeking compensation from FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 must be filed with FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 within 18 months after the date financial 
assistance is granted. Defects for which claims are filed beyond the 18-
month period must have been documented by FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 in the borrower's case file or on the form 
designated by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
(available in any FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
office), prior to expiration of the 18-month period. For loans made to 
construct a new dwelling or erect a new manufactured housing unit, 
financial assistance is granted on the date of final construction 
inspection and acceptance by the borrower and FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354. Claims must be submitted by completing 
the designated form (available in any FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 office).
    (5) Any obligation of the contractor to correct the defect(s) under 
a contractor's warranty must have expired, or the contractor is 
responsible for making corrections under the contractor's warranty but 
is unable or unwilling to do so.
    (b) Subsequent owners of eligible dwellings or units who are also 
Section 502 borrowers may be eligible to receive compensation for 
construction defects. These owners will be notified in accordance with 
Sec. 1924.258 of this subpart. However, the claim for compensation must 
be filed in accordance with paragraph (a)(4) of this section within the 
18-month period established for the original rural housing (RH) 
borrower.

[[Page 154]]


<R05>
Sec. 1924.266  Purposes for which claims may be approved.

    (a) Eligible purposes. A claim may be approved to:
    (1) Pay, or reimburse the borrower for costs already paid, to repair 
major structural defects which are completed in accordance with plans 
and specifications approved by FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354. Repairs must be made by a reputable licensed contractor and 
a warranty covering the repairs will be issued by the contractor when 
the repairs are completed, as prescribed in subpart A of this part. 
Payment will be based on actual cost of the development and the borrower 
must provide evidence to reasonably establish the development cost. 
Workmanship and materials used in repairs must be consistent with the 
level of quality specified in the original dwelling or unit 
specifications and/or comparable to the items being replaced. Payment 
may be made:
    (i) To cover damages which are a direct result of the defect to 
permanent enhancements made, such as landscaping, completion of 
unfinished living spaces, etc., of the dwelling or unit, installation or 
set-up of the unit, or related facilities, and
    (ii) For costs approved by FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 for professional reports by engineers, architects or others 
needed to determine cause of or means to repair the defect.
    (2) Reimburse the borrower for funds expended for emergency repairs. 
Emergency repairs are those repairs necessary to preserve the integrity 
of the structure, to prevent damage or further damage to personal 
property or fixtures in the dwelling or unit and related facilities, or 
to prevent or eliminate immediate health hazards. Receipts or other 
evidence of borrower's expenditures must be provided.
    (3) Acquire title to the property by the Government and, when 
appropriate, compensate the claimant for any loss of borrower 
contribution at the time the loan was closed. Conveyance of properties 
under this section will be handled in accordance with 7 CFR part 3550.
    (i) Before FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
accepts a conveyance, the borrower must attempt to sell the dwelling or 
unit in accordance with 7 CFR part 3550, if the dwelling or unit is 
considered decent, safe and sanitary as prescribed in 7 CFR part 3550. 
If the property is sold, FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 will:
    (A) Pay the borrower's relocation expenses, including temporary 
living expenses as prescribed in paragraph (a)(4) of this section, until 
another suitable property can be located;
    (B) Pay related sales expenses, as prescribed in 7 CFR part 3550, if 
the property is sold for less than the debt against it;
    (C) Release the borrower from personal liability for the remaining 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 debt; and
    (D) Process an application for a new RH loan if the borrower so 
desires and is still eligible for FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 assistance.
    (ii) If the dwelling or unit is not considered decent, safe and 
sanitary as prescribed in 7 CFR part 3550, FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354 should accept a voluntary conveyance of the 
property under the provisions of 7 CFR part 3550. Compensation for 
properties taken into inventory under this paragraph may not exceed the 
difference between the present market value of the security as 
established by the appraisal when the loan was made and the amount of 
the FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 loan and any 
prior liens.
    (iii) A borrower contribution which may be compensated for under 
this paragraph may be such things as:
    (A) A borrower's land or cash contribution,
    (B) Development work done by the borrower under the self-help 
program or borrower method of construction, the cost of which was not 
included in the loan funds,
    (C) Attorney fees, abstract costs or title insurance costs actually 
paid by the claimant in connection with closing the loan.

[[Page 155]]

    (4) Pay or reimburse the borrower for temporary living expenses, 
miscellaneous expenses, storage of household goods and moving expenses 
incurred as a result of the defect.
    (i) Payment under this paragraph may be made under either of the 
following circumstances:
    (A) The property is acquired by the Government in accordance with 7 
CFR part 3550 and FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
determines that the dwelling is not habitable and the severity of the 
defect(s) prevents the property from being repaired and made suitable as 
a permanent residence for the borrower.
    (B) The property is not acquired by the Government but FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 determines that the dwelling 
is not habitable or must be vacated in order to repair the defects.
    (ii) Claims for compensation under paragraph (a)(4) of this section 
are limited as follows:
    (A) Compensation may be granted for temporary living expenses for 
not more than 45 calendar days per claim unless a longer period is 
authorized by FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354. 
Compensation will be paid for actual cost to the claimant not to exceed 
the Government per diem rate for the area where the borrower's dwelling 
or unit is located. Reimbursement may be claimed for expenses such as 
food, lodging, laundering, etc., which would not have been incurred had 
the claimant remained in the house.
    (B) Compensation may be granted for actual miscellaneous expenses 
not to exceed $500 to cover such items as utility connect and disconnect 
fees.
    (C) Compensation may be granted for moving and storage expenses not 
to exceed $5,000 unless authorized by FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 and not to exceed the actual cost of moving the 
claimant household with personal belongings a distance of not more than 
50 miles from the original residence. Compensation for storage expenses 
may not exceed that amount paid to store household furnishings for 45 
days.
    (D) A strict accounting of the use of such funds must be maintained 
by the borrower and will be verified by FmHA or its successor agency 
under Public Law 103-354.
    (5) Compensate the claimant for reasonable interest paid on loans 
obtained for the sole purpose of correcting structural defects or other 
approved purposes under this section.
    (b) Ineligible purposes. Compensation will not be granted for:
    (1) Completion of a dwelling or unit or installation of materials/
items required under the construction contract and/or specifications.
    (2) Defective items which were not completed under the contract 
method or under the conditional commitment and supported by a builder's 
warranty. Work performed under the borrower method or self-help program 
without a warranty by a responsible party is not eligible for 
compensation.
    (3) Damage caused by defective design, workmanship, or material in 
making enhancements to or remodeling the dwelling or unit or related 
facilities which were not financed or approved by FmHA or its successor 
agency under Public Law 103-354.
    (4) The loss of past, present or future wages or salary directly or 
indirectly resulting from the defect.
    (5) Treatment for physical or psychological damages including 
medical and dental claims.
    (6) Death benefits or funeral expenses.
    (7) Damages encountered as a result of war, civil disorder, flood, 
tornado, lightning, earthquake or acts of nature which the structure was 
not designed to withstand.
    (8) Damages resulting from the homeowner's negligence or failure to 
properly maintain the property.
    (9) Damage to personal property.

[56 FR 40241, Aug. 14, 1991, as amended at 67 FR 78327, Dec. 24, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 1924.267-1924.270  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1924.271  Processing applications.

    An application for compensation for construction defects shall be 
submitted by the claimant to FmHA or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354 on the designated form (available in any FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 office). The

[[Page 156]]

application shall be completed in its entirety. All structural defects 
and claims for which compensation is sought will be listed. Borrowers 
will be told not to incur any expenses for repairs or temporary living 
expenses, except for emergency situations, until funds have been 
allocated and the request has been approved under Sec. 1924.273 of this 
subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 1924.272  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1924.273  Approval or disapproval.

    (a) Claimants will be notified in writing of the decision on the 
claim within 60 days of the date the designated form (available in any 
FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 office) is signed 
by the borrower. If the claim or any part of the claim is denied at any 
level, the claimant will be informed in writing of the reason(s) for the 
denial and advised of appeal rights in accordance with 7 CFR part 11.
    (b) [Reserved]

[56 FR 40241, Aug. 14, 1991, as amended at 67 FR 78327, Dec. 24, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 1924.274  Final inspection.

    Except for emergency repairs, all repair work must be performed in 
accordance with subpart A of this part. In all cases, FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 will make a final inspection 
of the repair work performed before final payment is made for the work.


<R05>
Sec. 1924.275  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1924.276  Action against contractor.

    If FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 pays for 
correction of construction defects which are the responsibility of the 
contractor, debarment proceedings will be initiated against the 
contractor in accordance with subpart M of part 1940 of this chapter 
(available in any FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
office), even if the contractor has gone out of business, declared 
bankruptcy, cannot be located, etc. The debarment will be pursued in 
both the contractor's company name and the principal parties as 
individuals, and any successor entities, if known. If the manufacturer 
of the defective product is determined to be solely responsible, no 
action will be taken against the contractor. In such a case, debarment 
will be initiated against the manufacturer. An assignment of the 
borrower's claim against the contractor or other party will be obtained 
if it appears to the approval officials, with any necessary advice from 
the Office of the General Counsel, that recovery is reasonably possible.


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 1924.277-1924.299  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1924.300  OMB control number.

    The reporting and recordkeeping requirements contained in this 
regulation have been approved by the Office of Management and Budget 
(OMB) and have been assigned OMB control number 0575-0082. Public 
reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to vary 
from 15 minutes to 2 hours per response, with an average of .28 hours 
per response including time for reviewing instructions, searching 
existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and 
completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments 
regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of 
information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to 
Department of Agriculture, Clearance Officer, OIRM, room 404-W, 
Washington, DC 20250; and to the Office of Management and Budget, 
Paperwork Reduction Project (OMB <greek-i>575-0082), Washington, DC 
20503.


<R03>
PART 1925_TAXES--Table of Contents

<R05>


                   Subpart A_Real Estate Tax Servicing

Sec.
1925.1 General.
1925.2 Definition of tax.
1925.3 Servicing taxes.
1925.4 Servicing delinquent taxes.
1925.5-1925.50 [Reserved]

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 301; 7 U.S.C. 1989; 42 U.S.C. 1480.

    Source: 57 FR 36590, Aug. 14, 1992, unless otherwise noted.

[[Page 157]]


<R04>
                   Subpart A_Real Estate Tax Servicing


<R05>
Sec. 1925.1  General.

    This Instruction applies to borrowers with Rural Rental Housing 
(RRH), Rural Cooperative Housing (RCH), Labor Housing (LH), and Non-
Program (NP) loans secured by real estate. It also applies to section 
502 and section 504 Rural Housing borrowers (Single Family Housing 
(SFH)) who also have a Farmer Program loan. It does not apply to 
borrowers who have a SFH loan only; those will be serviced under 7 CFR 
part 3550. Borrowers are responsible for paying taxes on the real estate 
security to the proper taxing authorities before taxes become 
delinquent. This obligation is set forth in the security instrument 
securing the loan. This subpart is inapplicable to Farm Service Agency, 
Farm Loan Programs.

[57 FR 36590, Aug. 14, 1992, as amended at 67 FR 78327, Dec. 24, 2002; 
72 FR 64122, Nov. 15, 2007]


<R05>
Sec. 1925.2  Definition of tax.

    For the purpose of this instruction, the word ``tax'' means all 
taxes, assessments, levies, irrigation and water charges or other 
similar obligations which are or will, on nonpayment, become a lien upon 
the real estate prior to the mortgage securing the Farmers Home 
Administration (FmHA) or its successor agency under Public Law 103-354 
loan.


<R05>
Sec. 1925.3  Servicing taxes.

    (a) The County Supervisor will be responsible for ascertaining that 
all mortgaged real estate is listed properly for tax purposes.
    (b) The County Supervisor will be responsible for taking all actions 
in connection with taxes as may be necessary to protect the Government's 
security interests. Any unusual situations that may arise with respect 
to tax servicing should be referred to the State Office for 
consideration.
    (c) The County Supervisor will encourage each borrower to pay taxes 
promptly in order to avoid any penalties. Normally, this can be 
accomplished through routine servicing of loans by emphasizing the 
advantages of setting aside sufficient income to meet tax obligations 
when they become due. Taxes will be adequately budgeted for those 
borrowers with whom Form FmHA or its successor agency under Public Law 
103-354 431-2, ``Farm and Home Plan,'' is developed. Each borrower will 
be encouraged to notify the County Supervisor when he has paid his 
taxes. After the delinquent date, it will be necessary for the County 
Supervisor to determine the borrowers whose taxes are delinquent. The 
Multi-Family Housing Information System (MFIS) will be used in posting 
servicing actions on delinquent taxes.

[57 FR 36590, Aug. 14, 1992, as amended at 69 FR 69104, Nov. 26, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 1925.4  Servicing delinquent taxes.

    (a) The County Supervisor will contact each borrower with a 
delinquent tax and make every practical effort to have him pay the tax 
with his own funds. He will use the Management System Card for follow-up 
of delinquent taxes. If the delinquent tax is not paid and the borrower 
comes to the office with proceeds for application on the FmHA or its 
successor agency under Public Law 103-354 account secured by the real 
estate, the County Office personnel will endeavor to get the borrower to 
use the proceeds to pay the delinquent tax. If the amount of the 
delinquent tax is less than the amount of the proposed payment, the 
difference will be applied on the FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 account in accordance with the policy outlined in 
subpart A of part 1951 of this chapter.
    (b) Prior (usually about 90 days) to the time it is legally possible 
for action to be taken that will cause the borrower to lose title or 
right of possessions of the security property or the use of essential 
water, the County Supervisor will contact the borrower and definitely 
determine if he will pay the delinquent tax immediately. If the borrower 
is unable or unwilling to pay the delinquent tax with his own funds 
after every appropriate effort has been made to have him do so, the 
County Supervisor will refer to FmHA or its successor agency under 
Public Law 103-354 Instruction 2024-A and utilize the Type 60 Purchase 
Order System to pay the

[[Page 158]]

amount of the delinquent taxes plus the amount of any accrued penalty to 
bring taxes current.
    (1) In an exceptional case where reasons for delinquent taxes have 
been removed and planned income during the next year covers payment of 
current obligations plus delinquent taxes not vouchered, only the 
delinquent taxes will be paid that could cause the borrower to lose 
title or right of possession of security property.
    (2) If the Government is holding a mortgage other than a first 
mortgage on the property, do not initiate payment request until the 
County Supervisor has determined that (i) the prior lien holder will not 
pay the delinquent tax, (ii) the Government's security will be 
jeopardized if the delinquent tax is not paid, and (iii) the value of 
the security is sufficient to justify the advance.

[57 FR 36590, Aug. 14, 1992, as amended at 67 FR 78327, Dec. 24, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 1925.5-1925.50  [Reserved]


<R03>
PART 1927_TITLE CLEARANCE AND LOAN CLOSING--Table of Contents

<R05>


Subpart A [Reserved]

         Subpart B_Real Estate Title Clearance and Loan Closing

Sec.
1927.51 General.
1927.52 Definitions.
1927.53 Costs of title clearance and closing of transactions.
1927.54 Requirements for closing agents.
1927.55 Title clearance services.
1927.56 Scheduling loan closing.
1927.57 Preparation of closing documents.
1927.58 Closing the transaction.
1927.59 Subsequent loans and transfers with assumptions.
1927.60-1927.99 [Reserved]
1927.100 OMB control number.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 301; 7 U.S.C. 1989; 42 U.S.C. 1480.

    Source: 61 FR 11711, Mar. 22, 1996, unless otherwise noted.

Subpart A [Reserved]


<R04>
         Subpart B_Real Estate Title Clearance and Loan Closing


<R05>
Sec. 1927.51  General.

    (a) Types of loans covered by this subpart. This subpart sets forth 
the authorities, policies, and procedures for real estate title 
clearance and closing of loans, assumptions, voluntary conveyances and 
credit sales in connection with the following types of Rural Housing 
Service (RHS), Rural Housing (RH), Farm Labor Housing (LH), Rural Rental 
Housing (RRH), Rural Cooperative Housing (RCH), and NonProgram (NP) 
loans. This subpart does not apply to guaranteed loans. This subpart is 
inapplicable to Farm Service Agency, Farm Loan Programs.
    (b) Programs not covered by this subpart. Title clearance and 
closing for all other types of agency loans and assumptions will be 
handled as provided in the applicable program instructions or as 
provided in special authorizations from the National Office.
    (c) [Reserved]
    (d) Copies of all agency forms referenced in this regulation and the 
agency's internal administrative procedures for title clearance and loan 
closing are available upon request from the agency's State Office. Forms 
and title clearance and loan closing requirements which are specific for 
any individual state must be obtained from the agency State Office for 
that state.

[61 FR 11711, Mar. 22, 1996, as amended at 72 FR 64122, Nov. 15, 2007]


<R05>
Sec. 1927.52  Definitions.

    Agency. The Rural Housing Service (RHS) and Farm Service Agency 
(FSA) or their successor agencies.
    Approval official. The agency employee who has been delegated the 
authority to approve, close, and service the particular kind of loan, 
will approve an attorney or title company as closing agent for the 
loans. If a loan must be approved at a higher level, the initiating 
office may approve the closing agent.
    Approved attorney. A duly licensed attorney, approved by the agency, 
who provides title opinions directly to the agency and the borrower or 
upon whose certification of title an approved title

[[Page 159]]

insurance company issues a policy of title insurance. Approved attorneys 
also close loans, assumptions, credit sales, and voluntary conveyances 
and disburse funds in connection with agency loans. Approved attorney is 
further defined in Sec. 1927.54(c).
    Approved title insurance company. A title insurance company, 
approved by the agency, (including its local representatives, employees, 
agents, and attorneys) that issues a policy of title insurance. 
Depending on the local practice, an approved title insurance company may 
also close loans, assumptions, credit sales, and voluntary conveyances 
and disburse funds in connection with agency loans. If the approved 
title insurance company does not close the loan itself, the loan closing 
functions may be performed by approved attorneys or closing agents 
authorized by the approved title insurance company.
    Borrower. The party indebted to the agency after the loan, 
assumption, or credit sale is closed.
    Certificate of title. A certified statement as to land ownership, 
based upon examination of record title.
    Closed loan. A loan is considered to be closed when the mortgage is 
filed for record and the appropriate lien has been obtained.
    Closing agent. The approved attorney or title company selected by 
the applicant and approved by the agency to provide closing services for 
the proposed loan. Unless a title insurance company also provides loan 
closing services, the term ``title company'' does not include ``title 
insurance company.''
    Closing protection letter. An agreement issued by an approved title 
insurance company which is an American Land Title Association (ALTA) 
form closing protection letter or which is otherwise acceptable to the 
agency and which protects the agency against damage, loss, fraud, theft, 
or injury as a result of negligence by the issuing agent, approved 
attorney, or title company when title clearance is done by means of a 
policy of title insurance. Depending on the area, closing protection 
letters may also be known as ``Insured Closing Letters,'' 
``Indemnification Agreements,'' ``Insured Closing Service Agreements,'' 
or ``Statements of Settlement Service Responsibilities.''
    Cosigner. A party who joins in the execution of a promissory note or 
assumption agreement to guarantee repayment of the debt.
    Credit sale. A sale in which the agency provides credit to the 
purchasers of agency inventory property. Title clearance and closing of 
a credit sale are the same as for an initial loan except the property is 
conveyed by quitclaim deed.
    Deed of trust. See trust deed.
    Exceptions. Exceptions include, but are not limited to, recorded 
covenants; conditions; restrictions; reservations; liens; encumbrances; 
easements; taxes and assessments; rights-of-way; leases; mineral, oil, 
gas, and geothermal rights (with or without the right of surface entry); 
timber and water rights; judgments; pending court proceedings in Federal 
and State courts (including bankruptcy); probate proceedings; and 
agreements which limit or affect the title to the property.
    Fee simple. An estate in land of which the owner has unqualified 
ownership and power of disposition.
    FSA. The Farm Service Agency, an agency of the United States 
Department of Agriculture ( and any successor agency). FSA is the 
successor agency for farm program loans of the former Farmers Home 
Administration.
    General warranty deed. A deed containing express covenants by the 
grantor or seller as to good title and right to possession.
    Indemnification agreement. An agreement that protects the agency 
against damage, loss, fraud, theft, or injury as a result of useful 
conduct or negligence on behalf of the issuing agent, approved attorney, 
or title company. This agreement may also be entitled closing protection 
letter, insured closing letter, insured closing service agreement, 
statement of settlement service responsibilities, or letters which 
provide similar protection.
    Issuing agent. An individual or entity who is authorized to issue 
title insurance for an approved title insurance company.
    Land purchase contract (contract for deed). An agreement between the 
buyer and seller of land in which the buyer

[[Page 160]]

has the right to possession and use of the land over a period of time 
(usually in excess of 1 year) and makes periodic payments of a portion 
of the purchase price to the seller. The seller retains legal title to 
the property until the final payment is made, at which time the buyer 
will receive a deed to the land vesting fee title in the buyer.
    Mortgage. Real estate security instrument which pledges land as 
security for the performance of an obligation such as repayment of a 
loan. For the purpose of this regulation the term ``mortgage'' includes 
deed of trust and deed to secure debt. A real estate mortgage or deed of 
trust form for the state in which the land to be taken as security is 
available in any agency office, and will be used to secure a mortgage to 
the agency.
    National Office. The National Headquarters Office of FSA or RHS 
depending on the loan program involved.
    OGC. The Office of the General Counsel, United States Department of 
Agriculture.
    Program regulations. The agency regulations for the particular loan 
program involved (e.g., 7 CFR part 3550 for single family housing (SFH) 
loans).
    Quitclaim deed. A transfer of the seller's interest in the title, 
without warranties or covenants. This type of deed is used by the agency 
to convey title to purchasers of inventory property.
    RHS. The Rural Housing Service, an agency of the United States 
Department of Agriculture, or its successor agency. RHS is the successor 
agency to the Rural Housing and Community Development Service (RHCDS) 
which was, in turn, the successor agency to the Farmers Home 
Administration.
    Seller. Individual or other entity which convey ownership in real 
property to an applicant for an agency loan or to the agency itself.
    Special warranty deed. A deed containing a covenant whereby the 
grantor agrees to protect the grantee against any claims arising during 
the grantor's period of ownership.
    State Office. For FSA, this term refers to the FSA State Office. For 
RHS, this term refers to the Rural Development State Director.
    Title clearance. Examination of a title and its exceptions to assure 
the agency that the loan is legally secured and has the required 
priority.
    Title company. A company that may abstract title, act as an issuing 
agent of title insurance for a title insurance company, act as a loan 
closing agent, and perform other duties associated with real estate 
title clearance and loan closing.
    Title defects. Any exception or legal claim of ownership (through 
deed, lien, judgment, or other recorded document), on behalf of a third 
party, which would prevent the seller from conveying a marketable title 
to the entire property.
    Trust deed. A three party security instrument conveying title to 
land as security for the performance of an obligation, such as the 
repayment of a loan. For the purpose of this regulation a trust deed is 
covered by the term ``mortgage.'' A trust deed is the same as a deed of 
trust.
    Voluntary conveyance. A method of liquidation by which title to 
agency security is transferred by a borrower to the agency by deed in 
lieu of foreclosure.
    Warranty deed. A deed in which the grantor warrants that he or she 
has the right to convey the property, the title is free from 
encumbrances, and the grantor shall take further action necessary to 
perfect or defend the title.

[61 FR 11711, Mar. 22, 1996, as amended at 67 FR 78327, Dec. 24, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 1927.53  Costs of title clearance and closing of transactions.

    The borrower or the seller, or both, in compliance with the terms of 
the sales contract or option will be responsible for payment of all 
costs of title clearance and closing of the transaction and will arrange 
for payment before the transaction is closed. These costs will include 
any costs of abstracts of title, land surveys, attorney's fees, owner's 
and lender's policies of title insurance, obtaining curative material, 
notary fees, documentary stamps, recording costs, tax monitoring 
service, and other expenses necessary to complete the transaction.

[[Page 161]]


<R05>
Sec. 1927.54  Requirements for closing agents.

    (a) Form of title certification. State Offices are directed to 
require title insurance for all loan closings unless the agency 
determines that the use of title insurance is not available or is 
economically not feasible for the type of loan involved or the area of 
the state where the loan will be closed. If title insurance is used, 
State Offices are authorized to require a closing protection letter 
issued by an approved title insurance company to cover the closing 
agent, if available. A closing protection letter need not be furnished 
when the closing is conducted by the title insurance company.
    (b) Approval of closing agent. An attorney or title company may act 
as a closing agent and close agency real estate loans, provide necessary 
title clearance, and perform such other duties as required in this 
subpart. A closing agent will be responsible for closing agency loans 
and disbursing both agency loan funds and funds provided by the borrower 
in connection with the agency loan so as to obtain title and security 
position as required by the agency. The closing agent must be covered by 
a fidelity bond which will protect the agency unless a closing 
protection letter is provided to the agency. The borrower will select 
the approved closing agent. If title clearance is by an attorney's 
opinion, the agency will approve the attorney who will perform the 
closing in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section. The attorney 
will be approved after submitting a certification acceptable to the 
agency. If title certification is by means of a policy of title 
insurance, the title company which will issue the policy must have been 
approved in accordance with paragraph (d) of this section. A closing 
agent's delay in providing services without justification in connection 
with agency loans may be a basis for not approving the closing agent in 
future cases.
    (c) Approval of attorneys. Any attorney selected by an applicant, 
who will be providing title clearance where the certificate of title 
will be an attorney's opinion, must submit an agency form certifying to 
professional liability insurance coverage. If the attorney is also the 
closing agent, fidelity coverage for the attorney and any employee 
having access to the funds must be provided. The agency will determine 
the appropriate level of such insurance. Required insurance will, as a 
minimum, cover the amount of the loan to be closed. The agency will 
approve the form stipulating the bond coverage. The agency will approve 
any attorney who is duly licensed to practice law in the state where the 
real estate security is located and who complies with the bonding and 
insurance requirements in this section. If the certification of title 
will be by means of title insurance, any attorney or closing agent 
designated as an approved attorney or closing agent by the approved 
title insurance company which will issue the policy of title insurance 
will be acceptable, and when covered by a closing protection letter, 
will not be required to obtain professional liability insurance or a 
fidelity bond. Each approved title insurance company may provide a 
master list of their approved attorneys that are covered by its closing 
protection letters to the State Office and, in such cases the attorneys 
are approved for closings for that title insurance company. Delay in 
providing closing services without justification may be a basis for not 
approving the attorney in future cases.
    (d) Approval of title companies. A title company acting as a closing 
agent, or as an issuing agent for a title insurance company, must be 
covered by a title insurance company closing protection letter or submit 
an agency form certifying to fidelity coverage to cover all employees 
having access to the loan funds. The agency will determine the 
appropriate level of such coverage and will approve the form stipulating 
the bond coverage. Delay in providing closing services without 
justification may be a basis for not approving the company in future 
cases. Each approved title insurance company may provide a master list 
of their approved title companies that are covered by its closing 
protection letter to the State Office and, in such cases the title 
companies on the list are approved for closings for that title insurance 
company.
    (e) Approval of title insurance companies. The agency will approve 
any title

[[Page 162]]

insurance company which issues policies of title insurance in the State 
where the security property is located if:
    (1) The form of the owner's and lender's policies of title insurance 
(including required endorsements) to be used in closing agency loans are 
acceptable to the agency, and will contain only standard types of 
exceptions and exclusions approved in advance by the agency;
    (2) The title insurance company is licensed to do business in the 
state (if a license is required); and
    (3) The title insurance company is regulated by a State Insurance 
Commission, or similar regulator, or if not, the title insurance company 
submits copies of audited financial statements, or other approved 
financial statements satisfactory to the agency, which show that the 
company has the financial ability to cover losses arising out of its 
activities as a title insurance company and under any closing protection 
letters issued by the title insurance company.
    (4) Delay in providing services without justification may be a basis 
for not approving the company.
    (f) [Reserved]
    (g) Conflict of interest. A closing agent who has, or whose spouse, 
children, or business associates have, a financial interest in the real 
estate which will secure the agency debt shall not be involved in the 
title clearance or loan closing process. Financial interest includes 
having either an equity, creditor, or debtor interest in any 
corporation, trust, or partnership with a financial interest in the real 
estate which will secure the agency debt.
    (h) Debarment or suspension. No attorney, title company, title 
insurance company, or closing agent, currently debarred or suspended 
from participating in Federal programs, may participate in any aspect of 
the agency loan closing and title clearance process.
    (i) Special provisions. Closing agents are responsible for having 
current knowledge of the requirements of State law in connection with 
loan closing and title clearance and should advise the agency of any 
changes in State law which necessitate changes in the agency's State 
mortgage forms and State Supplements.
    (j) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1927.55  Title clearance services.

    (a) Responsibilities of closing agents. Services to be provided to 
the agency and the borrower by a closing agent in connection with the 
transaction vary depending on whether a title insurance policy or title 
opinion is being furnished. The closing agent is expected to perform 
these services without unnecessary delay.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) Ordering title services. Application for title examination or 
insurance will be made by the borrower to a title company or attorney. 
The lender's policy will be for at least the amount of the loan. The 
United States of America will be named as the insured lender.
    (d) Use of title opinion. If a title opinion will be issued, a title 
examination will include searches of all relevant land title and other 
records, so as to express an opinion as to the title of the property and 
the steps necessary to obtain the appropriate title and security 
position to issue a title opinion as required by this subpart. The 
closing agent or approved attorney will determine:
    (1) The legal description and all owners of the real property;
    (2) Whether there are any exceptions affecting the property and 
advise the approval official and borrower of the nature and effect of 
outstanding interests or exceptions, prior sales of part of the 
property, judgments, or interests to assist in determining which 
exceptions must be corrected in order for the borrowers to obtain good 
and marketable title of record in accordance with prevailing title 
examination standards, and for the agency to obtain a valid lien of the 
required priority;
    (3) Whether there are outstanding Federal, State, or local tax 
claims (including taxes which under State law may become a lien superior 
to a previously attaching mortgage lien) or homeowner's association 
assessment liens;
    (4) Whether outstanding judgments of record, bankruptcy, insolvency, 
divorce, or probate proceedings involving

[[Page 163]]

any part of the property, whether already owned by the borrower, or to 
be acquired by assumption or with loan funds, or involving the borrower 
or the seller exist;
    (5) If a water right is to be included in the security for the loan, 
and if so, the full legal description of the water right;
    (6) In addition to paragraph(d)(2) of this section, if wetlands 
easements or other conservation easements have been placed on the 
property;
    (7) What measures are required for preparing, obtaining, or 
approving curative material, conveyances, and security instruments, and
    (8) That sufficient copies of these interests and exceptions are 
provided as requested by the approval official.
    (e) Use of title insurance. When title insurance is to be obtained, 
the approval official will be furnished with a title insurance binder 
disclosing any defects in, exceptions to, and encumbrances against, the 
title, the conditions to be met to make the title insurable and in the 
condition required by the agency, and the curative or other actions to 
be taken before closing of the transaction. The binder must include a 
commitment to issue a lender policy in an amount at least equal the 
amount of the loan, except in instances where there may be an 
outstanding owner's policy in favor of the borrower. Not withstanding 
the provisions of this section, the instance of an assumption without a 
subsequent loan, the existing policy may be continued if the coverage 
meets or exceeds the assumption balance and the title company agrees in 
writing to extend coverage in full force and effect.
    (f) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1927.56  Scheduling loan closing.

    The agency, in coordination with the closing agent, will arrange a 
loan closing and send loan closing instructions, on an agency form to 
the closing agent when the agency determines that the exceptions shown 
on the preliminary title opinion or title insurance binder will not 
adversely affect the suitability, security value, or successful 
operation of the property and all other agency conditions to closing 
have been satisfied.


<R05>
Sec. 1927.57  Preparation of closing documents.

    (a) Preparation of deeds. The closing agent, unless prohibited by 
law, will prepare, complete, or approve documents, including deeds, 
necessary for title clearance and closing of the transaction and provide 
the agency with the policy of title insurance or title opinion providing 
the lien priority required by the agency and subject only to exceptions 
approved by the agency. Agency forms will be used when required by this 
part.
    (1)-(2) [Reserved]
    (b) Preparation of mortgages. The closing agent will insure that all 
mortgages are properly prepared, completed, executed, and filed for 
record. Where applicable, the mortgages should recite that it is a 
purchase money mortgage. The following requirements will be observed in 
preparing agency morgages:
    (1)-(8) [Reserved]
    (9) Alteration of mortgage form. An agency mortgage form may be 
altered pursuant to a State Supplement having prior approval of the 
National Office, or in a special case, to comply with the terms of loan 
approval prescribed in accordance with program instructions. No other 
alterations in the printed mortgage forms will be made without prior 
approval of the National Office. Any changes made by deletion, 
substitution, or addition (excluding filling in blanks) will be 
initialed in the margin by all persons signing the mortgage.
    (10) [Reserved]
    (11) Mortgages on leasehold estates. When the agency security 
interest is a leasehold estate, unless State law or State Supplement 
otherwise provides, the real estate mortgage or deed of trust form, 
available in any agency office, will be modified as follows:
    (i) In the space provided on the mortgage for the description of the 
real property security, the leasehold estate and the land covered by the 
lease must be described. The following language must be used unless 
modified by a State Supplement:

    All of borrower's right, title, and interest in and to a leasehold 
estate for an original term of ---- years, commencing on ------, 19 ----
, created and established by and between ------ as lessor and owner and 
---- as lessee,

[[Page 164]]

including any extensions and renewals thereof, a copy of which lease was 
recorded or filed in book ----, page ----, as instrument number ----, in 
the Office of the (e.g., County Clerk), for the aforesaid county and 
State and covering the following real property: ------.

    (ii) Immediately preceding the covenant starting with the words 
``should default,'' the following covenant will be added:

    ( ) Borrower covenants and agrees to pay when due all rents and any 
and all other charges required by said lease, to comply with all other 
requirements of said lease, and not to surrender or relinquish, without 
the Government's prior written consent, any of borrower's right, title, 
or interest in or to said leasehold estate or under said lease while 
this mortgage remains of record.

    (12) Mortgages on land purchase contract. When the agency security 
interest is on a borrower's interest in a land purchase contract, OGC 
will provide language used to modify agency forms.
    (13) [Reserved]
    (c) [Reserved]
    (d) Preparation of protective instruments. The closing agent will 
properly prepare, complete, and approve releases and curative documents 
necessary for title clearance and closing, in recordable form and record 
them if required.
    (1) Prior lienholder's agreement. If any liens (other than agency 
liens or tax liens to local governmental authorities) or security 
agreements (hereafter called ``liens''), with priority over the agency 
mortgage will remain against the real property securing the loan, the 
lienholders must execute, in recordable form, agreements containing all 
of the following provisions unless prior approval for different 
provisions has been obtained from the National Office:
    (i) The prior lienholder shall agree not to declare the lien in 
default or accelerate the indebtedness secured by the prior lien for a 
specific period of time after notice to the agency. The agreement must:
    (A) Provide that the specified period of time will not commence 
until the lienholder gives written notice of the borrower's default and 
the prior lienholder's intention to accelerate the indebtedness to the 
agency office servicing the loan,
    (B) Include the address of the agency servicing office,
    (C) Give the agency the option to cure any monetary default by 
paying the amount of the borrower's delinquent payments to the prior 
lienholder, or pay the obligation in full and have the lien assigned to 
the agency, and
    (D) Provide that the prior lienholder will not declare the lien in 
default for any nonmonetary reason if the agency commences liquidation 
proceedings against the property and thereafter acquires the property.
    (ii) When the prior lien secures future advances, including the 
lienholder's costs for borrower liquidation or bankruptcy, which under 
State law have priority over the mortgage being taken (or an agency 
mortgage already held), the prior lienholder shall agree not to make 
advances for purposes other than taxes, insurance or payments on other 
prior liens without written consent of the agency.
    (iii) The prior lienholder shall consent to the agency making (or 
transferring) the loan and taking (or retaining) the related mortgage if 
the prior lien instrument prohibits a loan or mortgage (or transfer) 
without the prior lienholder's consent.
    (iv) The prior lienholder shall consent to the agency transferring 
the property subject to the prior lien after the agency has obtained 
title to the property either by foreclosure or voluntary conveyance if 
the prior lien instrument prohibits such transfer without the prior 
lienholder's consent.
    (2)-(3) [Reserved]
    (4) Agreement by holder of seller's interest under land purchase 
contract. If the buyer's interest in the security property is that of a 
buyer under a land purchase contract, it will be necessary for the 
seller to execute, in recordable form, an agreement containing all of 
the following provisions:
    (i) The seller shall agree not to sell or voluntarily transfer the 
seller's interest under the land purchase contract without the prior 
written consent of the State Office.
    (ii) The seller shall agree not to encumber or cause any liens to be 
levied against the property.

[[Page 165]]

    (iii) The seller shall agree not to commence or take any action to 
accelerate, forfeit, or foreclose the buyer's interest in the security 
property until a specified period of time after notifying the State 
Office of intent to do so. This period of time will be 90 days unless a 
State Supplement provides otherwise. The agreement shall give the agency 
the option to cure any monetary default by paying the amount of the 
buyer's delinquent payments to the seller, or paying the seller in full 
and having the contract assigned to the agency.
    (iv) The seller shall consent to the agency making the loan and 
taking a security interest in the borrower's interest under the land 
purchase contract as security for the agency loan.
    (v) The seller shall agree not to take any actions to foreclose or 
forfeit the interest of the buyer under the land purchase contract 
because the agency has acquired the buyer's interest under the land 
purchase contract by foreclosure or voluntary conveyance, or because the 
agency has subsequently sold or assigned the buyer's interest to a third 
party who will assume the buyer's obligations under the land purchase 
contract.
    (vi) When the agency acquires a buyer's interest under a land 
purchase contract by foreclosure or deed in lieu of foreclosure, the 
agency will not be deemed to have assumed any of the buyer's obligations 
under the contract, provided that the failure of the agency to perform 
any such obligations while it holds the buyer's interest is a ground to 
commence an action to terminate the land purchase contract.
    (5)-(6) [Reserved]
    (e) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1927.58  Closing the transaction.

    The closing agent will cooperate with the approval official, 
borrower, seller, and other necessary parties to arrange the time and 
place of closing. The transaction may be closed when the agency 
determines that the agency requirements for the loan have been satisfied 
and the closing agent or approved attorney can issue or cause to be 
issued a policy of title insurance or final title opinion as of the date 
of closing showing title vested as required by the agency, the lien of 
the agency's mortgage in the priority required by the agency, and title 
to the mortgaged property subject only to those exceptions approved in 
writing by the agency. The loan will be considered closed when the 
mortgage is filed for record and the required lien is obtained.
    (a) Disbursement of loan funds. When the closing agent indicates 
that the conditions necessary to close the loan have been met, loan 
funds will be forwarded to the closing agent. Loan funds will not be 
disbursed prior to filing of the mortgage for record; however, when 
necessary, loan funds may be placed in escrow before the mortgage is 
filed for record and disbursed after it is filed. No development funds 
will be kept in escrow by the closing agent after loan closing, unless 
approved by the agency. Loan funds for the payment of a lien may be 
disbursed only upon the recording of a discharge, satisfaction, or 
release of prior lien interests (or assignment where necessary to 
protect the interests of the agency).
    (b) Title examination and liens or claims against borrowers. If 
there are exceptions or recorded items which have arisen since the 
preliminary title opinion, the transaction will not be closed until 
these entries have been cleared of record or approved by the agency. The 
closing agent will advise the approval official of the nature of such 
intervening instruments and the effect they may have on obtaining a 
valid mortgage of the priority required or the title insurance policy to 
be issued.
    (c) Taxes and assessments. The closing agent will determine if all 
taxes and assessments against the property which are due and payable are 
paid at or before the time of loan closing. If the seller and the 
borrower have agreed to prorate any taxes or assessments which are not 
yet due and payable for the year in which the closing of the transaction 
takes place, the seller's proportionate share of the taxes and 
assessments will be deducted from the proceeds to be paid to seller at 
closing and will be added to the amount required to be paid by borrower 
at closing. Appropriate prorations as agreed upon between the borrower 
and seller may also be made for taxes paid by the seller which are 
applicable to a period

[[Page 166]]

after the closing date, and for common area maintenance fees, prepaid 
rentals, insurance (unless the borrower is to obtain a new policy of 
insurance), and growing crops.
    (d) Affidavit regarding work of improvement.--(1) Execution by 
borrower. If required by State Supplement, the closing agent will 
require that an affidavit regarding work of improvement, provided by the 
agency, be completed and executed when a loan is being made to a 
borrower who already owns the real estate to be mortgaged. This 
affidavit will be executed by the borrower at closing.
    (2) Execution by seller. If required by State Supplement, the 
closing agent will require that an affidavit regarding work of 
improvement, provided by the agency, be completed and executed 
(including acknowledgment) by the seller when the agency is making a 
loan to a borrower to enable the borrower to acquire the property 
(including transfers). This affidavit will be executed by the seller at 
closing.
    (3) Legal insufficiency of affidavit form. If the agency affidavit 
regarding work of improvement is not legally sufficient in a particular 
State, a State form approved by OGC will be used. A similar form that 
may be required by a title insurance company may be substituted for the 
agency form.
    (4) Recording. The affidavit will not be recorded unless the closing 
agent deems it necessary and State law permits.
    (5) Delay in closing. The loan will not be closed if, at the loan 
closing, the seller (in a sale transaction) or the borrower (in a 
nonpurchase money loan situation) indicates that construction, repair, 
or remodeling has been commenced or completed on the property, or 
related materials or services have been delivered to or performed on the 
property within the time limit specified in the affidavit, unless a 
State Supplement provides otherwise. The closing agent will notify the 
approval official, who will determine if the work of improvement could 
result in a lien prior to the agency lien. The State Office will, with 
the advice and concurrence of OGC, provide in a State Supplement the 
period of time to be used in completing the affidavit.
    (e)-(f) [Reserved]
    (g) Return of loan documents to approval official after loan 
closing. Within 1 day after loan closing, the closing agent will return 
completed and executed copies of the loan closing instructions, the 
executed original promissory note, and all other documents required for 
loan closing (except the mortgage), to the approval official. If the 
recorded mortgage is customarily returned to the borrower or closing 
agent after recording, then it must be forwarded to the approval 
official immediately.
    (h) Final title opinion or title insurance policy. As soon as 
possible after the transaction has been closed.
    (1) Final title opinion. The attorney will issue a final title 
opinion to the agency and the borrower on a form provided by the agency. 
Issuance of the final title opinion should not be held up pending the 
return of recorded instruments. If it is not possible for the final 
title opinion to show the book and page of recording of the agency 
security instrument, the words ``and is recorded'' in the final title 
opinion form provided by the agency office, may be deleted and the blank 
space completed to show the filing office and the filing instrument 
number, if available. Attached to the final title opinion will be 
required documents then available, including any which the approval 
official has furnished to the attorney which were not previously 
returned. The attorney will ensure that all recorded instruments are 
forwarded or delivered to the proper parties after recording. The 
certification of title will be forwarded for a voluntary conveyance.
    (2) Title insurance policy. The closing agent will send or deliver 
the title insurance policy, with the United States listed as mortgage 
holder, to the approval official. The policy will be subject only to 
standard exceptions and those outstanding encumbrances, and exceptions, 
approved by the approval official. If an owner's policy of title 
insurance is requested, the closing agent will send or deliver it to the 
borrower. The closing agent will ensure that all recorded instruments 
are delivered or sent to the proper parties after recording.

[[Page 167]]

    (3) [Reserved]
    (i) Other services of the closing agent. (1) The closing agent will 
assist the approval official in preparing, completing, obtaining 
execution and acknowledgment, and recording the required documents when 
necessary. The closing agent will keep the approval official advised as 
to the progress of title clearance and preparation of material for 
closing the transaction.
    (2) The closing agent will provide services for deeds in lieu of 
foreclosure as set forth in Sec. 1927.62 of this subpart, and Sec. 
1955.10 of subpart A of part 1955 of this chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 1927.59  Subsequent loans and transfers with assumptions.

    Title services and closing for subsequent loans to an existing 
borrower will be done in accordance with previous instructions in this 
subpart, except that:
    (a) Loans closed using title insurance or title opinions. (1) Title 
insurance or title opinions will be obtained unless:
    (i) The cost of title services is excessive in relationship to the 
size of the loan,
    (ii) The agency currently has a first mortgage security interest,
    (iii) The applicant has sufficient income to service the additional 
loan,
    (iv) The borrower is current on the existing agency loan, and
    (v) The best mortgage obtainable adequately protects the agency 
security interests.
    (2) Title insurance or a final title opinion will not be obtained 
for a subsequent Section 504 loan where the previous Section 504 loan 
was unsecured or secured for less than $7,500 and the outstanding debt 
amount plus the new loan is less than $7,500.
    (3) Loans closed using a new lender title insurance policy:
    (i) Will cover the entire real property which is to secure the loan, 
including the real property already owned and any additional real 
property being acquired by the borrower with the loan proceeds.
    (ii) Will cover the entire amount of any subsequent loan plus the 
amount of any existing loan being refinanced (if the existing loan is 
not being refinanced, the new lender policy will insure only the amount 
of the subsequent loan).
    (b) Title services required in connection with assumptions. These 
regulations are contained in subparts A and B of part 1965 of this 
chapter and 7 CFR part 3550 as appropriate for the loan type.

[61 FR 11711, Mar. 22, 1996, as amended at 67 FR 78327, Dec. 24, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. Sec. 1927.60-1927.99  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1927.100  OMB control number.

    The reporting requirements contained in this regulation have been 
approved by the Office of Management and Budget and have been assigned 
OMB control number 0575-0147. Public reporting burden for this 
collection of information is estimated to vary from 5 minutes to 1.5 
hours per response, with an average of .38 hours per response, including 
time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, 
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing 
the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden 
estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, 
including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Department of 
Agriculture, Clearance Officer, OIRM, Ag Box 7630, Washington, DC 20250; 
and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project 
(OMB <greek-i>0575-0147), Washington, DC 20503. You are not required to 
respond to the collection of information unless it displays a currently 
valid OMB control number.


<R03>
PART 1930_GENERAL--Table of Contents

<R05>


Subparts A-C [Reserved]

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 301; 7 U.S.C. 1989; 16 U.S.C. 1005.

Subparts A-C [Reserved]

                       PARTS 1931	1939 [RESERVED]


[[Page 169]]


<R02>
                              FINDING AIDS


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts and 
an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in 
the CFR Index and Finding Aids volume to the Code of Federal Regulations 
which is published separately and revised annually.

  Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
  Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
  List of CFR Sections Affected

[[Page 171]]


<R03>
                    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters


<R04>

                     (Revised as of January 1, 2008)

                      Title 1--General Provisions

         I  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register 
                (Parts 1--49)
        II  Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50--299)
        IV  Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400--500)

                    Title 2--Grants and Agreements

            Subtitle A--Office of Management and Budget Guidance 
                for Grants and Agreements
         I  Office of Management and Budget Governmentwide 
                Guidance for Grants and Agreements (Parts 100--
                199)
        II  Office of Management and Budget Circulars and Guidance 
                (200--299)
            Subtitle B--Federal Agency Regulations for Grants and 
                Agreements
       III  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300-- 
                399)
        VI  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
      VIII  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Department of Defense (Parts 1100--1199)
       XIV  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
     XVIII  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1880--1899)
      XXII  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2200--2299)
      XXIV  Housing and Urban Development (Parts 2400--2499)
       XXV  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
      XXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                2600--2699)
     XXVII  Small Business Administration (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
     XXXII  National Endowment for the Arts (Parts 3200--3299)
    XXXIII  National Endowment for the Humanities (Parts 3300--
                3399)
      XXXV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 3500--
                3599)
    XXXVII  Peace Corps (Parts 3700--3799)

[[Page 172]]

                        Title 3--The President

         I  Executive Office of the President (Parts 100--199)

                           Title 4--Accounts

         I  Government Accountability Office (Parts 1--99)

                   Title 5--Administrative Personnel

         I  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1--1199)
        II  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300--1399)
         V  The International Organizations Employees Loyalty 
                Board (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      VIII  Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800--1899)
        IX  Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900--1999)
        XI  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Parts 2100--2199)
       XIV  Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of 
                the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal 
                Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400--2499)
        XV  Office of Administration, Executive Office of the 
                President (Parts 2500--2599)
       XVI  Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600--2699)
       XXI  Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100--3199)
      XXII  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 3200--
                3299)
     XXIII  Department of Energy (Parts 3300--3399)
      XXIV  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Parts 3400--
                3499)
       XXV  Department of the Interior (Parts 3500--3599)
      XXVI  Department of Defense (Parts 3600-- 3699)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Parts 3800--3899)
      XXIX  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900--3999)
       XXX  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4099)
      XXXI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100--4199)
    XXXIII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Parts 4300--
                4399)
      XXXV  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 4500--4599)
        XL  Interstate Commerce Commission (Parts 5000--5099)
       XLI  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 5100--
                5199)
      XLII  Department of Labor (Parts 5200--5299)
     XLIII  National Science Foundation (Parts 5300--5399)
       XLV  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 5500--
                5599)
      XLVI  Postal Rate Commission (Parts 5600--5699)
     XLVII  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 5700--5799)
    XLVIII  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 5800--5899)
         L  Department of Transportation (Parts 6000--6099)
       LII  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 6200--
                6299)
      LIII  Department of Education (Parts 6300--6399)

[[Page 173]]

       LIV  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 6400--6499)
        LV  National Endowment for the Arts (Parts 6500--6599)
       LVI  National Endowment for the Humanities (Parts 6600--
                6699)
      LVII  General Services Administration (Parts 6700--6799)
     LVIII  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
                (Parts 6800--6899)
       LIX  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                6900--6999)
        LX  United States Postal Service (Parts 7000--7099)
       LXI  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 7100--7199)
      LXII  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 7200--
                7299)
     LXIII  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 7300--7399)
      LXIV  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 7400--7499)
       LXV  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                7500--7599)
      LXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                7600--7699)
     LXVII  Institute of Museum and Library Services (Parts 7700--
                7799)
      LXIX  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 7900--7999)
      LXXI  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 8100--8199)
    LXXIII  Department of Agriculture (Parts 8300--8399)
     LXXIV  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 8400--8499)
     LXXVI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                8600--8699)
    LXXVII  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 8700--8799)
     XCVII  Department of Homeland Security Human Resources 
                Management System (Department of Homeland 
                Security--Office of Personnel Management) (Parts 
                9700--9799)
      XCIX  Department of Defense Human Resources Management and 
                Labor Relations Systems (Department of Defense--
                Office of Personnel Management) (Parts 9900--9999)

                      Title 6--Domestic Security

         I  Department of Homeland Security, Office of the 
                Secretary (Parts 0--99)
         X  Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board (Parts 
                1000--1099)

                         Title 7--Agriculture

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Agriculture 
                (Parts 0--26)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of 
                Agriculture
         I  Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, 
                Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 27--209)
        II  Food and Nutrition Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 210--299)
       III  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 300--399)

[[Page 174]]

        IV  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         V  Agricultural Research Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                700--799)
      VIII  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Federal Grain Inspection Service), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 900--999)
         X  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1000--1199)
        XI  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1200--1299)
       XIV  Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative 
                Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service 
                Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800--
                2099)
        XX  Local Television Loan Guarantee Board (Parts 2200--
                2299)
      XXVI  Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 2600--2699)
     XXVII  Office of Information Resources Management, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2800--2899)
      XXIX  Office of Energy Policy and New Uses, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 2900--2999)
       XXX  Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Office of Environmental Quality, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3100--3199)
     XXXII  Office of Procurement and Property Management, 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 3200--3299)
    XXXIII  Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3300--3399)
     XXXIV  Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3400--
                3499)
      XXXV  Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3500--3599)

[[Page 175]]

     XXXVI  National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 3600--3699)
    XXXVII  Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3700--3799)
   XXXVIII  World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3800--3899)
       XLI  [Reserved]
      XLII  Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200--
                4299)

                    Title 8--Aliens and Nationality

         I  Department of Homeland Security (Immigration and 
                Naturalization) (Parts 1--499)
         V  Executive Office for Immigration Review, Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1000--1399)

                 Title 9--Animals and Animal Products

         I  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1--199)
        II  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Packers and Stockyards Programs), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--299)
       III  Food Safety and Inspection Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 300--599)

                           Title 10--Energy

         I  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Department of Energy (Parts 200--699)
       III  Department of Energy (Parts 700--999)
         X  Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 
                1000--1099)
      XIII  Nuclear Waste Technical Review Board (Parts 1303--
                1399)
      XVII  Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700--
                1799)
     XVIII  Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste 
                Commission (Parts 1800--1899)

                      Title 11--Federal Elections

         I  Federal Election Commission (Parts 1--9099)

                      Title 12--Banks and Banking

         I  Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  Federal Reserve System (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400--
                499)

[[Page 176]]

         V  Office of Thrift Supervision, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XIV  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400--
                1499)
        XV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1500--1599)
      XVII  Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                1700--1799)
     XVIII  Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, 
                Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800--1899)

               Title 13--Business Credit and Assistance

         I  Small Business Administration (Parts 1--199)
       III  Economic Development Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 500--599)

                    Title 14--Aeronautics and Space

         I  Federal Aviation Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--199)
        II  Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation 
                (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200--399)
       III  Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 400--499)
         V  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
        VI  Air Transportation System Stabilization (Parts 1300--
                1399)

                 Title 15--Commerce and Foreign Trade

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 
                0--29)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Commerce and 
                Foreign Trade
         I  Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                30--199)
        II  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)

[[Page 177]]

        IV  Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 400--499)
       VII  Bureau of Industry and Security, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Technology Administration, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
      XIII  East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400--
                1499)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade 
                Agreements
        XX  Office of the United States Trade Representative 
                (Parts 2000--2099)
            Subtitle D--Regulations Relating to Telecommunications 
                and Information
     XXIII  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                2300--2399)

                    Title 16--Commercial Practices

         I  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0--999)
        II  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000--1799)

             Title 17--Commodity and Securities Exchanges

         I  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1--199)
        II  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 400--499)

          Title 18--Conservation of Power and Water Resources

         I  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of 
                Energy (Parts 1--399)
       III  Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Water Resources Council (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800--899)
      XIII  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300--1399)

                       Title 19--Customs Duties

         I  Bureau of Customs and Border Protection, Department of 
                Homeland Security; Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--199)
        II  United States International Trade Commission (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)

[[Page 178]]

        IV  Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, 
                Department of Homeland Security (Parts 400--599)

                     Title 20--Employees' Benefits

         I  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200--399)
       III  Social Security Administration (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Employees Compensation Appeals Board, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 500--599)
         V  Employment and Training Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 600--699)
        VI  Employment Standards Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 
                800--899)
      VIII  Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 
                900--999)
        IX  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training Service, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1000--1099)

                       Title 21--Food and Drugs

         I  Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1--1299)
        II  Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 1300--1399)
       III  Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400--
                1499)

                      Title 22--Foreign Relations

         I  Department of State (Parts 1--199)
        II  Agency for International Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Peace Corps (Parts 300--399)
        IV  International Joint Commission, United States and 
                Canada (Parts 400--499)
         V  Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Parts 700--
                799)
        IX  Foreign Service Grievance Board (Parts 900--999)
         X  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  International Boundary and Water Commission, United 
                States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 
                1100--1199)
       XII  United States International Development Cooperation 
                Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Millenium Challenge Corporation (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor 
                Relations Authority; General Counsel of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign 
                Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400--1499)

[[Page 179]]

        XV  African Development Foundation (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700--1799)

                          Title 23--Highways

         I  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--999)
        II  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and 
                Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 1300--1399)

                Title 24--Housing and Urban Development

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban 
                Development
         I  Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                100--199)
        II  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Government National Mortgage Association, Department 
                of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Housing and Office of Multifamily Housing 
                Assistance Restructuring, Department of Housing 
                and Urban Development (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 600--699) [Reserved]
       VII  Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and 
                Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700--
                799)
      VIII  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance 
                Programs, Section 202 Direct Loan Program, Section 
                202 Supportive Housing for the Elderly Program and 
                Section 811 Supportive Housing for Persons With 
                Disabilities Program) (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian 
                Housing, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 900--1699)
         X  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Interstate Land Sales 
                Registration Program) (Parts 1700--1799)

[[Page 180]]

       XII  Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 2000--2099)
        XX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 3200--3899)
       XXV  Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100--
                4199)

                           Title 25--Indians

         I  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--299)
        II  Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 300--399)
       III  National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500--599)
        IV  Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 
                700--799)
         V  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, 
                and Indian Health Service, Department of Health 
                and Human Services (Part 900)
        VI  Office of the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 1000--1199)
       VII  Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 1200--1299)

                      Title 26--Internal Revenue

         I  Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 1--899)

           Title 27--Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms

         I  Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau, Department 
                of the Treasury (Parts 1--399)
        II  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, 
                Department of Justice (Parts 400--699)

                   Title 28--Judicial Administration

         I  Department of Justice (Parts 0--299)
       III  Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice 
                (Parts 300--399)
         V  Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500--
                599)
        VI  Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the 
                District of Columbia (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact Council 
                (Parts 900--999)

[[Page 181]]

        XI  Department of Justice and Department of State (Parts 
                1100--1199)

                            Title 29--Labor

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 
                0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor
         I  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 400--499)
         V  Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 
                500--899)
        IX  Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission 
                (Parts 900--999)
         X  National Mediation Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       XII  Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 
                1400--1499)
       XIV  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600--
                1699)
      XVII  Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2499)
       XXV  Employee Benefits Security Administration, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 2500--2599)
     XXVII  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2700--2799)
        XL  Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4999)

                      Title 30--Mineral Resources

         I  Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Minerals Management Service, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 200--299)
       III  Board of Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                400--499)
       VII  Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 700--999)

                 Title 31--Money and Finance: Treasury

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--50)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
         I  Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                51--199)
        II  Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                200--399)

[[Page 182]]

        IV  Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of International Investment, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Claims Collection Standards (Department of the 
                Treasury--Department of Justice) (Parts 900--999)

                      Title 32--National Defense

            Subtitle A--Department of Defense
         I  Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1--399)
         V  Department of the Army (Parts 400--699)
        VI  Department of the Navy (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Department of the Air Force (Parts 800--1099)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to National 
                Defense
       XII  Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XVI  Selective Service System (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  Office of the Director of National Intelligence (Parts 
                1700--1799)
     XVIII  National Counterintelligence Center (Parts 1800--1899)
       XIX  Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Information Security Oversight Office, National 
                Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000--
                2099)
       XXI  National Security Council (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXIV  Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400--
                2499)
     XXVII  Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 
                2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of the Vice President of the United States 
                (Parts 2800--2899)

               Title 33--Navigation and Navigable Waters

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                1--199)
        II  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                          Title 34--Education

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Education (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Offices of the 
                Department of Education
         I  Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education 
                (Parts 100--199)

[[Page 183]]

        II  Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, 
                Department of Education (Parts 200--299)
       III  Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
                Services, Department of Education (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Vocational and Adult Education, Department 
                of Education (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages 
                Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of 
                Education (Parts 600--699)
        XI  National Institute for Literacy (Parts 1100--1199)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Education
       XII  National Council on Disability (Parts 1200--1299)

                          Title 35 [Reserved]

             Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property

         I  National Park Service, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--
                299)
       III  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400--499)
         V  Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Library of Congress (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800--
                899)
        IX  Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Presidio Trust (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance 
                Board (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
        XV  Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust (Parts 1500--
                1599)
       XVI  Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National 
                Environmental Policy Foundation (Parts 1600--1699)

             Title 37--Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights

         I  United States Patent and Trademark Office, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 1--199)
        II  Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200--299)
       III  Copyright Royalty Board, Library of Congress (Parts 
                301--399)
        IV  Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Under Secretary for Technology, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 500--599)

           Title 38--Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief

         I  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0--99)

[[Page 184]]

                       Title 39--Postal Service

         I  United States Postal Service (Parts 1--999)
       III  Postal Regulatory Commission (Parts 3000--3099)

                  Title 40--Protection of Environment

         I  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1--1099)
        IV  Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1400--1499)
         V  Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
       VII  Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
                Defense; Uniform National Discharge Standards for 
                Vessels of the Armed Forces (Parts 1700--1799)

          Title 41--Public Contracts and Property Management

            Subtitle B--Other Provisions Relating to Public 
                Contracts
        50  Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1--50-
                999)
        51  Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or 
                Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1--51-99)
        60  Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal 
                Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 
                60-1--60-999)
        61  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training Service, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 61-1--61-999)
            Subtitle C--Federal Property Management Regulations 
                System
       101  Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1--
                101-99)
       102  Federal Management Regulation (Parts 102-1--102-299)
       105  General Services Administration (Parts 105-1--105-999)
       109  Department of Energy Property Management Regulations 
                (Parts 109-1--109-99)
       114  Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1--114-99)
       115  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1--115-99)
       128  Department of Justice (Parts 128-1--128-99)
            Subtitle D--Other Provisions Relating to Property 
                Management [Reserved]
            Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management 
                Regulations System
            Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System
       300  General (Parts 300-1--300-99)
       301  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1--
                301-99)
       302  Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1--302-99)
       303  Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of 
                Certain Employees (Part 303-1--303-99)
       304  Payment of Travel Expenses from a Non-Federal Source 
                (Parts 304-1--304-99)

[[Page 185]]

                        Title 42--Public Health

         I  Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 1--199)
        IV  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Department 
                of Health and Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1000--1999)

                   Title 43--Public Lands: Interior

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Lands
         I  Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 200--499)
        II  Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1000--9999)
       III  Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation 
                Commission (Parts 10000--10010)

             Title 44--Emergency Management and Assistance

         I  Federal Emergency Management Agency, Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 0--399)
        IV  Department of Commerce and Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                       Title 45--Public Welfare

            Subtitle A--Department of Health and Human Services 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Welfare
        II  Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), 
                Administration for Children and Families, 
                Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support 
                Enforcement Program), Administration for Children 
                and Families, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United 
                States, Department of Justice (Parts 500--599)
        VI  National Science Foundation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800--899)
         X  Office of Community Services, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities 
                (Parts 1100--1199)

[[Page 186]]

       XII  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                1200--1299)
      XIII  Office of Human Development Services, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1300--1399)
       XVI  Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  National Commission on Libraries and Information 
                Science (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800--
                1899)
       XXI  Commission on Fine Arts (Parts 2100--2199)
     XXIII  Arctic Research Commission (Part 2301)
      XXIV  James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 
                2400--2499)
       XXV  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2500--2599)

                          Title 46--Shipping

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                1--199)
        II  Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 200--399)
       III  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage), Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500--599)

                      Title 47--Telecommunication

         I  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Office of Science and Technology Policy and National 
                Security Council (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                300--399)

           Title 48--Federal Acquisition Regulations System

         1  Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1--99)
         2  Defense Acquisition Regulations System, Department of 
                Defense (Parts 200--299)
         3  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300--
                399)
         4  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         5  General Services Administration (Parts 500--599)
         6  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
         7  Agency for International Development (Parts 700--799)
         8  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
         9  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        10  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)
        12  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
        13  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
        14  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)

[[Page 187]]

        15  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
        16  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                1600--1699)
        17  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700--1799)
        18  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1800--1899)
        19  Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 1900--1999)
        20  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000--2099)
        21  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation (Parts 2100--2199)
        23  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
        24  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2400--2499)
        25  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
        28  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
        29  Department of Labor (Parts 2900--2999)
        30  Department of Homeland Security, Homeland Security 
                Acquisition Regulation (HSAR) (Parts 3000--3099)
        34  Department of Education Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                3400--3499)
        51  Department of the Army Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5100--5199)
        52  Department of the Navy Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5200--5299)
        53  Department of the Air Force Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation Supplement [RESERVED]
        54  Defense Logistics Agency, Department of Defense (Parts 
                5400--5499)
        57  African Development Foundation (Parts 5700--5799)
        61  General Services Administration Board of Contract 
                Appeals (Parts 6100--6199)
        63  Department of Transportation Board of Contract Appeals 
                (Parts 6300--6399)
        99  Cost Accounting Standards Board, Office of Federal 
                Procurement Policy, Office of Management and 
                Budget (Parts 9900--9999)

                       Title 49--Transportation

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Transportation 
                (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to 
                Transportation
         I  Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Federal Railroad Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                400--499)

[[Page 188]]

         V  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Federal Transit Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) 
                (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  National Transportation Safety Board (Parts 800--999)
         X  Surface Transportation Board, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1000--1399)
        XI  Research and Innovative Technology Administration, 
                Department of Transportation [RESERVED]
       XII  Transportation Security Administration, Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 1500--1699)

                   Title 50--Wildlife and Fisheries

         I  United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of 
                the Interior (Parts 1--199)
        II  National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Fishing and Related Activities (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife 
                Service, Department of the Interior and National 
                Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and 
                Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce); Endangered Species Committee 
                Regulations (Parts 400--499)
         V  Marine Mammal Commission (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 600--699)

                      CFR Index and Finding Aids

            Subject/Agency Index
            List of Agency Prepared Indexes
            Parallel Tables of Statutory Authorities and Rules
            List of CFR Titles, Chapters, Subchapters, and Parts
            Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR

[[Page 189]]




<R03>
           Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR


<R04>

                     (Revised as of January 1, 2008)

                                                  CFR Title, Subtitle or 
                     Agency                               Chapter

Administrative Committee of the Federal Register  1, I
Advanced Research Projects Agency                 32, I
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation         36, VIII
African Development Foundation                    22, XV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 57
Agency for International Development              22, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
Agricultural Marketing Service                    7, I, IX, X, XI
Agricultural Research Service                     7, V
Agriculture Department                            5, LXXIII
  Agricultural Marketing Service                  7, I, IX, X, XI
  Agricultural Research Service                   7, V
  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service      7, III; 9, I
  Chief Financial Officer, Office of              7, XXX
  Commodity Credit Corporation                    7, XIV
  Cooperative State Research, Education, and      7, XXXIV
       Extension Service
  Economic Research Service                       7, XXXVII
  Energy, Office of                               2, IX; 7, XXIX
  Environmental Quality, Office of                7, XXXI
  Farm Service Agency                             7, VII, XVIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 4
  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation              7, IV
  Food and Nutrition Service                      7, II
  Food Safety and Inspection Service              9, III
  Foreign Agricultural Service                    7, XV
  Forest Service                                  36, II
  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards        7, VIII; 9, II
       Administration
  Information Resources Management, Office of     7, XXVII
  Inspector General, Office of                    7, XXVI
  National Agricultural Library                   7, XLI
  National Agricultural Statistics Service        7, XXXVI
  Natural Resources Conservation Service          7, VI
  Operations, Office of                           7, XXVIII
  Procurement and Property Management, Office of  7, XXXII
  Rural Business-Cooperative Service              7, XVIII, XLII
  Rural Development Administration                7, XLII
  Rural Housing Service                           7, XVIII, XXXV
  Rural Telephone Bank                            7, XVI
  Rural Utilities Service                         7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
  Secretary of Agriculture, Office of             7, Subtitle A
  Transportation, Office of                       7, XXXIII
  World Agricultural Outlook Board                7, XXXVIII
Air Force Department                              32, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement       48, 53
Air Transportation Stabilization Board            14, VI
Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau          27, I
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives,       27, II
     Bureau of
AMTRAK                                            49, VII
American Battle Monuments Commission              36, IV
American Indians, Office of the Special Trustee   25, VII
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service        7, III; 9, I
Appalachian Regional Commission                   5, IX

[[Page 190]]

Architectural and Transportation Barriers         36, XI
     Compliance Board
Arctic Research Commission                        45, XXIII
Armed Forces Retirement Home                      5, XI
Army Department                                   32, V
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 51
Benefits Review Board                             20, VII
Bilingual Education and Minority Languages        34, V
     Affairs, Office of
Blind or Severely Disabled, Committee for         41, 51
     Purchase From People Who Are
Broadcasting Board of Governors                   22, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 19
Census Bureau                                     15, I
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services          42, IV
Central Intelligence Agency                       32, XIX
Chief Financial Officer, Office of                7, XXX
Child Support Enforcement, Office of              45, III
Children and Families, Administration for         45, II, III, IV, X
Civil Rights, Commission on                       45, VII
Civil Rights, Office for                          34, I
Coast Guard                                       33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)                46, III
Commerce Department                               44, IV
  Census Bureau                                   15, I
  Economic Affairs, Under Secretary               37, V
  Economic Analysis, Bureau of                    15, VIII
  Economic Development Administration             13, III
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 13
  Fishery Conservation and Management             50, VI
  Foreign-Trade Zones Board                       15, IV
  Industry and Security, Bureau of                15, VII
  International Trade Administration              15, III; 19, III
  National Institute of Standards and Technology  15, II
  National Marine Fisheries Service               50, II, IV, VI
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric                15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
       Administration                             VI
  National Telecommunications and Information     15, XXIII; 47, III
       Administration
  National Weather Service                        15, IX
  Patent and Trademark Office, United States      37, I
  Productivity, Technology and Innovation,        37, IV
       Assistant Secretary for
  Secretary of Commerce, Office of                15, Subtitle A
  Technology, Under Secretary for                 37, V
  Technology Administration                       15, XI
  Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for      37, IV
Commercial Space Transportation                   14, III
Commodity Credit Corporation                      7, XIV
Commodity Futures Trading Commission              5, XLI; 17, I
Community Planning and Development, Office of     24, V, VI
     Assistant Secretary for
Community Services, Office of                     45, X
Comptroller of the Currency                       12, I
Construction Industry Collective Bargaining       29, IX
     Commission
Consumer Product Safety Commission                5, LXXI; 16, II
Cooperative State Research, Education, and        7, XXXIV
     Extension Service
Copyright Office                                  37, II
Copyright Royalty Board                           37, III
Corporation for National and Community Service    2, XXII; 45, XII, XXV
Cost Accounting Standards Board                   48, 99
Council on Environmental Quality                  40, V
Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency    28, VIII
     for the District of Columbia
Customs and Border Protection Bureau              19, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Department                                5, XXVI; 32, Subtitle A; 
                                                  40, VII

[[Page 191]]

  Advanced Research Projects Agency               32, I
  Air Force Department                            32, VII
  Army Department                                 32, V; 33, II; 36, III, 
                                                  48, 51
  Defense Acquisition Regulations System          48, II
  Defense Intelligence Agency                     32, I
  Defense Logistics Agency                        32, I, XII; 48, 54
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  National Imagery and Mapping Agency             32, I
  Navy Department                                 32, VI; 48, 52
  Secretary of Defense, Office of                 2, XI; 32, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Intelligence Agency                       32, I
Defense Logistics Agency                          32, XII; 48, 54
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board           10, XVII
Delaware River Basin Commission                   18, III
District of Columbia, Court Services and          28, VIII
     Offender Supervision Agency for the
Drug Enforcement Administration                   21, II
East-West Foreign Trade Board                     15, XIII
Economic Affairs, Under Secretary                 37, V
Economic Analysis, Bureau of                      15, VIII
Economic Development Administration               13, III
Economic Research Service                         7, XXXVII
Education, Department of                          5, LIII
  Bilingual Education and Minority Languages      34, V
       Affairs, Office of
  Civil Rights, Office for                        34, I
  Educational Research and Improvement, Office    34, VII
       of
  Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of   34, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 34
  Postsecondary Education, Office of              34, VI
  Secretary of Education, Office of               34, Subtitle A
  Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,  34, III
       Office of
  Vocational and Adult Education, Office of       34, IV
Educational Research and Improvement, Office of   34, VII
Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of     34, II
Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board       13, V
Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board              13, IV
Employee Benefits Security Administration         29, XXV
Employees' Compensation Appeals Board             20, IV
Employees Loyalty Board                           5, V
Employment and Training Administration            20, V
Employment Standards Administration               20, VI
Endangered Species Committee                      50, IV
Energy, Department of                             5, XXIII; 10, II, III, X
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 9
  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission            5, XXIV; 18, I
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 109
Energy, Office of                                 7, XXIX
Engineers, Corps of                               33, II; 36, III
Engraving and Printing, Bureau of                 31, VI
Environmental Protection Agency                   2, XV; 5, LIV; 40, I, IV, 
                                                  VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 15
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 115
Environmental Quality, Office of                  7, XXXI
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission           5, LXII; 29, XIV
Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary  24, I
     for
Executive Office of the President                 3, I
  Administration, Office of                       5, XV
  Environmental Quality, Council on               40, V
  Management and Budget, Office of                5, III, LXXVII; 14, VI; 
                                                  48, 99
  National Drug Control Policy, Office of         21, III
  National Security Council                       32, XXI; 47, 2
  Presidential Documents                          3

[[Page 192]]

  Science and Technology Policy, Office of        32, XXIV; 47, II
  Trade Representative, Office of the United      15, XX
       States
Export-Import Bank of the United States           2, XXXV; 5, LII; 12, IV
Family Assistance, Office of                      45, II
Farm Credit Administration                        5, XXXI; 12, VI
Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation          5, XXX; 12, XIV
Farm Service Agency                               7, VII, XVIII
Federal Acquisition Regulation                    48, 1
Federal Aviation Administration                   14, I
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
Federal Claims Collection Standards               31, IX
Federal Communications Commission                 5, XXIX; 47, I
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of   41, 60
Federal Crop Insurance Corporation                7, IV
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation             5, XXII; 12, III
Federal Election Commission                       11, I
Federal Emergency Management Agency               44, I
Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal    48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition     48, 16
     Regulation
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission              5, XXIV; 18, I
Federal Financial Institutions Examination        12, XI
     Council
Federal Financing Bank                            12, VIII
Federal Highway Administration                    23, I, II
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation            1, IV
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office       12, XVII
Federal Housing Finance Board                     12, IX
Federal Labor Relations Authority, and General    5, XIV; 22, XIV
     Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations 
     Authority
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center           31, VII
Federal Management Regulation                     41, 102
Federal Maritime Commission                       46, IV
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service        29, XII
Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission  5, LXXIV; 29, XXVII
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration       49, III
Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                   28, III
Federal Procurement Policy Office                 48, 99
Federal Property Management Regulations           41, 101
Federal Railroad Administration                   49, II
Federal Register, Administrative Committee of     1, I
Federal Register, Office of                       1, II
Federal Reserve System                            12, II
  Board of Governors                              5, LVIII
Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board        5, VI, LXXVI
Federal Service Impasses Panel                    5, XIV
Federal Trade Commission                          5, XLVII; 16, I
Federal Transit Administration                    49, VI
Federal Travel Regulation System                  41, Subtitle F
Fine Arts, Commission on                          45, XXI
Fiscal Service                                    31, II
Fish and Wildlife Service, United States          50, I, IV
Fishery Conservation and Management               50, VI
Food and Drug Administration                      21, I
Food and Nutrition Service                        7, II
Food Safety and Inspection Service                9, III
Foreign Agricultural Service                      7, XV
Foreign Assets Control, Office of                 31, V
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the       45, V
     United States
Foreign Service Grievance Board                   22, IX
Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel            22, XIV
Foreign Service Labor Relations Board             22, XIV
Foreign-Trade Zones Board                         15, IV
Forest Service                                    36, II
General Services Administration                   5, LVII; 41, 105
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 61
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 5
  Federal Management Regulation                   41, 102

[[Page 193]]

  Federal Property Management Regulations         41, 101
  Federal Travel Regulation System                41, Subtitle F
  General                                         41, 300
  Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel    41, 304
       Expenses
  Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death    41, 303
       of Certain Employees
  Relocation Allowances                           41, 302
  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances          41, 301
Geological Survey                                 30, IV
Government Accountability Office                  4, I
Government Ethics, Office of                      5, XVI
Government National Mortgage Association          24, III
Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards          7, VIII; 9, II
     Administration
Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation            45, XVIII
Health and Human Services, Department of          2, III; 5, XLV; 45, 
                                                  Subtitle A,
  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services        42, IV
  Child Support Enforcement, Office of            45, III
  Children and Families, Administration for       45, II, III, IV, X
  Community Services, Office of                   45, X
  Family Assistance, Office of                    45, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 3
  Food and Drug Administration                    21, I
  Human Development Services, Office of           45, XIII
  Indian Health Service                           25, V
  Inspector General (Health Care), Office of      42, V
  Public Health Service                           42, I
  Refugee Resettlement, Office of                 45, IV
Homeland Security, Department of                  6, I
  Coast Guard                                     33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)              46, III
  Customs and Border Protection Bureau            19, I
  Federal Emergency Management Agency             44, I
  Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau      19, IV
  Immigration and Naturalization                  8, I
  Transportation Security Administration          49, XII
Housing and Urban Development, Department of      5, LXV; 24, Subtitle B, 2, 
                                                  XXIV; 2424
  Community Planning and Development, Office of   24, V, VI
       Assistant Secretary for
  Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant          24, I
       Secretary for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 24
  Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office    12, XVII
       of
  Government National Mortgage Association        24, III
  Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office   24, II, VIII, X, XX
       of Assistant Secretary for
  Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing     24, IV
       Assistance Restructuring, Office of
  Inspector General, Office of                    24, XII
  Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant  24, IX
       Secretary for
  Secretary, Office of                            24, Subtitle A, VII
Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of  24, II, VIII, X, XX
     Assistant Secretary for
Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing       24, IV
     Assistance Restructuring, Office of
Human Development Services, Office of             45, XIII
Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau        19, IV
Immigration and Naturalization                    8, I
Immigration Review, Executive Office for          8, V
Independent Counsel, Office of                    28, VII
Indian Affairs, Bureau of                         25, I, V
Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant           25, VI
     Secretary
Indian Arts and Crafts Board                      25, II
Indian Health Service                             25, V
Industry and Security, Bureau of                  15, VII
Information Resources Management, Office of       7, XXVII
Information Security Oversight Office, National   32, XX
   Archives and Records Administration
[[Page 194]]

Inspector General
  Agriculture Department                          7, XXVI
  Health and Human Services Department            42, V
  Housing and Urban Development Department        24, XII
Institute of Peace, United States                 22, XVII
Inter-American Foundation                         5, LXIII; 22, X
Interior Department
  American Indians, Office of the Special         25, VII
       Trustee
  Endangered Species Committee                    50, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 14
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 114
  Fish and Wildlife Service, United States        50, I, IV
  Geological Survey                               30, IV
  Indian Affairs, Bureau of                       25, I, V
  Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant         25, VI
       Secretary
  Indian Arts and Crafts Board                    25, II
  Land Management, Bureau of                      43, II
  Minerals Management Service                     30, II
  National Indian Gaming Commission               25, III
  National Park Service                           36, I
  Reclamation, Bureau of                          43, I
  Secretary of the Interior, Office of            2, XIV; 43, Subtitle A
  Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board   30, III
       of
  Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,     30, VII
       Office of
Internal Revenue Service                          26, I
International Boundary and Water Commission,      22, XI
     United States and Mexico, United States 
     Section
International Development, United States Agency   22, II
     for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
International Development Cooperation Agency,     22, XII
     United States
International Fishing and Related Activities      50, III
International Investment, Office of               31, VIII
International Joint Commission, United States     22, IV
     and Canada
International Organizations Employees Loyalty     5, V
     Board
International Trade Administration                15, III; 19, III
International Trade Commission, United States     19, II
Interstate Commerce Commission                    5, XL
James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation      45, XXIV
Japan-United States Friendship Commission         22, XVI
Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries       20, VIII
Justice Department                                2, XXVII; 5, XXVIII; 28, 
                                                  I, XI; 40, IV
  Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives,     27, II
       Bureau of
  Drug Enforcement Administration                 21, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 28
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             31, IX
  Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                 28, III
  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the     45, V
       United States
  Immigration Review, Executive Office for        8, V
  Offices of Independent Counsel                  28, VI
  Prisons, Bureau of                              28, V
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 128
Labor Department                                  5, XLII
  Benefits Review Board                           20, VII
  Employee Benefits Security Administration       29, XXV
  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board           20, IV
  Employment and Training Administration          20, V
  Employment Standards Administration             20, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 29
  Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office    41, 60
       of
  Federal Procurement Regulations System          41, 50
  Labor-Management Standards, Office of           29, II, IV
  Mine Safety and Health Administration           30, I
  Occupational Safety and Health Administration   29, XVII
  Public Contracts                                41, 50

[[Page 195]]

  Secretary of Labor, Office of                   29, Subtitle A
  Veterans' Employment and Training Service,      41, 61; 20, IX
       Office of the Assistant Secretary for
  Wage and Hour Division                          29, V
  Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of       20, I
Labor-Management Standards, Office of             29, II, IV
Land Management, Bureau of                        43, II
Legal Services Corporation                        45, XVI
Library of Congress                               36, VII
  Copyright Office                                37, II
  Copyright Royalty Board                         37, III
Local Television Loan Guarantee Board             7, XX
Management and Budget, Office of                  5, III, LXXVII; 14, VI; 
                                                  48, 99
Marine Mammal Commission                          50, V
Maritime Administration                           46, II
Merit Systems Protection Board                    5, II, LXIV
Micronesian Status Negotiations, Office for       32, XXVII
Millenium Challenge Corporation                   22, XIII
Mine Safety and Health Administration             30, I
Minerals Management Service                       30, II
Minority Business Development Agency              15, XIV
Miscellaneous Agencies                            1, IV
Monetary Offices                                  31, I
Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in     36, XVI
     National Environmental Policy Foundation
National Aeronautics and Space Administration     2, XVIII; 5, LIX; 14, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 18
National Agricultural Library                     7, XLI
National Agricultural Statistics Service          7, XXXVI
National and Community Service, Corporation for   45, XII, XXV
National Archives and Records Administration      2, XXVI; 5, LXVI; 36, XII
  Information Security Oversight Office           32, XX
National Capital Planning Commission              1, IV
National Commission for Employment Policy         1, IV
National Commission on Libraries and Information  45, XVII
     Science
National Council on Disability                    34, XII
National Counterintelligence Center               32, XVIII
National Credit Union Administration              12, VII
National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact     28, IX
     Council
National Drug Control Policy, Office of           21, III
National Endowment for the Arts                   2, XXXII
National Endowment for the Humanities             2, XXXIII
National Foundation on the Arts and the           45, XI
     Humanities
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration    23, II, III; 49, V
National Imagery and Mapping Agency               32, I
National Indian Gaming Commission                 25, III
National Institute for Literacy                   34, XI
National Institute of Standards and Technology    15, II
National Intelligence, Office of Director of      32, XVII
National Labor Relations Board                    5, LXI; 29, I
National Marine Fisheries Service                 50, II, IV, VI
National Mediation Board                          29, X
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration   15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
                                                  VI
National Park Service                             36, I
National Railroad Adjustment Board                29, III
National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)  49, VII
National Science Foundation                       2, XXV; 5, XLIII; 45, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 25
National Security Council                         32, XXI
National Security Council and Office of Science   47, II
     and Technology Policy
National Telecommunications and Information       15, XXIII; 47, III
     Administration
National Transportation Safety Board              49, VIII
Natural Resources Conservation Service            7, VI

[[Page 196]]

Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, Office of      25, IV
Navy Department                                   32, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 52
Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation             24, XXV
Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste  10, XVIII
     Commission
Nuclear Regulatory Commission                     5, XLVIII; 10, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 20
Occupational Safety and Health Administration     29, XVII
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission  29, XX
Offices of Independent Counsel                    28, VI
Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust             36, XV
Operations Office                                 7, XXVIII
Overseas Private Investment Corporation           5, XXXIII; 22, VII
Patent and Trademark Office, United States        37, I
Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel      41, 304
     Expenses
Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of   41, 303
     Certain Employees
Peace Corps                                       22, III
Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation       36, IX
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation              29, XL
Personnel Management, Office of                   5, I, XXXV; 45, VIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 17
  Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal  48, 21
       Acquisition Regulation
  Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition   48, 16
       Regulation
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety           49, I
     Administration
Postal Regulatory Commission                      5, XLVI; 39, III
Postal Service, United States                     5, LX; 39, I
Postsecondary Education, Office of                34, VI
President's Commission on White House             1, IV
     Fellowships
Presidential Documents                            3
Presidio Trust                                    36, X
Prisons, Bureau of                                28, V
Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board       6, X
Procurement and Property Management, Office of    7, XXXII
Productivity, Technology and Innovation,          37, IV
     Assistant Secretary
Public Contracts, Department of Labor             41, 50
Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant    24, IX
     Secretary for
Public Health Service                             42, I
Railroad Retirement Board                         20, II
Reclamation, Bureau of                            43, I
Refugee Resettlement, Office of                   45, IV
Relocation Allowances                             41, 302
Research and Innovative Technology                49, XI
     Administration
Rural Business-Cooperative Service                7, XVIII, XLII
Rural Development Administration                  7, XLII
Rural Housing Service                             7, XVIII, XXXV
Rural Telephone Bank                              7, XVI
Rural Utilities Service                           7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation     33, IV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of          32, XXIV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of, and     47, II
     National Security Council
Secret Service                                    31, IV
Securities and Exchange Commission                17, II
Selective Service System                          32, XVI
Small Business Administration                     2, XXVII; 13, I
Smithsonian Institution                           36, V
Social Security Administration                    20, III; 48, 23
Soldiers' and Airmen's Home, United States        5, XI
Special Counsel, Office of                        5, VIII
Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,    34, III
     Office of
State Department                                  2, VI; 22, I; 28, XI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 6
Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board of  30, III

[[Page 197]]

Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,       30, VII
     Office of
Surface Transportation Board                      49, X
Susquehanna River Basin Commission                18, VIII
Technology Administration                         15, XI
Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for        37, IV
Technology, Under Secretary for                   37, V
Tennessee Valley Authority                        5, LXIX; 18, XIII
Thrift Supervision Office, Department of the      12, V
     Treasury
Trade Representative, United States, Office of    15, XX
Transportation, Department of                     5, L
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 63
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 12
  Federal Aviation Administration                 14, I
  Federal Highway Administration                  23, I, II
  Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration     49, III
  Federal Railroad Administration                 49, II
  Federal Transit Administration                  49, VI
  Maritime Administration                         46, II
  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  23, II, III; 49, V
  Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety         49, I
       Administration
  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation   33, IV
  Secretary of Transportation, Office of          14, II; 49, Subtitle A
  Surface Transportation Board                    49, X
  Transportation Statistics Bureau                49, XI
Transportation, Office of                         7, XXXIII
Transportation Security Administration            49, XII
Transportation Statistics Bureau                  49, XI
Travel Allowances, Temporary Duty (TDY)           41, 301
Treasury Department                               5, XXI; 12, XV; 17, IV; 
                                                  31, IX
  Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau        27, I
  Community Development Financial Institutions    12, XVIII
       Fund
  Comptroller of the Currency                     12, I
  Customs and Border Protection Bureau            19, I
  Engraving and Printing, Bureau of               31, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 10
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             31, IX
  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center         31, VII
  Fiscal Service                                  31, II
  Foreign Assets Control, Office of               31, V
  Internal Revenue Service                        26, I
  International Investment, Office of             31, VIII
  Monetary Offices                                31, I
  Secret Service                                  31, IV
  Secretary of the Treasury, Office of            31, Subtitle A
  Thrift Supervision, Office of                   12, V
Truman, Harry S. Scholarship Foundation           45, XVIII
United States and Canada, International Joint     22, IV
     Commission
United States and Mexico, International Boundary  22, XI
     and Water Commission, United States Section
Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation      43, III
     Commission
Veterans Affairs Department                       2, VIII; 38, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 8
Veterans' Employment and Training Service,        41, 61; 20, IX
     Office of the Assistant Secretary for
Vice President of the United States, Office of    32, XXVIII
Vocational and Adult Education, Office of         34, IV
Wage and Hour Division                            29, V
Water Resources Council                           18, VI
Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of         20, I
World Agricultural Outlook Board                  7, XXXVIII

[[Page 199]]


<R03>
List of CFR Sections Affected

<R04>

All changes in this volume of the Code of Federal Regulations that were 
made by documents published in the Federal Register since January 1, 
2001, are enumerated in the following list. Entries indicate the nature 
of the changes effected. Pages numbers refer to Federal Register pages. 
The user should consult the entries for chapters and parts as well as 
sections for revisions.
For the period before January 1, 2001, see the ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected, 1949-1963, 1964-1972, 1973-1985, and 1986-2000'' published in 
11 separate volumes.

                                  2001

7 CFR
                                                                   66 FR
                                                                    Page
Subtitle B
Chapter XVIII
1901 Authority citation revised.....................................7568
1901.1--1901.5 (Subpart A) Removed..................................7568
1902 Authority citation revised.....................................1569
1902.15 (c) amended.................................................1569
    Regulation at 66 FR 1569 eff. date delayed......................8886
1910.1 (f) added; interim...........................................1572
1910.4 (b) amended; (c) through (k) redesignated as (d) through 
        (l); new (c) added; interim.................................1572

                                  2002

7 CFR
                                                                   67 FR
                                                                    Page
Subtitle B
Chapter XVIII
1924.5 (g)(4) revised; (i) introductory text amended; eff. 1-23-03
                                                                   78326
1924.6 Introductory text and (c) amended; eff. 1-23-03.............78326
1924.9 (a) amended; ef
</pre></body></html>
