<html><body><pre>
[Title 46 CFR ]
[Code of Federal Regulations (annual edition) - October 1, 2010 Edition]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]



[[Page i]]

          
<R02>
          46


          Parts 70 to 89

          Revised as of October 1, 2010


          Shipping
          
<R03>


________________________

          Containing a codification of documents of general 
          applicability and future effect

          As of October 1, 2010
          With Ancillaries
                    Published by
                    Office of the Federal Register
                    National Archives and Records
                    Administration
                    A Special Edition of the Federal Register

[[Page ii]]

          U.S. GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL EDITION NOTICE

          Legal Status and Use of Seals and Logos
          <GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>
          
          The seal of the National Archives and Records Administration 
              (NARA) authenticates the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) as 
              the official codification of Federal regulations established 
              under the Federal Register Act. Under the provisions of 44 
              U.S.C. 1507, the contents of the CFR, a special edition of the 
              Federal Register, shall be judicially noticed. The CFR is 
              prima facie evidence of the original documents published in 
              the Federal Register (44 U.S.C. 1510).

          It is prohibited to use NARA's official seal and the stylized Code 
              of Federal Regulations logo on any republication of this 
              material without the express, written permission of the 
              Archivist of the United States or the Archivist's designee. 
              Any person using NARA's official seals and logos in a manner 
              inconsistent with the provisions of 36 CFR part 1200 is 
              subject to the penalties specified in 18 U.S.C. 506, 701, and 
              1017.

          Use of ISBN Prefix

          This is the Official U.S. Government edition of this publication 
              and is herein identified to certify its authenticity. Use of 
              the 0-16 ISBN prefix is for U.S. Government Printing Office 
              Official Editions only. The Superintendent of Documents of the 
              U.S. Government Printing Office requests that any reprinted 
              edition clearly be labeled as a copy of the authentic work 
              with a new ISBN.

              <GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>
              
          U . S . G O V E R N M E N T P R I N T I N G O F F I C E

          ------------------------------------------------------------------

          U.S. Superintendent of Documents <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Washington, DC 
              20402-0001

          http://bookstore.gpo.gov

          Phone: toll-free (866) 512-1800; DC area (202) 512-1800

[[Page iii]]



<R02>
                            Table of Contents


<R03>
                                                                    Page
  Explanation.................................................       v

  Title 46:
          Chapter I--Coast Guard, Department of Homeland 
          Security (Continued)                                       3
  Finding Aids:
      Table of CFR Titles and Chapters........................     119
      Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR......     139
      List of CFR Sections Affected...........................     149

[[Page iv]]





                     ----------------------------

                     Cite this Code: CFR
                     To cite the regulations in 
                       this volume use title, 
                       part and section number. 
                       Thus, 46 CFR 70.01-1 
                       refers to title 46, part 
                       70, section 01-1.

                     ----------------------------

[[Page v]]



                               EXPLANATION

    The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and 
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided 
into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal 
regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the 
name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into 
parts covering specific regulatory areas.
    Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year 
and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:

Title 1 through Title 16.................................as of January 1
Title 17 through Title 27..................................as of April 1
Title 28 through Title 41...................................as of July 1
Title 42 through Title 50................................as of October 1

    The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each 
volume.

LEGAL STATUS

    The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially 
noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie 
evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).

HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

    The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual 
issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used 
together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
    To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its 
revision date (in this case, October 1, 2010), consult the ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected (LSA),'' which is issued monthly, and the ``Cumulative 
List of Parts Affected,'' which appears in the Reader Aids section of 
the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal 
Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.

EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES

    Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal 
Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source 
citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page 
number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication 
dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be 
exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In 
instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the 
Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In 
those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register 
states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be 
inserted following the text.

OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

    The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires 
Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information 
collection request.

[[Page vi]]

Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as 
amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are 
placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting 
requirements.

OBSOLETE PROVISIONS

    Provisions that become obsolete before the revision date stated on 
the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text 
of provisions in effect on a given date in the past by using the 
appropriate numerical list of sections affected. For the period before 
January 1, 2001, consult either the List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-
1963, 1964-1972, 1973-1985, or 1986-2000, published in eleven separate 
volumes. For the period beginning January 1, 2001, a ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected'' is published at the end of each CFR volume.

``[RESERVED]'' TERMINOLOGY

    The term ``[Reserved]'' is used as a place holder within the Code of 
Federal Regulations. An agency may add regulatory information at a 
``[Reserved]'' location at any time. Occasionally ``[Reserved]'' is used 
editorially to indicate that a portion of the CFR was left vacant and 
not accidentally dropped due to a printing or computer error.

INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE

    What is incorporation by reference? Incorporation by reference was 
established by statute and allows Federal agencies to meet the 
requirement to publish regulations in the Federal Register by referring 
to materials already published elsewhere. For an incorporation to be 
valid, the Director of the Federal Register must approve it. The legal 
effect of incorporation by reference is that the material is treated as 
if it were published in full in the Federal Register (5 U.S.C. 552(a)). 
This material, like any other properly issued regulation, has the force 
of law.
    What is a proper incorporation by reference? The Director of the 
Federal Register will approve an incorporation by reference only when 
the requirements of 1 CFR part 51 are met. Some of the elements on which 
approval is based are:
    (a) The incorporation will substantially reduce the volume of 
material published in the Federal Register.
    (b) The matter incorporated is in fact available to the extent 
necessary to afford fairness and uniformity in the administrative 
process.
    (c) The incorporating document is drafted and submitted for 
publication in accordance with 1 CFR part 51.
    What if the material incorporated by reference cannot be found? If 
you have any problem locating or obtaining a copy of material listed as 
an approved incorporation by reference, please contact the agency that 
issued the regulation containing that incorporation. If, after 
contacting the agency, you find the material is not available, please 
notify the Director of the Federal Register, National Archives and 
Records Administration, 8601 Adelphi Road, College Park, MD 20740-6001, 
or call 202-741-6010.

CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

    A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a 
separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index 
and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Authorities 
and Rules. A list of CFR titles, chapters, subchapters, and parts and an 
alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are also included in 
this volume.
    An index to the text of ``Title 3--The President'' is carried within 
that volume.

[[Page vii]]

    The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. 
This index is based on a consolidation of the ``Contents'' entries in 
the daily Federal Register.
    A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to 
the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.

REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL

    There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing 
in the Code of Federal Regulations.

INQUIRIES

    For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this 
volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at 
the top of odd-numbered pages.
    For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-741-6000 
or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, 8601 Adelphi Road, College Park, MD 
20740-6001 or e-mail fedreg.info@nara.gov.

SALES

    The Government Printing Office (GPO) processes all sales and 
distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call toll-free, 
866-512-1800, or DC area, 202-512-1800, M-F 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or 
fax your order to 202-512-2250, 24 hours a day. For payment by check, 
write to: US Government Printing Office - New Orders, P.O. Box 979050, 
St. Louis, MO 63197-9000. For GPO Customer Service call 202-512-1803.

ELECTRONIC SERVICES

    The full text of the Code of Federal Regulations, the LSA (List of 
CFR Sections Affected), The United States Government Manual, the Federal 
Register, Public Laws, Public Papers, Daily Compilation of Presidential 
Documents and the Privacy Act Compilation are available in electronic 
format via Federalregister.gov. For more information, contact Electronic 
Information Dissemination Services, U.S. Government Printing Office. 
Phone 202-512-1530, or 888-293-6498 (toll-free). E-mail, 
gpoaccess@gpo.gov.
    The Office of the Federal Register also offers a free service on the 
National Archives and Records Administration's (NARA) World Wide Web 
site for public law numbers, Federal Register finding aids, and related 
information. Connect to NARA's web site at www.archives.gov/federal-
register. The NARA site also contains links to GPO Access.

    Raymond A. Mosley,
    Director,
    Office of the Federal Register.
    October 1, 2010.







[[Page ix]]



                               THIS TITLE

    Title 46--Shipping is composed of nine volumes. The parts in these 
volumes are arranged in the following order: Parts 1-40, 41-69, 70-89, 
90-139, 140-155, 156-165, 166-199, 200-499, and 500 to end. The first 
seven volumes containing parts 1-199 comprise chapter I--Coast Guard, 
DHS. The eighth volume, containing parts 200-- 499, includes chapter 
II--Maritime Administration, DOT and chapter III--Coast Guard (Great 
Lakes Pilotage), DHS. The ninth volume, containing part 500 to end, 
includes chapter IV--Federal Maritime Commission. The contents of these 
volumes represent all current regulations codified under this title of 
the CFR as of October 1, 2010.

    For this volume, Michele Bugenhagen was Chief Editor. The Code of 
Federal Regulations publication program is under the direction of 
Michael L. White, assisted by Ann Worley.

[[Page 1]]


<R01>
                           TITLE 46--SHIPPING


<R02>

                    (This book contains Parts 70-89)

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Part

chapter i--Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security 
  (Continued)...............................................          70

[[Page 3]]


<R02>
   CHAPTER I--COAST GUARD, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (CONTINUED)


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

                     SUBCHAPTER H--PASSENGER VESSELS
Part                                                                Page
70              General provisions..........................           5
71              Inspection and certification................          20
72              Construction and arrangement................          38
76              Fire protection equipment...................          63
77              Vessel control and miscellaneous systems and 
                    equipment...............................          90
78              Operations..................................          96
80              Disclosure of safety standards and country 
                    of registry.............................         113
81-89           [Reserved]

[[Page 5]]


<R03>
                     SUBCHAPTER H_PASSENGER VESSELS

<R05>


<R03>
PART 70_GENERAL PROVISIONS--Table of Contents



                   Subpart 70.01_Authority and Purpose

Sec.
70.01-1 Purpose of regulations.
70.01-7 Right of appeal.
70.01-15 OMB control numbers assigned pursuant to the Paperwork 
          Reduction Act.

                        Subpart 70.05_Application

70.05-1 United States flag vessels subject to the requirements of this 
          subchapter.
70.05-3 Foreign vessels subject to the requirements of this subchapter.
70.05-5 Specific application noted in text.
70.05-7 Ocean or unlimited coastwise vessels on inland and Great Lakes 
          Routes.
70.05-10 Application to vessels on an international voyage.
70.05-18 Applicability to vessels operating under an exemption afforded 
          in the Passenger Vessel Safety Act of 1993 (PSVA).
70.05-20 Gross tonnage as a criterion for requirements.
70.05-30 Combustible and flammable liquid cargo in bulk.

        Subpart 70.10_Definition of Terms Used in This Subchapter

70.10-1 Definitions.

                        Subpart 70.15_Equivalents

70.15-1 Conditions under which equivalents may be used.

          Subpart 70.20_General Marine Engineering Requirements

70.20-1 Marine engineering details.

        Subpart 70.25_General Electrical Engineering Requirements

70.25-1 Electrical engineering details.

          Subpart 70.28_Lifesaving Appliances and Arrangements

70.28-1 Lifesaving appliances and arrangements.

          Subpart 70.35_American Bureau of Shipping's Standards

70.35-1 Standards to be used.
70.35-5 Where obtainable.

    Authority: 46 U.S.C. 3306, 3703; Pub. L. 103-206, 107 Stat. 2439; 49 
U.S.C. 5103, 5106; E.O. 12234, 45 FR 58801, 3 CFR, 1980 Comp., p. 277; 
Department of Homeland Security Delegation No. 0170.1; Section 70.01-15 
also issued under the authority of 44 U.S.C. 3507.

    Source: CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16890, Dec. 30, 1965, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R04>
                   Subpart 70.01_Authority and Purpose


<R05>
Sec. 70.01-1  Purpose of regulations.

    The purpose of the regulations in this subchapter is to set forth 
uniform minimum requirements for passenger vessels. The regulations are 
necessary to carry out the provisions of law affecting passenger vessels 
and such regulations have the force of law.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16890, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 95-028, 62 FR 
51203, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 70.01-7  Right of appeal.

    Any person directly affected by a decision or action taken under 
this subchapter, by or on behalf of the Coast Guard, may appeal 
therefrom in accordance with subpart 1.03 of this chapter.

[54 FR 50380, Dec. 6, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 70.01-15  OMB control numbers assigned pursuant to the 
Paperwork Reduction Act.

    (a) Purpose. This section collects and displays the control numbers 
assigned to information collection and recordkeeping requirements in 
this subchapter by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) pursuant to 
the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.). The Coast 
Guard intends that this section comply with the requirements of 44 
U.S.C. 3507(f) which requires that agencies display a current control 
number assigned by the Director of the OMB for each approved agency 
information collection requirement.
    (b) Display.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Current OMB
    46 CFR part or section where identified or described     control No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sec. 71.10...............................................    1625-0032
Sec. 71.50-5.............................................    1625-0032
Sec. 78.17-22............................................    1625-0064

[[Page 6]]

 
Sec. 78.17-33............................................    1625-0064
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[49 FR 38120, Sept. 27, 1984, as amended by CGD 88-072, 53 FR 34297, 
Sept. 6, 1988; CGD 89-037, 57 FR 41822, Sept. 11, 1992; USCG-2004-18884, 
69 FR 58347, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R04>
                        Subpart 70.05_Application


<R05>
Sec. 70.05-1  United States flag vessels subject to the requirements
of this subchapter.

    (a) This subchapter is applicable to all U.S.-flag vessels indicated 
in Column 3 of table 70.05-1(a) that are 100 gross tons or more, except 
as follows:
    (1) Any vessel operating exclusively on inland waters which are not 
navigable waters of the United States; or,
    (2) Any vessel while laid up and dismantled and out of commission; 
or,
    (3) With the exception of vessels of the U.S. Maritime 
Administration, any vessel with title vested in the United States and 
which is used for public purposes.

[[Page 7]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE09.024


[[Page 8]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE09.025


[[Page 9]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE09.026


[[Page 10]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE09.027


[[Page 11]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE09.028


[[Page 12]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE09.029


[[Page 13]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE09.030


[[Page 14]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE09.031


[[Page 15]]


    (b) The requirements for notification of safety standards and for 
safety information and country of registry in promotional literature or 
advertising of a domestic passenger vessel of 100 gross tons or over 
having berth or stateroom accommodations for 50 or more passengers are 
contained in part 80 of this chapter.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16890, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGFR 67-83, 33 FR 
1107, Jan. 27, 1968; CGFR 70-10, 35 FR 3710, Feb. 25, 1970; CGD 72-187R, 
38 FR 9081, Apr. 10, 1973; CGP 73-96, 42 FR 49024, Sept. 26, 1977; CGD 
86-033, 53 FR 36024, Sept. 16, 1988; 53 FR 46871, Nov. 21, 1988; CGD 90-
008, 55 FR 30660, July 26, 1990; USCG-1999-5040, 67 FR 34784, May 15, 
2002; USCG-2008-1107, 74 FR 63646, Dec. 4, 2009]


<R05>
Sec. 70.05-3  Foreign vessels subject to the requirements of this subchapter.

    (a) Except as specifically noted in paragraphs (b) and (e), and (f) 
of this section, parts 70 to 78, inclusive, of this subchapter, shall be 
applicable to the extent prescribed by law to all foreign vessels of the 
following classifications indicated in column 4 of table 70.05-1(a) that 
are 100 gross tons or over:
    (1) Foreign vessels which carry more than 12 passengers from any 
port in the United States; or,
    (2) Foreign vessels, other than those mentioned in paragraph (a)(1) 
of this section, which carry more than 6 passengers from any port in the 
United States, and which are:
    (i) Sailing vessels of 100 gross tons or over and not more than 700 
gross tons; or,
    (ii) Non-self-propelled vessels of 100 gross tons.
    (b) The provisions of parts 70 to 78, inclusive, of this subchapter 
shall not be applicable to those foreign vessels covered by paragraph 
(a) of this section which are:
    (1) Any vessel of a foreign nation signatory to the International 
Convention for Safety of Life at Sea, 1974, and which has on board a 
current valid safety certificate; or,
    (2) Any vessel of a foreign nation having inspection laws 
approximating those of the United States together with reciprocal 
inspection arrangements with the United States, and which has on board a 
current valid certificate of inspection issued by its government under 
such arrangements.
    (c) Notwithstanding the exceptions previously noted in paragraph (b) 
of this section, foreign vessels of novel design or construction, or 
whose operation involves potential unusual risks shall be subject to 
inspection to the extent necessary to safeguard life and property in 
United States' ports, as further provided by Sec. 2.01-13 of subchapter 
A (Procedures Applicable to the Public) of this chapter.
    (d) The requirements for notification of safety standards and for 
safety information and country of registry in promotional literature or 
advertising of a foreign passenger vessel of 100 gross tons or over 
having berth or stateroom accommodations for 50 or more passengers are 
contained in part 80 of this chapter.
    (e) Not withstanding the other provisions of this section, foreign 
passenger vessels of over 100 gross tons having berth or stateroom 
accommodations for more than 50 persons and departing a United States 
port with passengers who are United States nationals and who embarked at 
that port shall comply with the provisions of the International 
Convention for Safety of Life at Sea, 1974.
    (f) Notwithstanding the exceptions noted in paragraph (b) of this 
section, each foreign vessel must report marine casualties occurring 
while the vessel is in the navigable waters of the United States as 
required by subpart 78.07.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16890, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGFR 66-33, 31 FR 
15280, Dec. 6, 1966; CGFR 68-65, 33 FR 19985, Dec. 28, 1968; CGFR 69-
106a, 35 FR 16834, Oct. 31, 1970; CGD 72-187R, 38 FR 9081, Apr. 10, 
1973; CGD 77-042, 42 FR 63643, Dec. 19, 1977; CGD 90-008, 55 FR 3066O, 
July 26, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 70.05-5  Specific application noted in text.

    (a) At the beginning of the various parts, subparts, and sections, a 
more specific application is generally given for the particular portion 
of the text involved. This application sets forth the types, sizes, or 
services or vessels to which the text pertains, and in many cases limits 
the application of the text to vessels contracted for before or after a 
specific date. As used in

[[Page 16]]

this subchapter, the term vessels contracted for includes not only the 
contracting for the construction of a vessel, but also the contracting 
for a material alteration to a vessel, the contracting for the 
conversion of a vessel to a passenger vessel, and the changing of 
service or route of a vessel if such change increases or modifies the 
general requirements for the vessel or increases the hazards to which it 
might be subjected.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 70.05-7  Ocean or unlimited coastwise vessels on inland and 
Great Lakes Routes.

    (a) Vessels inspected and certificated for ocean or unlimited 
coastwise routes shall be considered suitable for navigation insofar as 
the provisions of this subchapter are concerned on any inland route, 
including the Great Lakes.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 70.05-10  Application to vessels on an international voyage.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this 
section, the regulations in this subchapter that apply to a vessel on an 
``international voyage'' apply to a vessel that--
    (1) Is mechanically propelled and carries more than 12 passengers; 
and
    (2) Is engaged on a voyage--
    (i) From a country to which the International Convention for Safety 
of Life at Sea, 1974, (SOLAS 74) applies, to a port outside that country 
or the reverse;
    (ii) From any territory, including the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, 
all possessions of the United States and all lands held by the United 
States under a protectorate or mandate, whose international relations 
are the responsibility of a contracting SOLAS 74 government, or which is 
administered by the United Nations, to a port outside that territory or 
the reverse; or
    (iii) Between the contiguous states of the United States and the 
states of Hawaii or Alaska or between the states of Hawaii and Alaska.
    (b) The regulations that apply to a vessel on an ``international 
voyage'' in this subchapter do not apply to ships engaged on a voyage 
solely on the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River as far east as a 
straight line drawn from Cap des Rosiers to West Point, Anticosti Island 
and, on the north side of Anticosti Island, the 63rd Meridian;
    (c) The Commandant or his authorized representative may exempt any 
vessel on an international voyage from the requirements of this 
subchapter if the vessel--
    (1) Makes a single international voyage in exceptional 
circumstances; and
    (2) Meets safety requirements prescribed for the voyage by the 
Commandant.
    (d) The Commandant or his authorized representative may exempt any 
vessel from the construction requirements of this subchapter if the 
vessel does not proceed more than 20 nautical miles from the nearest 
land in the course of its voyage.

[CGD 72-131R, 38 FR 29320, Oct. 24, 1973, as amended by CGD 90-008, 55 
FR 30661, July 26, 1990; CGD 84-069, 61 FR 25287, May 20, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 70.05-18  Applicability to vessels operating under an exemption 
afforded in the Passenger Vessel Safety Act of 1993 (PVSA).

    (a) The Passenger Vessel Safety Act of 1993 (PVSA) contained an 
allowance for the exemption of certain passenger vessels that are--
    (1) At least 100 gross tons but less than 300 gross tons; or
    (2) Former public vessels of at least 100 gross tons but less than 
500 gross tons.
    (b) The owner or operator of a vessel must have applied for an 
exemption under the PVSA by June 21, 1994, and then brought the vessel 
into compliance with the interim guidance in Navigation and Inspection 
Circular (NVIC) 7-94 not later than December 21, 1996. The PVSA 
exemption is valid for the service life of the vessel, as long as the 
vessel remains certified for passenger service. If the Certificate of 
Inspection (COI) is surrendered or otherwise becomes invalid (not 
including a term while the vessel is out of service but undergoing an 
inspection for recertification), the owner or operator must meet the 
appropriate inspection regulations to obtain a new COI without the PVSA 
exemption. See 46 CFR 175.118 for information about applicable

[[Page 17]]

regulations for vessels that operate under the PVSA exemption.

[USCG-1999-5040, 67 FR 34791, May 15, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 70.05-20  Gross tonnage as a criterion for requirements.

    (a) The regulations in this subchapter, as well as referenced 
requirements in other subchapters in this chapter, take into account the 
passenger vessel's size, construction, and equipment, as well as its 
intended service on the routes or waters on which it is desired to be 
operated or navigated, which are indications of the hazards to which 
such vessel may be subjected. The Commandant's determinations in this 
respect for a particular passenger vessel are stipulated in a 
certificate of inspection, which states certain terms and conditions 
governing such vessel when in operation.
    (b) In applying the laws and regulations to passenger vessels, one 
criterion for invocation of safety standards is the description of 
passenger vessels by relative size in gross tons. When it is determined 
by the Commandant that the gross register tonnage for a particular 
passenger vessel, which is attained by exemptions, reductions, or other 
devices in the basic gross tonnage formulation, will circumvent or be 
incompatible with the application of specific safety requirements in the 
passenger vessel regulations for a vessel of such physical size, the 
Commandant shall prescribe the regulations to be made applicable to such 
vessel.
    (c) When the Commandant determines that the gross register tonnage 
is not a valid criterion for the invocation of safety requirements based 
on relative size, the parties involved will be informed of the 
determination and of the regulations applicable to such passenger 
vessel, and before being permitted to operate such vessel, compliance 
therewith shall be required. Endorsements or notations on the passenger 
vessel's certificate of inspection may be made as appropriate.


<R05>
Sec. 70.05-30  Combustible and flammable liquid cargo in bulk.

    Note: Requirements for double hull construction for vessels carrying 
oil, as defined in 33 CFR 157.03, in bulk as cargo are found in 33 CFR 
157.10d.

    Vessels inspected and certificated under this subchapter may carry 
limited quantities of combustible liquid cargo in bulk in the grades 
indicated, provided the certificate of inspection is endorsed to permit 
such carriage:
    (a) Grade E in an integral tank; and
    (b) Grade E in a portable tank, including a marine portable tank, in 
accordance with subpart 98.30 or 98.33 of this chapter.

[CGD 84-043, 55 FR 37410, Sept. 11, 1990, as amended by CGD 90-051, 57 
FR 36246, Aug. 12, 1992]


<R04>
        Subpart 70.10_Definition of Terms Used in This Subchapter


<R05>
Sec. 70.10-1  Definitions.

    Approved means approved by the Commandant, unless otherwise stated.
    Barge means any non-self-propelled vessel.
    Carrying freight for hire means the carriage of any goods, wares, or 
merchandise, or any other freight for a consideration, whether directly 
or indirectly flowing to the owner, charterer, operator, agent, or any 
other person interested in the vessel.
    Classed vessel means any vessel classed by the American Bureau of 
Shipping or other recognized classification society.
    Coast Guard District Commander means an officer of the Coast Guard 
designated as such by the Commandant to command all Coast Guard 
activities within his or her district, which include the inspection, 
enforcement, and administration of Subtitle II, Title 46 U.S. Code; 
Title 33 U.S. Code; and regulations issued under these statutes.
    Coastwise is a designation of service that includes all vessels 
normally navigating the waters of any ocean or the Gulf of Mexico 20 
nautical miles or less offshore.
    Commandant means the Commandant of the United States Coast Guard.
    Consideration means an economic benefit, inducement, right, or 
profit including pecuniary payment accruing to an individual, person, or 
entity but not including a voluntary sharing of the actual expenses of 
the voyage by monetary contribution or donation of fuel, food, beverage, 
or other supplies.

[[Page 18]]

    Ferry means a vessel that is used on a regular schedule--
    (1) To provide transportation only between places that are not more 
than 300 miles apart; and
    (2) To transport only--
    (i) Passengers; or
    (ii) Vehicles, or railroad cars, that are being used, or have been 
used, in transporting passengers or goods.
    Great Lakes is a designation of service that includes all vessels 
navigating the Great Lakes.
    Headquarters means the Office of the Commandant, United States Coast 
Guard, Washington, DC 20593.
    Lakes, bays, and sounds is a designation of service that includes 
all vessels navigating the waters of the lakes, bays, or sounds other 
than the waters of the Great Lakes.
    Marine inspector or inspector means any person from the civilian or 
military branch of the Coast Guard assigned under the direction of an 
Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, or any other person designated to 
perform duties related to the inspection, enforcement, and 
administration of Subtitle II, Title 46 U.S. Code; Title 33 U.S. Code; 
and regulations issued under these statutes.
    Motor vessel means any vessel more than 65 feet in length, which is 
propelled by machinery other than steam.
    Ocean is a designation of service that includes all vessels 
navigating the waters of any ocean or the Gulf of Mexico more than 20-
nautical miles offshore.
    Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection means any person from the 
civilian or military branch of the Coast Guard designated as such by the 
Commandant and who, under the direction of the Coast Guard District 
Commander, is in charge of an inspection zone for the performance of 
duties related to the inspection, enforcement, and administration of 
Subtitle II, Title 46 U.S. Code; Title 33 U.S. Code; and regulations 
issued under these statutes.
    Passenger means--
    (1) On an international voyage, every person other than--
    (i) The master and the members of the crew or other persons employed 
or engaged in any capacity onboard a vessel on the business of that 
vessel; and
    (ii) A child under the age of one.
    (2) On other than an international voyage, an individual carried on 
the vessel, except--
    (i) The owner or an individual representative of the owner or, in 
the case of a vessel under charter, an individual charterer or 
individual representative of the charterer;
    (ii) The master; or
    (iii) A member of the crew engaged in the business of the vessel, 
who has not contributed consideration for carriage, and who is paid for 
onboard services.
    Passenger-for-hire means a passenger for whom consideration is 
contributed as a condition of carriage on the vessel, whether directly 
or indirectly flowing to the owner, charterer, operator, agent, or any 
other person having an interest in the vessel.
    Passenger vessel means a vessel of at least 100 gross tons:
    (1) Carrying more than 12 passengers, including at least one 
passenger for hire;
    (2) That is chartered and carrying more than 12 passengers;
    (3) That is a submersible vessel carrying at least one passenger for 
hire; or
    (4) That is a ferry carrying a passenger.
    Pilot boarding equipment means a pilot ladder, accommodation ladder, 
pilot hoist, or combination of them, as required by this subchapter.
    Point of access means the place on the deck of a vessel where a 
person steps onto or off pilot boarding equipment.
    Recognized classification society means the American Bureau of 
Shipping or other classification society as recognized by the 
Commandant.
    Rivers is a designation of service that includes all vessels whose 
navigation is restricted to rivers and/or canals, and to such other 
waters as may be designated by the Coast Guard District Commander.
    Sailing vessel means a vessel with no mechanical means of 
propulsion, all propulsive power being provided by sails.
    Short international voyage means an international voyage in the 
course of which a vessel is not more than 200 miles from a port or place 
in which the passengers and crew could be placed in safety. Neither the 
distance between the last port of call in the country in

[[Page 19]]

which the voyage begins and the final port of destination, nor the 
return voyage, may exceed 600 miles. The final port of destination is 
the last port of call in the scheduled voyage at which the vessel 
commences its return voyage to the country in which the voyage began.
    Specially suitable for vehicles is a designation used for a space 
that is designed for the carriage of automobiles or other self-propelled 
vehicles with batteries connected and fuel tanks containing gasoline on 
vessels on ocean or unlimited coastwise voyages. Requirements for the 
design and protection of spaces specially suitable for vehicles appear 
in subparts 72.15, 76.15, 77.05, 78.45, 78.47, and 78.83 of parts 72, 
76, 77, and 78 of this subchapter. In addition, preparation of 
automobiles prior to carriage, with the exception of disconnecting 
battery cables, must be in accordance with the applicable provision of 
49 CFR 176.905.
    Submersible vessel means a vessel that is capable of operating below 
the surface of the water.
    Vessel, unless otherwise noted in this subpart, includes all vessels 
indicated in column three of table 70.05-1(a) in Sec. 70.05-1 that 
exceed 65 feet in length (measured from end-to-end over the deck, 
excluding sheer) and that carry more than six passengers-for-hire.

[USCG-1999-5040, 67 FR 34792, May 15, 2002, as amended by USCG-2008-
1107, Dec. 4, 2009]


<R04>
                        Subpart 70.15_Equivalents


<R05>
Sec. 70.15-1  Conditions under which equivalents may be used.

    (a) Where in this subchapter it is provided that a particular 
fitting, material, appliance, apparatus, or equipment, or type thereof, 
shall be fitted or carried in a vessel, or that any particular provision 
shall be made or arrangement shall be adopted, the Commandant may accept 
in substitution therefor any other fitting, material, apparatus, or 
equipment, or type thereof, or any other provision or arrangement: 
Provided, That he shall have been satisfied by suitable trials that the 
fitting, material, appliance, apparatus, or equipment, or type thereof, 
or the provision or arrangement shall be at least as effective as that 
specified in this subchapter.
    (b) In any case where it is shown to the satisfaction of the 
Commandant that the use of any particular equipment, apparatus, or 
arrangement not specifically required by law is unreasonable or 
impracticable, the Commandant may permit the use of alternate equipment, 
apparatus, or arrangement to such an extent and upon such conditions as 
will insure, to his satisfaction, a degree of safety consistent with the 
minimum standards set forth in this subchapter.


<R04>
          Subpart 70.20_General Marine Engineering Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 70.20-1  Marine engineering details.

    All marine engineering details such as piping, valves, fittings, 
boilers, pressure vessels, etc., and their appurtenances installed on 
the vessel, shall be designed, constructed, and installed in accordance 
with the provisions of subchapter F (Marine Engineering) of this 
chapter.


<R04>
        Subpart 70.25_General Electrical Engineering Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 70.25-1  Electrical engineering details.

    All electrical engineering details and installations shall be 
designed and installed in accordance with subchapter J (Electrical 
Engineering) of this chapter.


<R04>
          Subpart 70.28_Lifesaving Appliances and Arrangements


<R05>
Sec. 70.28-1  Lifesaving appliances and arrangements.

    All lifesaving appliances and arrangements on passenger vessels must 
be in accordance with subchapter W (Lifesaving Appliances and 
Arrangements) of this chapter.

[CGD 84-069, 61 FR 25287, May 20, 1996]

[[Page 20]]


<R04>
          Subpart 70.35_American Bureau of Shipping's Standards


<R05>
Sec. 70.35-1  Standards to be used.

    (a) Where in this subchapter an item, or method of construction, or 
testing is required to meet the standards established by the American 
Bureau of Shipping, the current standards in effect at the time of 
construction of the vessel, or otherwise as applicable, shall be used. 
The current standards of other recognized classification societies may 
also be accepted upon approval by the Commandant.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 70.35-5  Where obtainable.

    (a) The standards established by the American Bureau of Shipping are 
usually published annually and may be purchased from the American Bureau 
of Shipping, ABS Plaza, 16855 Northchase Drive, Houston, TX 77060. These 
standards may be also examined at the Office of the Commandant (CG-52), 
2100 2nd St., SW., Stop 7126, Washington, DC 20593-7126, or at the 
office of any Coast Guard District Commander or Officer in Charge, 
Marine Inspection.
    (b) [Reserved]

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16890, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGFR 68-32, 33 FR 
5715, Apr. 12, 1968; CGD 88-070, 53 FR 34534, Sep. 7, 1988; CGD 88-070, 
53 FR 37570, Sept. 27, 1988, 53 FR 44011, Nov. 1, 1988; CGD 95-072, 60 
FR 50463, Sept. 29, 1995; USCG-2000-7790, 65 FR 58461, Sept. 29, 2000; 
USCG-2009-0702, 74 FR 49231, Sept 25, 2009; USCG-2010;-0759, 75 FR 
60003, Sept. 29, 2010]


<R03>
PART 71_INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION--Table of Contents



                 Subpart 71.01_Certificate of Inspection

Sec.
71.01-1 When required.
71.01-5 Posting.
71.01-10 Period of validity.
71.01-15 Temporary certificate.
71.01-20 Expired certificate.

       Subpart 71.05_Permit To Proceed to Another Port for Repair

71.05-1 When issued.
71.05-5 To whom issued.
71.05-10 Conditions of permit.
71.05-15 Posting.

              Subpart 71.10_Permit To Engage in Excursions

71.10-1 When issued.
71.10-5 To whom issued.
71.10-10 Conditions of permit.
71.10-15 Posting.

                   Subpart 71.15_Inspection of Vessels

71.15-1 Standards in inspection of hulls, boilers, and machinery.
71.15-5 Alternate compliance.

                    Subpart 71.20_Initial Inspection

71.20-1 Prerequisite of certificate of inspection.
71.20-5 When made.
71.20-10 Plans.
71.20-15 Scope of inspections.
71.20-20 Specific tests and inspections.

                     Subpart 71.25_Annual Inspection

71.25-1 Prerequisite of reissuance of certificate of inspection.
71.25-5 When made.
71.25-10 Scope of inspections.
71.25-15 Lifesaving equipment.
71.25-20 Fire-detecting and extinguishing equipment.
71.25-25 Hull equipment.
71.25-30 [Reserved]
71.25-35 Marine engineering equipment.
71.25-37 Pollution prevention.
71.25-40 Sanitary inspection.
71.25-45 Fire hazards.
71.25-50 Inspector not limited.

                       Subpart 71.30_Reinspection

71.30-1 When made.
71.30-5 Scope.
71.30-10 Inspector not limited.

                 Subpart 71.40_Inspection After Accident

71.40-1 General or partial survey.

                   Subpart 71.45_Sanitary Inspections

71.45-1 When made.

                        Subpart 71.50_Drydocking

71.50-1 Definitions relating to hull examinations.
71.50-3 Drydock examination, internal structural examination, underwater 
          survey, and alternate hull exam intervals.
71.50-5 Underwater Survey in Lieu of Drydocking (UWILD).
71.50-15 Description of the Alternate Hull Examination (AHE) Program for 
          certain passenger vessels.
71.50-17 Eligibility requirements for the Alternative Hull Examination 
          (AHE) Program for certain passenger vessels.

[[Page 21]]

71.50-19 The Alternative Hull Examination (AHE) Program application.
71.50-21 Preliminary examination requirements.
71.50-23 Pre-survey meeting.
71.50-25 Alternative Hull Examination (AHE) procedure.
71.50-27 Alternative Hull Examination (AHE) Program options: Divers or 
          underwater remotely operated vehicle (ROV).
71.50-29 Hull examination reports.
71.50-31 Continued participation in the Alternative Hull Examination 
          (AHE) Program.
71.50-35 Notice and plans required.

            Subpart 71.53_Integral Fuel Oil Tank Examinations

71.53-1 When required.

                  Subpart 71.55_Repairs and Alterations

71.55-1 Permission required.
71.55-5 Inspection required.

              Subpart 71.60_Special Operating Requirements

71.60-1 Inspection and testing required when making alterations, 
          repairs, or other such operations involving riveting, welding, 
          burning or like fire-producing actions.

                       Subpart 71.65_Plan Approval

71.65-1 General.
71.65-5 Plans and specifications required for new construction.
71.65-10 Plans required for alterations of existing vessels.
71.65-15 Procedure for submittal of plans.
71.65-20 Number of plans required.

Subpart 71.75_Certificates Under the International Convention for Safety 
                          of Life at Sea, 1960

71.75-1 Application.
71.75-5 Passenger Ship Safety Certificate.
71.75-10 Exemption Certificate.
71.75-13 Safety Management Certificate.
71.75-15 Posting of Convention certificates.
71.75-20 Duration of certificates.

    Authority: 33 U.S.C. 1321(j); 46 U.S.C. 2113, 3205, 3306, 3307; E.O. 
12234, 45 FR 58801, 3 CFR, 1980 Comp., p. 277; E.O. 12777, 56 FR 54757, 
3 CFR, 1991 Comp., p. 351; Department of Homeland Security Delegation 
No. 0170.1.

    Source: CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16895, Dec. 30, 1965, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R04>
                 Subpart 71.01_Certificate of Inspection


<R05>
Sec. 71.01-1  When required.

    (a) Except as noted in this subpart or subpart 71.05, no vessel 
subject to inspection and certification shall be operated without a 
valid certificate of inspection.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 71.01-5  Posting.

    The certificate of inspection shall be displayed under glass in a 
conspicuous place where observation by the passengers is likely.

[CGD 72-104R, 37 FR 14233, July 18, 1972]


<R05>
Sec. 71.01-10  Period of validity.

    (a) Certificates of inspection will be issued for a period of 1 
year. Application may be made by the master, owner, or agent for 
inspection and issuance of a new certificate of inspection at any time 
within the period of validity of the current certificate.
    (b) Certificates of inspection may be revoked or suspended by the 
Coast Guard where such process is authorized by law. This may occur if 
the vessel does not meet the requirements of law or regulations in this 
chapter or if there is a failure to maintain the safety requirements 
requisite to the issuance of a certificate of inspection.

[CGFR 68-82, 33 FR 18899, Dec. 18, 1968, as amended by CGD 95-012, 60 FR 
48051, Sept. 18, 1995; CGD 95-028, 62 FR 51203, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 71.01-15  Temporary certificate.

    (a) If necessary to prevent delay of the vessel, a temporary 
certificate of inspection, Form CG-854, shall be issued pending the 
issuance and delivery of the regular certificate of inspection. Such 
temporary certificate shall be carried in the same manner as the regular 
certificate and shall in all ways be considered the same as the regular 
certificate of inspection which it represents.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 71.01-20  Expired certificate.

    (a) Nothing in this subpart shall prevent a vessel upon a regularly 
established line from a port in the United States to a port of a foreign 
country

[[Page 22]]

not contiguous to the United States whose certificate of inspection 
expires at sea or while said vessel is in a foreign port or a port of 
Hawaii from lawfully completing her voyage without the valid certificate 
of inspection or temporary certificate required by this subpart: 
Provided, That the voyage shall be completed within 30 days after the 
expiration of the certificate of inspection. No such vessel shall depart 
if its certificate of inspection will expire within 15 days of the date 
of sailing.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
       Subpart 71.05_Permit To Proceed to Another Port for Repair


<R05>
Sec. 71.05-1  When issued.

    (a) The Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, may issue a permit to 
proceed to another port for repair, Form CG-948, to a vessel, if in his 
judgment it can be done with safety, even if the certificate of 
inspection of the vessel has expired or is about to expire.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 71.05-5  To whom issued.

    (a) Such permit will only be issued upon the written application of 
the master, owner, or agent of the vessel.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 71.05-10  Conditions of permit.

    (a) The permit will state upon its face the conditions under which 
it is issued and whether or not the vessel is permitted to carry freight 
or passengers. Passengers may not be carried if the certificate of 
inspection has expired, except as provided under Sec. 71.01-20.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 71.05-15  Posting.

    (a) The permit shall be carried in a manner similar to that 
described in Sec. 71.01-5 for a certificate of inspection.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
              Subpart 71.10_Permit To Engage in Excursions


<R05>
Sec. 71.10-1  When issued.

    (a) The Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, may issue a permit to 
carry additional passengers on an excursion, Form CG-949, if after 
personally inspecting the vessel, it can, in his judgment, be done with 
safety.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 71.10-5  To whom issued.

    (a) Such permit will only be issued upon the written application of 
the master, owner, or agent of the vessel.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 71.10-10  Conditions of permit.

    (a) The permit will state upon its face the conditions under which 
it is issued, the number of extra passengers the vessel may carry, any 
additional lifesaving or safety equipment which will be required, the 
route for which the permit is granted, and the dates on which the permit 
will be valid.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 71.10-15  Posting.

    (a) The permit when used, shall be carried in addition to the 
certificate of inspection and shall be carried in a manner similar to 
that described in Sec. 71.01-5 for a certificate of inspection.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
                   Subpart 71.15_Inspection of Vessels


<R05>
Sec. 71.15-1  Standards in inspection of hulls, boilers, and machinery.

    In the inspection of hulls, boilers, and machinery of vessels, the 
standards established by the American Bureau of Shipping, see part 70, 
subpart 70.35 of this chapter respecting material and inspection of 
hulls, boilers, and machinery, and the certificate of classification 
referring thereto, except where otherwise provided for by the rules and 
regulations in this subchapter, subchapter E (Load Lines), subchapter F 
(Marine Engineering), subchapter J (Electrical Engineering), and 
subchapter W (Lifesaving Appliances and Arrangements) of this chapter, 
shall be accepted as standard by the inspectors.

[CGD 84-069, 61 FR 25287, May 20, 1996]

[[Page 23]]


<R05>
Sec. 71.15-5  Alternate compliance.

    (a) In place of compliance with other applicable provisions of this 
subchapter, the owner or operator of a vessel subject to plan review and 
inspection under this subchapter for initial issuance or renewal of a 
Certificate of Inspection may comply with the Alternate Compliance 
Program provisions of part 8 of this chapter.
    (b) For the purposes of this section, a list of authorized 
classification societies, including information for ordering copies of 
approved classification society rules and supplements, is available from 
Commandant (CG-521), 2100 2nd St. SW., Stop 7126, Washington, DC 20593-
7126; telephone (202) 372-1372; or fax (202) 372-1925. Approved 
classification society rules and supplements are incorporated by 
reference into 46 CFR 8.110(b).

[CGD 95-010, 62 FR 67536, Dec. 24, 1997, as amended by USCG-1999-5004, 
64 FR 30439, June 8, 1999; USCG-2004-18884, 69 FR 58347, Sept. 30, 2004; 
USCG-2006-25697, 71 FR 55746, Sept. 25, 2006; USCG-2009-0702, 74 FR 
49231, Sept 25, 2009]


<R04>
                    Subpart 71.20_Initial Inspection


<R05>
Sec. 71.20-1  Prerequisite of certificate of inspection.

    (a) The initial inspection is a prerequisite of the issuance of the 
original certificate of inspection.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 71.20-5  When made.

    (a) The original inspection will only be made upon the written 
application of the owner or builder of the vessel to the Officer in 
Charge, Marine Inspection, on Form CG-3752, application for inspection 
of U.S. vessel, at or nearest the port where the vessel is located.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 71.20-10  Plans.

    (a) Before application for inspection is made and before 
construction is started, the owner or builder shall have plans 
indicating the proposed arrangement and construction of the vessel 
approved by the Commandant. The procedure for submitting plans and the 
list of plans to be supplied is set forth in subpart 71.65.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 71.20-15  Scope of inspections.

    The initial inspection, which may consist of a series of inspections 
during the construction of a vessel, shall include a complete inspection 
of the structure, including the outside of the vessel's bottom, the 
machinery, unfired pressure vessels, equipment and the inside and 
outside of the boilers. The inspection shall be such as to insure that 
the arrangements, material, and scantlings of the structure, boilers and 
other pressure vessels and their appurtenances, piping, main and 
auxiliary machinery, electrical installations, lifesaving appliances, 
fire-detecting and extinguishing equipment, pilot boarding equipment, 
pollution prevention equipment and other equipment fully comply with the 
applicable regulations for such vessel and are in accordance with 
approved plans, and determine that the vessel is in possession of a 
valid certificate issued by the Federal Communications Commission, if 
any. The inspection shall be such as to ensure that the workmanship of 
all parts of the vessel and its equipment is in all respects 
satisfactory and that the vessel is provided with lights, means of 
making sound signals, and distress signals as required by applicable 
statutes and regulations.

[CGFR 68-32, 33 FR 5715, Apr. 12, 1968, as amended by CGD 82-036, 48 FR 
654, Jan. 6, 1983; CGD 79-032, 49 FR 25455, June 21, 1984; CGD 95-012, 
60 FR 48051, Sept. 18, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 71.20-20  Specific tests and inspections.

    The applicable tests and inspections relating to annual inspection 
as set forth in subpart 71.25 shall be made at this time. In addition, 
the following specific tests and inspections shall be made by the 
inspector:
    (a) For inspection procedures of lifesaving appliances and 
arrangements, see subchapter W (Lifesaving Appliances and Arrangements) 
of this chapter.
    (b) Installation of carbon dioxide extinguishing piping, see Sec. 
76.15-15 of this subchapter.

[[Page 24]]

    (c) For inspection procedures of marine engineering equipment and 
systems, see subchapter F (Marine Engineering) of this chapter.
    (d) For inspection procedures of electrical engineering equipment 
and systems, see subchapter J (Electrical Engineering) of this chapter.
    (e) For inspection and testing standards of structural subdivision 
integrity, see Sec. 72.01-25 of this subchapter.
    (f) For inspection and testing of watertight doors, see Sec. 
170.270 of this chapter.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16895, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 79-023, 48 FR 
51007, Nov. 4, 1983; CGD 84-069, 61 FR 25287, May 20, 1996]


<R04>
                     Subpart 71.25_Annual Inspection


<R05>
Sec. 71.25-1  Prerequisite of reissuance of certificate of inspection.

    (a) The annual inspection is a prerequisite of the reissuance of a 
certificate of inspection.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 71.25-5  When made.

    (a) The annual inspection will be made only upon the written 
application of the master, owner, or agent of the vessel on Form CG-
3752, Application for Inspection of U.S. Vessel, to the Officer in 
Charge, Marine Inspection, at or nearest the port where the vessel is to 
be inspected.
    (b) You must submit your application for the annual inspection at 
least 30 days before your current certificate of inspection expires.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16895, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by USCG-1999-4976, 
65 FR 6501, Feb. 9, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 71.25-10  Scope of inspections.

    The annual inspection shall include an inspection of the structure, 
boilers, and other pressure vessels, machinery and equipment. The 
inspection shall be such as to insure that the vessel, as regards the 
structure, boilers and other pressure vessels, and their appurtenances, 
piping, main and auxiliary machinery, electrical installations, life-
saving appliances, fire-detecting and extinguishing equipment, pilot 
boarding equipment, and other equipment is in satisfactory condition and 
fit for the service for which it is intended, and that it complies with 
the applicable regulations for such vessels, and determine that the 
vessel is in possession of a valid certificate issued by the Federal 
Communications Commission, if required. The lights, means of making 
sound signals, and distress signals carried by the vessel shall also be 
subject to the above-mentioned inspection for the purpose of ensuring 
that they comply with the requirements of the applicable statutes and 
regulations.

[CGFR 68-32, 33 FR 5715, Apr. 12, 1968 as amended by CGD 82-036, 48 FR 
655, Jan. 6, 1983; CGD 79-032, 49 FR 25455, June 21, 1984; CGD 95-012, 
60 FR 48051, Sept. 18, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 71.25-15  Lifesaving equipment.

    For inspection procedures of lifesaving appliances and arrangements, 
see subchapter W (Lifesaving Appliances and Arrangements) of this 
chapter.

[CGD 84-069, 61 FR 25287, May 20, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 71.25-20  Fire-detecting and extinguishing equipment.

    (a) At each annual inspection, the inspector shall conduct the 
following tests and inspections of fire detecting and extinguishing 
equipment:
    (1) All hand portable fire extinguishers and semiportable fire 
extinguishing systems shall be checked as noted in table 71.25-20(a)(1). 
In addition, the hand portable fire extinguishers and semiportable fire 
extinguishing systems shall be examined for excessive corrosion and 
general condition.

                          Table 71.25-20(a)(1)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                Type unit                              Test
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Soda acid...............................  Discharge. Clean hose and
                                           inside of extinguisher
                                           thoroughly. Recharge.
Foam....................................  Discharge. Clean hose and
                                           inside of extinguisher
                                           thoroughly. Recharge.
Pump tank (water or antifreeze).........  Discharge. Clean hose and
                                           inside of extinguisher
                                           thoroughly. Recharge with
                                           clean water or antifreeze.

[[Page 25]]

 
Cartridge operated (water, antifreeze or  Examine pressure cartirdge and
 loaded stream).                           replace if end is punctured
                                           or if cartridge is otherwise
                                           determined to have leaked or
                                           to be in unsuitable
                                           condition. Remove liquid.
                                           Clean hose and inside of
                                           extinguisher thoroughly.
                                           Recharge with clean water,
                                           solution or antifreeze.
                                           Insert charged cartridge.
Carbon Dioxide..........................  Weigh cylinders. Recharge if
                                           weight loss exceed 10 percent
                                           of weight of charge. Inspect
                                           hose and nozzle to be sure
                                           they are clear.\1\
Dry chemical (cartridge-operated type)..  Examine pressure cartridge and
                                           replace if end is punctured
                                           or if cartridge is otherwise
                                           determined to have leaked or
                                           to be in unsuitable
                                           condition. Inspect hose and
                                           nozzle to see they are clear.
                                           Insert charged cartridge. Be
                                           sure dry chemical is free-
                                           flowing (not caked) and
                                           chamber contains full charge.
Dry chemical (stored pressure type).....  See that pressure gage is in
                                           operating range. If not, or
                                           if seal is broken, weigh or
                                           otherwise determine that full
                                           charge of dry chemical is in
                                           extinguisher. Recharge if
                                           pressure is low or if dry
                                           chemical is needed.
Vaporizing liquid \2\ (pump type).......  Pump a few strokes into clean
                                           pail and replace liquid. Keep
                                           water out of extinguisher or
                                           liquid. Keep extinguisher
                                           completely full of liquid.
Vaporizing liquid (stored pressure type)  See that pressure gage is in
                                           operating range. Weigh or
                                           check liquid level to
                                           determine that full charge of
                                           liquid is in extinguisher.
                                           Recharge if pressure is low
                                           or if liquid is needed.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Cylinders must be tested and marked, and all flexible connections
  and discharge hoses of semi-portable carbon dioxide and halon
  extinguishers must be tested or renewed, as required by Sec. Sec.
  147.60 and 147.65 of this chapter.
\2\ Vaporizing-liquid type fire extinguishers containing carbon
  tetrachloride or chlorobromomethane or other toxic vaporizing liquids
  shall be removed from all vessels. (See Sec. 76.50-5(e) of this
  subchapter.)

    (2) Fixed fire extinguishing systems shall be checked as noted in 
table 71.25-20(a)(2). In addition all parts of the fixed fire 
extinguishing systems shall be examined for excessive corrosion and 
general conditions.

                          Table 71.25-20(a)(2)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Type system                              Test
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Foam...................................  Systems utilizing a soda
                                          solution shall have such
                                          solution replaced. In all
                                          cases, ascertain that powder
                                          is not caked.
Carbon dioxide.........................  Weigh cylinders. Recharge if
                                          weight loss exceeds 10 percent
                                          of weight of charge.\1\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Cylinders must be tested and marked, and all flexible connections on
  fixed carbon dioxide systems must be tested or renewed, as required by
  Sec. Sec. 147.60 and 147.65 of this chapter.

    (3) All fire detecting and extinguishing systems, all piping 
controls, valves, and alarms shall be checked to ascertain that the 
system is in operating condition. In this respect, automatic sprinkling 
systems shall be checked by means of test stations or opening heads, 
smoke detecting systems shall be checked by introducing smoke into the 
accumulators, fire detecting and manual alarm systems shall be checked 
by test stations or actuating detectors or pull boxes, and steam 
smothering lines shall be checked with at least a 50 p.s.i. air pressure 
with the ends capped or by blowing steam through the lines at the 
designed pressure.
    (4) The fire main system shall be operated and the pressure checked 
at the most remote and highest outlets. All fire hose shall be subjected 
to a test pressure equivalent to the maximum pressure to which they may 
be subjected in service, but not less than 100 p.s.i.
    (b) [Reserved]

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16895, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGFR 68-32, 33 FR 
5716, Apr. 12, 1968; CGD 84-044, 53 FR 7748, Mar. 10, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 71.25-25  Hull equipment.

    (a) At each annual inspection, the inspector shall conduct the 
following tests and inspections of hull equipment:
    (1) All subdivision bulkheads shall be examined to determine that 
their watertight integrity has not been impaired.
    (2) All watertight doors shall be operated locally by manual power 
and also by hydraulic or electric power if so fitted. Where remote 
control is fitted, the doors shall also be operated by the remote 
control apparatus.
    (3) All magnetically controlled fire doors shall be operated locally 
and by the remote control, and all automatic

[[Page 26]]

fire dampers shall be checked to determine that they are in an operable 
condition.
    (4) The remote controls of all valves shall be operated.
    (5) The owner, operator or master shall provide the Officer in 
Charge, Marine Inspection with all current valid certificates and 
registers of cargo gear issued by an organization recognized by the 
Commandant under Sec. 31.10-16.
    (b) Every acceptable cargo gear certificate and/or register shall be 
properly executed by a person authorized to do so and shall:
    (1) Certify as to the tests and examinations conducted;
    (2) Show the dates on which the tests and examinations were 
conducted; and,
    (3) Indicate that the cargo gear described in the certificate or 
register complies with the standards of the organization or association 
authorized to issue the certificate or register.
    (c) Competent persons for the purposes of this section are defined 
as--
    (1) Surveyors of a classification society recognized by the 
Commandant under 46 U.S.C. 3316.
    (2) Surveyors of a cargo gear organization recognized by the 
Commandant under Sec. 31.10-16.
    (3) Responsible officials or employees of the testing laboratories, 
companies, or organizations who conduct tests of pieces of loose cargo 
gear, wire rope, or the annealing of gear as may be required by the 
standards of the organization or association authorized to issue the 
certificate or register.
    (d) The registers issued in connection with cargo gear certification 
must have all required entries fully completed as of the dates 
indicated, shall be kept current, and shall include the following:
    (1) A register of the cargo handling machinery and the gear 
accessory thereto carried on the vessel named therein;
    (2) Certification of the testing and examination of winches, 
derricks, and their accessory gear;
    (3) Certification of the testing and examination of cranes, hoists, 
and their accessory gear;
    (4) Certification of the testing and examination of chains, rings, 
hooks, shackles, swivels, and blocks;
    (5) Certification of the testing and examination of wire rope;
    (6) Certification of the heat treatment of chains, rings, hooks, 
shackles, and swivels which require such treatment; and,
    (7) Certification of the annual thorough examinations of gear not 
required to be periodically heat treated.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16895, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 95-028, 62 FR 
51203, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 71.25-30  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 71.25-35  Marine engineering equipment.

    (a) For inspection procedures of marine engineering equipment and 
systems, see subchapter F. (Marine Engineering) of this chapter.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 71.25-37  Pollution prevention.

    At each inspection for certification, the inspector shall examine 
the vessel to determine that it meets the vessel design and equipment 
requirements for pollution prevention in 33 CFR part 155, subpart B.

[CGD 71-161R, 37 FR 28262, Dec. 21, 1972]


<R05>
Sec. 71.25-40  Sanitary inspection.

    (a) At each annual inspection the passenger and crew quarters, 
toilet and washing spaces, galleys, serving pantries, lockers, etc., 
shall be examined by the inspector to be assured that they are in a 
sanitary condition.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 71.25-45  Fire hazards.

    (a) At each annual inspection, the inspector shall examine the tank 
tons and bilges in the machinery spaces to see that there is no 
accumulation of oil which might create a fire hazard.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 71.25-50  Inspector not limited.

    (a) Nothing in this subpart shall be construed as limiting the 
inspector from making such tests or inspections as he deems necessary to 
be assured of the safety and seaworthiness of the vessel.
    (b) [Reserved]

[[Page 27]]


<R04>
                       Subpart 71.30_Reinspection


<R05>
Sec. 71.30-1  When made.

    In general, at least three reinspections shall be made on each 
vessel within one year. These reinspections will be made at 
approximately equal intervals between annual inspections. In the case of 
vessels with a seasonal schedule, reinspections will be made during the 
operating season if practicable.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16895, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 95-028, 62 FR 
51203, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 71.30-5  Scope.

    (a) The inspector shall examine all accessible parts of the vessel's 
hull, machinery, and equipment to be assured that it is in a 
satisfactory condition.
    (b) In general, the scope of the reinspection shall be the same as 
for the annual inspection, but will be in less detail unless it is 
determined that major change has occurred since the last annual 
inspection.


<R05>
Sec. 71.30-10  Inspector not limited.

    (a) Nothing in this subpart shall be construed as limiting the 
inspector from making such tests or inspections as he deems necessary to 
be assured of the safety and seaworthiness of the vessel.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
                 Subpart 71.40_Inspection After Accident


<R05>
Sec. 71.40-1  General or partial survey.

    (a) A survey, either general or partial, according to the 
circumstances, shall be made every time an accident occurs or a defect 
is discovered which affects the safety of the vessel or the efficacy or 
completeness of its lifesaving appliances, fire-fighting or other 
equipment, or whenever any important repairs or renewals are made. The 
survey shall be such as to insure that the necessary repairs or renewals 
have been effectively made, that the material and the workmanship of 
such repairs or renewals are in all respects satisfactory, and that the 
vessel complies in all respects with the regulations in this subchapter.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
                   Subpart 71.45_Sanitary Inspections


<R05>
Sec. 71.45-1  When made.

    (a) An inspection of passenger and crew quarters, toilet and washing 
spaces, serving pantries, galleys, etc., shall be made, in general, at 
least once in every month. If the route of the vessel is such that it is 
away from a United States port for more than one month, an inspection 
shall be conducted at least once every trip.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
                        Subpart 71.50_Drydocking


<R05>
Sec. 71.50-1  Definitions relating to hull examinations.

    As used in this part--
    Adequate hull protection system means a method of protecting the 
vessel's hull from corrosion. It includes, as a minimum, either hull 
coatings and a cathodic protection (CP) system consisting of sacrificial 
anodes, or an impressed current CP system.
    Alternative Hull Examination (AHE) Program means a program in which 
an eligible vessel may receive an initial and subsequent credit hull 
examination through a combination of underwater surveys, internal 
examinations, and annual hull condition assessment.
    Drydock examination means hauling out a vessel or placing a vessel 
in a drydock or slipway for an examination of all accessible parts of 
the vessel's underwater body and all through-hull fittings and 
appurtenances.
    Internal structural examination means an examination of the vessel 
while afloat or in drydock and consists of a complete examination of the 
vessel's main strength members, including the major internal framing, 
the hull plating, voids, and ballast tanks, but not including cargo, 
sewage, or fuel oil tanks.
    Remotely operated vehicle (ROV) team, at a minimum, consist of an 
ROV operator, a non-destructive testing inspector, an ROV tender or 
mechanic, and a team supervisor who is considered by

[[Page 28]]

the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection (OCMI), to have the appropriate 
training and experience to perform the survey and to safely operate the 
ROV in an effective manor. The team must also have a hull-positioning 
technician present. This position may be assigned to a team member 
already responsible for another team duty.
    Shallow water is an ascertained water depth at which the uppermost 
deck(s) of a sunken vessel remain above the water's surface. The 
determination of the water's depth is made by the Officer in Charge, 
Marine Inspection (OCMI) who considers the vessel's stability (passenger 
heeling moment), the contour of the hull, the composition of the river 
bottom, and any other factors that would tend to prevent a vessel from 
resting an even keel.
    Third party examiner means an entity:
    (1) With a thorough knowledge of diving operations, including diving 
limitations as related to diver safety and diver supervision;
    (2) Having a familiarity with, but not limited to, the following--
    (i) The camera used during the AHE; and
    (ii) The NDT equipment used during the AHE, including the effect of 
water clarity, and marine growth in relation to the quality of the 
readings obtained;
    (3) Having a familiarity with the communications equipment used 
during the AHE;
    (4) Possessing the knowledge of vessel structures, design features, 
nomenclature, and the applicable AHE regulations; and
    (5) Able to present the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, with 
evidence of formal training, demonstrated ability, past acceptance, or a 
combination of these.
    Underwater Survey in Lieu of Drydocking (UWILD) means a program in 
which an eligible vessel may alternate between an underwater survey and 
the required drydock examinations.

[USCG-2000-6858, 67 FR 21076, Apr. 29, 2002, as amended by USCG-2000-
6858, 69 FR 47382, Aug. 5, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 71.50-3  Drydock examination, internal structural examination,
underwater survey, and alternate hull exam intervals.

    (a) If your vessel is operated on international voyages, it must 
undergo a drydock and internal structural examination once every 12 
months unless it has been approved to undergo an underwater survey per 
Sec. 71.50-5 of this part.
    (b) If your vessel is operated on other than international voyages 
and does not meet the conditions in paragraphs (c) through (f) of this 
section, it must undergo a drydock and internal structural examination 
as follows unless it has been approved to undergo an underwater survey 
per Sec. 71.50-5 of this part:
    (1) Except as provided in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, vessels 
that operate in salt water must undergo two drydock and two internal 
structural examinations within any five year period. No more than three 
years may elapse between any two examinations.
    (2) Vessels 20 years of age or older that operate in salt water and 
accommodate overnight passengers must undergo drydock and internal 
structural examinations at intervals not to exceed 18 months.
    (3) Vessels that operate in fresh water at least six months in every 
12 month period since the last drydock examination must undergo drydock 
and internal structural examinations at intervals not to exceed five 
years.
    (c) Vessels with wooden hulls must undergo two drydock and two 
internal structural examinations within any five year period regardless 
of the type of water in which they operate. No more than three years may 
elapse between any two examinations.
    (d) If, during an internal structural examination, damage or 
deterioration to the hull plating or structural members is discovered, 
the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, may require the vessel to be 
drydocked or otherwise taken out of service to further assess the extent 
of the damage and to effect permanent repairs.
    (e) Each vessel which has not met the applicable examination 
schedules in paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section because it is on 
a voyage, must undergo the required examinations upon completion of the 
voyage.

[[Page 29]]

    (f) For a vessel that is eligible per Sec. 71.50-17 and the owner 
opts for an alternate hull examination with the underwater survey 
portion conducted exclusively by divers, the vessel must undergo two 
alternate hull exams and two internal structural exams within any five-
year period. If a vessel completes a satisfactory alternate hull exam, 
with the underwater survey portion conducted predominantly by an 
approved underwater ROV, the vessel must undergo one alternate hull and 
one internal structural exam, within any five-year period. The vessel 
may undergo a drydock exam to satisfy any of the required alternate hull 
exams.
    (g) The Commandant (CG-543) may authorize extensions to the 
examination intervals specified in paragraph (a) through (c) of this 
section.

[CGD 84-024, 52 FR 39652, Oct. 23, 1987, as amended by CGD 84-024, 53 FR 
32231, Aug. 24, 1988; GCD 95-072, 60 FR 50463, Sept. 29, 1995; CGD 96-
041, 61 FR 50729, Sept. 27, 1996; USCG-2000-6858, 67 FR 21076, Apr. 29, 
2002; USCG-2009-0702, 74 FR 49231, Sept 25, 2009]


<R05>
Sec. 71.50-5  Underwater Survey in Lieu of Drydocking (UWILD).

    (a) The Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection (OCMI), may approve an 
underwater survey instead of a drydock examination at alternating 
intervals if your vessel is--
    (1) Less than 15 years of age;
    (2) A steel or aluminum hulled vessel;
    (3) Fitted with an effective hull protection system; and
    (4) Described in Sec. 71.50-3(a) or (b).
    (b) For vessels less than 15 years of age, you must submit an 
application for an underwater survey to the OCMI at least 90 days before 
your vessel's next required drydock examination. The application must 
include--
    (1) The procedure for carrying out the underwater survey;
    (2) The time and place of the underwater survey;
    (3) The method used to accurately determine the diver's or remotely 
operated vehicle's (ROV) location relative to the hull;
    (4) The means for examining all through-hull fittings and 
appurtenances;
    (5) The means for taking shaft bearing clearances;
    (6) The condition of the vessel, including the anticipated draft of 
the vessel at the time of survey;
    (7) A description of the hull protection system; and
    (8) The name and qualifications of any third party examiner.
    (c) If your vessel is 15 years old or older, the cognizant District 
Commander for the area in which the exam is being completed, may approve 
an underwater survey instead of a drydock examination at alternating 
intervals. You must submit an application for an underwater survey to 
the OCMI at least 90 days before your vessel's next required drydock 
examination. You may be allowed this option if--
    (1) The vessel is qualified under paragraphs (a)(2) through (4) of 
this section;
    (2) Your application includes the information in paragraphs (b)(1) 
through (b)(8) of this section; and
    (3) During the vessel's drydock examination that precedes the 
underwater survey, a complete set of hull gaugings was taken and they 
indicated that the vessel was free from appreciable hull deterioration.
    (d) After this drydock examination required in paragraph (c)(3) of 
this section, the OCMI submits a recommendation for future underwater 
surveys, the results of the hull gauging, and the results of the Coast 
Guards' drydock examination results to the cognizant District Commander 
for review.

[USCG-2000-6858, 67 FR 21077, Apr. 29, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 71.50-15  Description of the Alternative Hull Examination (AHE)
Program for certain passenger vessels.

    The Alternative Hull Examination (AHE) Program provides you with an 
alternative to a drydock examination by allowing your vessel's hull to 
be examined while it remains afloat. If completed using only divers, 
this program has four steps: the application process, the preliminary 
examination, the pre-survey meeting, and the hull examination. If the 
vessel is already participating in the program or if a remotely operated 
vehicle (ROV) is used during the program, the preliminary exam step may 
be omitted. Once you complete these steps, the Officer in Charge,

[[Page 30]]

Marine Inspection (OCMI), will evaluate the results and accept the 
examination as a credit hull exam if the vessel is in satisfactory 
condition. If only divers are used for the underwater survey portion of 
the examination process, you may receive credit for a period of time 
such that subsequent AHEs would be conducted at intervals of twice in 
every five years, with no more than three years between any two AHEs. 
The OCMI may waive an underwater survey in accordance with Sec. 71.50-
29(d) provided that the interval does not exceed five years between any 
two underwater surveys. If an underwater ROV is used as the predominate 
method to examine the vessel's underwater hull plating, you may receive 
credit up to five years. At the end of this period, you may apply for 
further participation under the AHE Program.

    Note to Sec. 71.50-15: The expected hull coverage when using an ROV 
must be at least 80 percent.

[USCG-2000-6858, 69 FR 47382, Aug. 5, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 71.50-17  Eligibility requirements for the Alternative Hull Examination
(AHE) Program for certain passenger vessels.

    (a) Your vessel may be eligible for the AHE Program if--
    (1) It is constructed of steel or aluminum;
    (2) It has an effective hull protection system;
    (3) It has operated exclusively in fresh water since its last 
drydock examination;
    (4) It operates in a reduced risk environment such as a river or the 
protected waters of a lake; and
    (5) It operates exclusively in shallow water or within 0.5 nautical 
miles from shore.
    (b) In addition to the requirements in paragraph (a), the Officer in 
Charge, Marine Inspection (OCMI), will evaluate the following 
information when determining your vessel's eligibility for the AHE 
Program:
    (1) The overall condition of the vessel, based on its inspection 
history;
    (2) The vessel's history of hull casualties and hull-related 
deficiencies; and
    (3) The AHE Program application, as described in Sec. 71.50-19 of 
this part.
    (c) When reviewing a vessel's eligibility for the AHE program, the 
OCMI may modify the standards given by paragraph (a)(5) of this section 
where it is considered safe and reasonable to do so. In making this 
determination, the OCMI will consider the vessel's overall condition, 
its history of safe operation, and any other factors that serve to 
mitigate overall safety risks.

[USCG-2000-6858, 67 FR 21077, Apr. 29, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 71.50-19  The Alternative Hull Examination (AHE) Program application.

    If your vessel meets the eligibility criteria in Sec. 71.50-17 of 
this part, you may apply to the AHE Program. You must submit an 
application at least 90 days before the requested hull examination date 
to the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection (OCMI), who will oversee the 
hull examination. The application must include--
    (a) The proposed time and place for conducting the hull examination;
    (b) The name of the participating diving contractor and underwater 
remotely operated vehicle (ROV) company accepted by the OCMI under Sec. 
71.50-27 of this part;
    (c) The name and qualifications of the third party examiner. This 
person must be familiar with the inspection procedures and his or her 
responsibilities under this program. The OCMI has the discretionary 
authority to accept or deny use of any third party examiner using the 
criteria established in Sec. 71.50-1 of this part;
    (d) A signed statement from your vessel's master, chief engineer, or 
the person in charge stating the vessel meets the eligibility criteria 
of Sec. 71.50-17 of this part and a description of the vessel's overall 
condition, level of maintenance, known or suspected damage, underwater 
body cleanliness (if known), and the anticipated draft of the vessel at 
the time of the examination;
    (e) Plans or drawings that illustrate the external details of the 
hull below the sheer strake;
    (f) A detailed plan for conducting the hull examination in 
accordance with Sec. Sec. 71.50-25 and 71.50-27 of this part, which 
must address all safety concerns related to the removal of sea valves 
during the inspection; and

[[Page 31]]

    (g) A preventative maintenance plan for your vessel's hull, its 
related systems and equipment.

[USCG-2000-6858, 67 FR 21077, Apr. 29, 2002, as amended by USCG-2000-
6858, 69 FR 47382, Aug. 5, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 71.50-21  Preliminary examination requirements.

    (a) If you exclusively use divers to examine the underwater hull 
plating, you must arrange to have a preliminary examination conducted by 
a third party examiner, with the assistance of qualified divers. The 
purpose of the preliminary examination is to assess the overall 
condition of the vessel's hull and identify any specific concerns to be 
addressed during the underwater hull examination.
    (b) The preliminary examination is required only upon the vessel's 
entry or reentry into the AHE program.
    (c) If you use an underwater ROV as the predominant means to examine 
your vessel's hull plating, a preliminary examination and the 
participation of a third party examiner will not be necessary.

[USCG-2000-6858, 67 FR 21078, Apr. 29, 2002]


<R05>
Sec. 71.50-23  Pre-survey meeting.

    (a) In advance of each AHE, you must conduct a pre-survey meeting to 
discuss the details of the AHE procedure with the Officer in Charge, 
Marine Inspection (OCMI). If you exclusively use divers to examine the 
underwater hull plating, the third party examiner must attend the 
meeting and you must present the results of the preliminary examination. 
If you use an underwater remotely operated vehicle (ROV) as the 
predominant means to examine the vessel's hull plating, then the pre-
survey meeting must be attended by a representative of the ROV operating 
company who is qualified to discuss the ROV's capabilities and 
limitations of your vessel's hull design and configuration.
    (b) A vessel owner, operator, or designated agent must request this 
meeting in writing at least 30 days in advance of the examination date.
    (c) The pre-survey meeting may be conducted by teleconference, if 
agreed to in advance by the OCMI.

[USCG-2000-6858, 67 FR 21078, Apr. 29, 2002,as amended by USCG-2000-
6858, 69 FR 47382, Aug. 5, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 71.50-25  Alternative Hull Examination (AHE) procedure.

    (a) To complete the underwater survey you must--
    (1) Perform a general examination of the underwater hull plating and 
a detailed examination of all hull welds, propellers, tailshafts, 
rudders, and other hull appurtenances;
    (2) Examine all sea chests;
    (3) Remove and inspect all sea valves in the presence of a marine 
inspector once every five years;
    (4) Remove all passengers from the vessel when the sea valves are 
being examined, if required by the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection 
(OCMI);
    (5) Allow access to all internal areas of the hull for examination, 
except internal tanks that carry fuel, sewage, or potable water. 
Internal tanks that carry fuel must be examined in accordance with Sec. 
71.53-1 of this part. Internal sewage and potable water tanks may be 
examined visually or by non-destructive testing to the satisfaction of 
the attending marine inspector; and
    (6) Meet the requirements in Sec. 71.50-27 of this part.
    (b) A marine inspector may examine any other areas deemed necessary 
by the OCMI.
    (c) If the AHE reveals significant deterioration or damage to the 
vessel's hull plating or structural members, the OCMI must be 
immediately notified. The OCMI may require the vessel be drydocked or 
otherwise taken out of service to further assess the extent of damage or 
to effect permanent repairs if the assessment or repairs cannot be 
completed to the satisfaction of the OCMI while the vessel is 
waterborne.

[USCG-2000-6858, 67 FR 21078, Apr. 29, 2002, as amended by USCG-2000-
6858, 69 FR 47382, Aug. 5, 2004]

[[Page 32]]


<R05>
Sec. 71.50-27  Alternative Hull Examination (AHE) program options: 
Divers or underwater remotely operated vehicle (ROV).

    To conduct the underwater survey portion of the AHE, you may use 
divers or an underwater ROV.
    (a) If you use divers to conduct the underwater survey, you must:
    (1) Locate the vessel so the divers can work safely under the 
vessel's keel and around both sides. The water velocity must be safe for 
dive operations;
    (2) Provide permanent hull markings, a temporary grid system of 
wires or cables spaced not more than 10 feet apart and tagged at one-
foot intervals, or any other acoustic or electronic positioning system 
approved by the OCMI to identify the diver's location with respect to 
the hull, within one foot of accuracy;
    (3) Take ultrasonic thickness gaugings at a minimum of 5 points on 
each plate, evenly spaced;
    (4) Take hull plating thickness gaugings along transverse belts at 
the bow, stern, and midships, as a minimum. Plating thickness gaugings 
must also be taken along a longitudinal belt at the wind and water 
strake. Individual gaugings along the transverse and longitudinal belts 
must be spaced no more than 3 feet apart;
    (5) Ensure the third party examiner observes the entire underwater 
examination process;
    (6) Record the entire underwater survey with audio and video 
recording equipment and ensure that communications between divers and 
the third party examiner are recorded; and
    (7) Use appropriate equipment, such as a clear box, if underwater 
visibility is poor, to provide the camera with a clear view of the hull.
    (b) You may use an underwater ROV to conduct the underwater survey. 
The underwater ROV operating team, survey process and equipment, quality 
assurance methods, and the content and format of the survey report must 
be accepted by the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection (OCMI) prior to 
the survey. If you choose this option, you must--
    (1) Locate the vessel to ensure that the underwater ROV can operate 
effectively under the vessel's keel and around all sides;
    (2) Employ divers to examine any sections of the hull and 
appurtenances that the underwater ROV cannot access or is otherwise 
unable to evaluate; and
    (3) If the OCMI determines that the data obtained by the ROV, 
including non-destructive testing results, readability of the results, 
and positioning standards, will not integrate into the data obtained by 
the divers, then a third party examiner must be present during the 
divers portion of the examination.

[USCG-2000-6858, 67 FR 21078, Apr. 29, 2002, as amended by USCG-2000-
6858, 69 FR 47382, Aug. 5, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 71.50-29  Hull examination reports.

    (a) If you use only divers for the underwater survey portion of the 
Alternative Hull Examination (AHE), you must provide the Officer in 
Charge, Marine Inspection (OCMI), with a written hull examination 
report. This report must include thickness gauging results, bearing 
clearances, a copy of the audio and video recordings, and any other 
information that will help the OCMI evaluate your vessel for a credit 
hull exam. The third party examiner must sign the report and confirm the 
validity of its contents.
    (b) If you use an underwater ROV as the predominant means to examine 
the vessel's underwater hull plating, you must provide the OCMI with a 
report in the format that is accepted by the OCMI, per Sec. 71.50-27(b) 
of this part.
    (c) The OCMI will evaluate the hull examination report and grant a 
credit hull exam if satisfied with the condition of the vessel. If 
approved and you exclusively use divers to examine the hull plating, you 
may receive a credit hull exam up to 36 months. (Underwater examinations 
are required twice every 5 years). If approved and you use an underwater 
ROV as the predominant means to examine the underwater hull plating, you 
may receive a credit hull exam up to 60 months (5 years).
    (d) At least 60 days prior to each scheduled underwater exam, the 
owner may request a waiver from the OCMI if:
    (1) A satisfactory exam has been completed within the last three 
years;
    (2) The conditions during the last exam allowed at least 80 percent 
of the

[[Page 33]]

bottom surface to be viewed and recorded; and
    (3) The results of the last exam indicated that an extended interval 
is safe and reasonable.

[USCG-2000-6858, 67 FR 21078, Apr. 29, 2002, as amended by USCG-2000-
6858, 69 FR 47382, Aug. 5, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 71.50-31  Continued participation in the Alternative Hull
Examination (AHE) program.

    (a) To continue to participate in the AHE Program, vessel operators 
must conduct an annual hull condition assessment. At a minimum, vessel 
operators must conduct an internal examination and take random hull 
gaugings internally during the hull condition assessment, unless waived 
by the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection (OCMI). If the annual hull 
assessment reveals significant damage or corrosion, where temporary 
repairs have been made, or where other critical areas of concern have 
been identified, the OCMI may require an expanded examination to include 
an underwater hull examination using divers. If an underwater 
examination is required, the examination must focus on areas at higher 
risk of damage or corrosion and must include a representative sampling 
of hull gaugings.
    (b) If an underwater survey is required for the annual hull 
condition assessment, the OCMI may require the presence of a third party 
examiner and a written hull examination report must be submitted to the 
OCMI. This report must include thickness gauging results, a copy of the 
audio and video recordings and any other information that will help the 
OCMI evaluate your vessel for continued participation in the AHE 
program. The third party examiner must sign the report and confirm the 
validity of its contents.
    (c) You must submit your preventive maintenance reports or 
checklists on an annual basis to the OCMI. These reports or checklists 
must conform to the plans you submitted in your application under Sec. 
71.50-19 of this part, which the OCMI approved.
    (d) Prior to each scheduled annual hull condition assessment--
    (1) The owner may submit to the OCMI a plan for conducting the 
assessment, or a request for a waiver of this requirement, no fewer than 
30 days before the scheduled assessment; and
    (2) The OCMI may reduce the scope or extend the interval of the 
assessment if the operational, casualty, and deficiency history of the 
vessel, along with a recommendation of the vessel's master, indicates 
that it is warranted.

[USCG-2000-6858, 67 FR 21078, Apr. 29, 2002, as amended by USCG-2000-
6858, 69 FR 47382, Aug. 5, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 71.50-35  Notice and plans required.

    (a) The master, owner, operator, or agent of the vessel shall notify 
the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, whenever the vessel is to be 
drydocked, regardless of the reason for drydocking.
    (b) Each vessel, except barges, that holds a Load Line Certificate 
must have on board a plan showing the vessel's scantlings. This plan 
must be made available to the Coast Guard marine inspector whenever the 
vessel undergoes a drydock examination, internal structural 
examinationor underwater survey or whenever repairs are made to the 
vessel's hull.
    (c) Each barge that holds a Load Line Certificate must have a plan 
showing the barge's scantlings. The plan need not be maintained on board 
the barge but must be made available to the Coast Guard marine inspector 
whenever the barge undergoes a drydock examination, internal structural 
examination, or underwater survey or whenever repairs are made to the 
barge's hull.

[CGD 84-024, 52 FR 39652, Oct. 23, 1987. Redesignated and amended by 
USCG-2000-6858, 67 FR 21076, Apr. 29, 2002]


<R04>
            Subpart 71.53_Integral Fuel Oil Tank Examinations


<R05>
Sec. 71.53-1  When required.

    (a) Each fuel oil tank with at least one side integral to the 
vessel's hull and located within the hull (``integral fuel oil tank'') 
is subject to inspection as provided in this section. Each integral fuel 
oil tank is subject to inspection as provided in this section. The owner 
or operator of the vessel shall have the tanks cleaned out and gas

[[Page 34]]

freed as necessary to permit internal examination of the tank or tanks 
designated by the marine inspector. The owner or operator shall arrange 
for an examination of the fuel tanks of each vessel during an internal 
structural examination at intervals not to exceed five years.
    (b) Integral non-double-bottom fuel oil tanks need not be cleaned 
out and internally examined if the marine inspector is able to determine 
by external examination that the general condition of the tanks is 
satisfactory.
    (c) Double-bottom fuel oil tanks on vessels less than 10 years of 
age need not be cleaned out and internally examined if the marine 
inspector is able to determine by external examination that the general 
condition of the tanks is satisfactory.
    (d) All double-bottom fuel oil tanks on vessels 10 years of age or 
older but less than 15 years of age need not be cleaned out and 
internally examined if the marine inspector is able to determine by 
internal examination of at least one forward double-bottom fuel oil 
tank, and by external examination of all other double-bottom fuel oil 
tanks on the vessel, that the general condition of the tanks is 
satisfactory.
    (e) All double-bottom fuel oil tanks on vessels 15 years of age or 
older need not be cleaned out and internally examined if the marine 
inspector is able to determine by internal examination of at least one 
forward, one amidships, and one aft double-bottom fuel oil tank, and by 
external examination of all other double-bottom fuel oil tanks on the 
vessel, the general condition of the tanks is satisfactory.

[CGD 84-024, 52 FR 39652, Oct. 23, 1987, as amended by CGD 84-024, 53 FR 
32231, Aug. 24, 1988]


<R04>
                  Subpart 71.55_Repairs and Alterations


<R05>
Sec. 71.55-1  Permission required.

    (a) No repairs or alterations affecting the safety of the vessel 
with regard to the hull, machinery, or equipment, shall be made without 
the knowledge of the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection.
    (b) Drawings of alterations shall be approved before work is 
started, unless deemed unnecessary by the Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspection.
    (c) Drawings will not be required for repairs in kind.


<R05>
Sec. 71.55-5  Inspection required.

    (a) An inspection, either general or partial depending upon the 
circumstances, shall be made whenever any important repairs or 
alterations are undertaken.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
              Subpart 71.60_Special Operating Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 71.60-1  Inspection and testing required when making alterations,
repairs, or other such operations involving riveting, welding,

burning or like fire-producing actions.

    (a) The provisions of ``Standard for the Control of Gas Hazards on 
Vessels to be Repaired,'' NFPA No. 306, published by National Fire 
Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269, shall be 
used as a guide in conducting the inspections and issuance of 
certificates required by this section.
    (b) Until an inspection has been made to determine that such 
operation can be undertaken with safety, no alterations, repairs, or 
other such operations involving riveting, welding, burning, or like 
fire-producing actions shall be made:
    (1) Within or on the boundaries of cargo tanks which have been used 
to carry combustible liquid or chemicals in bulk; or,
    (2) Within or on the boundaries of fuel tanks; or,
    (3) To pipe lines, heating coils, pumps, fittings, or other 
appurtenances connected to such cargo or fuel tanks.
    (c) Such inspections shall be made and evidenced as follows:
    (1) In ports or places in the United States or its territories and 
possessions the inspection shall be made by a marine chemist 
certificated by the National Fire Protection Association; however, if 
the services of such certified marine chemist are not reasonably 
available, the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, upon the 
recommendation of the vessel owner and his contractor or their 
representative,

[[Page 35]]

shall select a person who, in the case of an individual vessel, shall be 
authorized to make such inspection. If the inspection indicated that 
such operations can be undertaken with safety, a certificate setting 
forth the fact in writing and qualified as may be required, shall be 
issued by the certified marine chemist or the authorized person before 
the work is started. Such qualifications shall include any requirements 
as may be deemed necessary to maintain, insofar as can reasonably be 
done, the safe conditions in the spaces certified throughout the 
operation and shall include such additional tests and certifications as 
considered required. Such qualifications and requirements shall include 
precautions necessary to eliminate or minimize hazards that may be 
present from protective coatings or residues from cargoes.
    (2) When not in such a port or place, and a marine chemist or such 
person authorized by the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, is not 
reasonably available, the inspection shall be made by the senior officer 
present and a proper entry shall be made in the vessel's logbook.
    (d) It shall be the responsibility of the senior officer present to 
secure copies of certificates issued by the certified marine chemist or 
such person authorized by the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection. It 
shall be the responsibility of the senior officer present, insofar as 
the persons under his control are concerned, to maintain a safe 
condition on the vessel by full observance of all qualifications and 
requirements listed by the marine chemist in the certificate.

[CGD 84-024, 52 FR 39652, Oct. 23, 1987, as amended by GCD 95-072, 60 FR 
50463, Sept. 29, 1995]


<R04>
                       Subpart 71.65_Plan Approval


<R05>
Sec. 71.65-1  General.

    (a) The list of required plans is general in character, but includes 
all plans in Sec. 71.65-5 which normally show construction and safety 
features coming under the cognizance of the Coast Guard. In the case of 
a particular vessel, all of the plans enumerated may not be applicable, 
and it is intended that only those plans and specifications be submitted 
as will clearly show the vessel's arrangement, construction and required 
equipment.
    (b) In the list of required plans in Sec. 71.65-5 the items which 
must be approved by the American Bureau of Shipping for vessels classed 
by that organization are indicated by an asterisk. When prints bearing 
record of such approval by the American Bureau of Shipping are forwarded 
to the Coast Guard they will in general be accepted as satisfactory 
except insofar as the law or the Coast Guard regulations contain 
requirements which are not covered by the American Bureau of Shipping.
    (c) Plans and specifications for cargo gear shall be approved by 
either a recognized classification society or the International Cargo 
Gear Bureau, Inc., whose home office is located at 321 West 44th Street, 
New York, NY 10036; on the Internet at http://www.icgb.com.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16895, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 95-028, 62 FR 
51204, Sept. 30, 1997; USCG-2008-0906, 73 FR 56510, Sept. 29, 2008]


<R05>
Sec. 71.65-5  Plans and specifications required for new construction.

    (a) General. (1) Specifications.
    (2) General Arrangement Plan of decks, holds, inner bottoms, etc., 
and including inboard and outboard profile.
    (b) Hull structure. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ The Asterisk (*) indicates items that are approved by the 
American Bureau of Shipping for vessels classed by it. Items approved 
the American Bureau of Shipping are generally accepted as satisfactory 
unless the law or Coast Guard regulations contain requirements that are 
not covered by the American Bureau of Shipping.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (1) *Inner Bottom Plating and Framing.
    (2) *Midship Section.
    (3) *Shell Plating and Framing.
    (4) *Stem, Stern Frame, and Rudder.
    (5) *Structural Deck Plans for Strength Decks.
    (6) *Pillars and Girders.
    (7) *Watertight and Oiltight Bulkheads.
    (8) *Foundations for Main Machinery and Boilers.
    (9) *Arrangement of Ports, Doors, and Airports in Shell Plating.

[[Page 36]]

    (10) *Hatch Coamings and Covers in Weather and Watertight Decks.
    (11) *Details of Hinged Subdivision Watertight Doors and Operating 
Gear.
    (12) *Scuppers and Drains Penetrating Shell Plating.
    (13) *Arrangement of the cargo gear including a stress diagram. The 
principal details of the gear and the safe working load for each 
component part shall be shown.
    (c) Subdivision and stability. Plans and calculations required by 
subchapter S of this chapter.
    (d) Fire control. (1) Fire control diagram showing location and type 
of all required fire-screen insulation, including main fire zone and 
subdivisions, stairway and elevator enclosures, control space 
enclosures, etc., and type of all doors in such subdivisions and 
enclosures.
    (2) Comprehensive typical details of fire-screen insulation of both 
vertical and horizontal surfaces, including deck coverings where used, 
keyed by reference numbers to the ``fire control diagram''.
    (3) Ventilation diagram including dampers and other fire control 
features.
    (4) Alarm systems.
    (5) Detecting systems.
    (6) Extinguishing systems, including fire mains, carbon dioxide, 
foam, and sprinkling systems.
    (7) Supervised Patrol Route.
    (e) Marine engineering. (1) For plans required for marine 
engineering equipment and systems, see subchapter F (Marine Engineering) 
of this chapter.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (f) Electrical engineering. (1) For plans required for electrical 
engineering equipment and systems, see subchapter J (Electrical 
Engineering) of this chapter.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (g) Lifesaving equipment. (1) These plans are to show the location 
and arrangement of embarkation decks, all overboard discharges and 
projections in way of launching lifeboats, weights of lifeboats fully 
equipped and loaded, working loads of davits and winches, types and 
sizes of falls, the manufacturer's name and identification for all 
equipment, and all other relevant and necessary information.
    (i) Arrangement of lifeboats.
    (ii) Arrangement of davits.
    (iii) Location and stowage of liferafts and buoyant apparatus.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (h) Crew's accommodations. (1) Arrangement plans showing 
accommodations, ventilation, escapes, hospital, and sanitary facilities 
for all crewmembers.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (i) Navigation bridge visibility. For vessels of 100 meters (328 
feet) or more in length contracted for on or after September 7, 1990, a 
plan must be included which shows how visibility from the navigation 
bridge will meet the standards contained in Sec. 72.04-1 of this 
subchapter.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16895, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 79-023, 48 FR 
51007, Nov. 4, 1983; CGD 85-099, 55 FR 32247, Aug. 8, 1990; CGD 88-032, 
56 FR 35824, July 29, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 71.65-10  Plans required for alterations of existing vessels.

    (a) In the event of alterations involving the safety of the vessel, 
the applicable plans shall be submitted for approval covering the 
proposed work, except as modified by Sec. 71.55-1(b). The general scope 
of the plans shall be as noted in Sec. 71.65-5.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 71.65-15  Procedure for submittal of plans.

    (a) As the relative location of shipyards, design offices, and Coast 
Guard offices vary throughout the country, no specific routing will be 
required in the submittal of plans. In general, one of the following 
procedures would apply, but in a particular case, if a more expeditious 
procedure can be used, there will be no objection to its adoption:
    (1) The plans may be submitted to the Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspection, in the district in which the vessel is to be built. This 
procedure will be most expeditious in the case of those offices where 
personnel and facilities are available for examination and approval of 
the plans locally.
    (2) The plans may be submitted by visitors directly to Commanding 
Officer, U.S. Coast Guard Marine Safety Center, 1900 Half Street, SW., 
Suite

[[Page 37]]

1000, Room 525, Washington, DC 20024, or transmitted by mail to: 
Commanding Officer, U.S. Coast Guard Marine Safety Center, 2100 2nd St. 
SW., Stop 7102, Washington, DC 20593-7102, in a written or electronic 
format. Information for submitting the VSP electronically can be found 
at http://www.uscg.mil/HQ/MSC. In this case, the plans will be returned 
directly to the submitter, with a copy of the action being forwarded to 
the interested Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection.
    (3) In the case of classed vessels, upon specific request by the 
submitter, the American Bureau of Shipping will arrange to forward the 
necessary plans to the Coast Guard indicating its action thereon. In 
this case, the plans will be returned as noted in paragraph (a)(2) of 
this section.
    (b) [Reserved]

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16895, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by 60 FR 50463, 
Sept. 29, 1995; CGD 95-072, 60 FR 54106, Oct. 19, 1995; USCG-2007-29018, 
72 FR 53965, Sept. 21, 2007; USCG-2009-0702, 74 FR 49231, Sept 25, 2009]


<R05>
Sec. 71.65-20  Number of plans required.

    (a) Three copies of each plan are normally required so that one can 
be returned to the submitter. If the submitter desires additional 
approved plans, a suitable number should be submitted to permit the 
desired distribution.
    (b) [Reserved]

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16895, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGFR 69-116, 35 
FR 6861, Apr. 30, 1970]


<R04>
Subpart 71.75_Certificates Under the International Convention for Safety 
                          of Life at Sea, 1960


<R05>
Sec. 71.75-1  Application.

    (a) The provisions of this subpart shall apply to all vessels on an 
international voyage.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 71.75-5  Passenger Ship Safety Certificate.

    (a) All vessels on an international voyage are required to have a 
``Passenger Ship Safety Certificate.''
    (b) All such vessels shall meet the requirements of this chapter for 
vessels on an international voyage.

[CGFR, 65-50, 30 FR 16895, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 95-012, 60 
FR 48051, Sept. 18, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 71.75-10  Exemption Certificate.

    (a) A vessel may be exempted by the Commandant from complying with 
certain requirements of the Convention under his administration upon 
request made in writing to him and transmitted via the Officer in 
Charge, Marine Inspection.
    (b) When an exemption is granted to a vessel by the Commandant under 
and in accordance with the Convention, an Exemption Certificate 
describing such exemption shall be issued through the appropriate 
Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, in addition to the Passenger Ship 
Safety Certificate.

[CGFR, 65-50, 30 FR 16895, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 95-012, 60 
FR 48051, Sept. 18, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 71.75-13  Safety Management Certificate.

    All vessels to which 33 CFR part 96 applies on an international 
voyage must have a valid Safety Management Certificate and a copy of 
their company's valid Document of Compliance certificate on board.

[CGD 95-073, 62 FR 67514, Dec. 24, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 71.75-15  Posting of Convention certificates.

    (a) The certificates described in this subpart, or certified copies 
thereof, when issued to a vessel shall be posted in a prominent and 
accessible place on the vessel.
    (b) The certificate shall be carried in a manner similar to that 
described in Sec. 71.01-5 for a certificate of inspection.


<R05>
Sec. 71.75-20  Duration of certificates.

    (a) The certificates are issued for a period of not more than 12 
months, with exception to a Safety Management Certificate which is 
issued for a period of not more than 60 months.
    (b) An Exemption Certificate shall not be valid for longer than the 
period of the Passenger Ship Safety Certificate to which it refers.

[[Page 38]]

    (c) The Passenger Ship Safety Certificate may be withdrawn, revoked, 
or suspended at any time when it is determined the vessel is no longer 
in compliance with applicable requirements. (See Sec. 2.01-70 of this 
chapter for procedures governing appeals.)

[CGFR, 65-50, 30 FR 16895, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 95-012, 60 
FR 48051, Sept. 18, 1995; CGD 95-073, 62 FR 67514, Dec. 24, 1997]


<R03>
PART 72_CONSTRUCTION AND ARRANGEMENT--Table of Contents



                      Subpart 72.01_Hull Structure

Sec.
72.01-1 Application.
72.01-5 Vessels subject to load line.
72.01-10 Vessels using fuel having a flashpoint of 110 degrees F. or 
          lower.
72.01-15 Structural standards.
72.01-20 Special consideration.
72.01-25 Additonal structural requirements.
72.01-90 Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

                  Subpart 72.03_General Fire Protection

72.03-1 Application.
72.03-5 Fire hazards to be minimized.
72.03-10 Woodwork insulated from heated surfaces.
72.03-15 Lamp room construction.

               Subpart 72.04_Navigation Bridge Visibility

72.04-1 Navigation bridge visibility.

                Subpart 72.05_Structural Fire Protection

72.05-1 Application.
72.05-5 Definitions.
72.05-10 Type, location, and construction of fire control bulkheads and 
          decks.
72.05-15 Ceilings, linings, trim, and decorations in accommodation 
          spaces and safety areas.
72.05-20 Stairways, ladders, and elevators.
72.05-25 Doors, other than watertight.
72.05-30 Windows and airports.
72.05-35 Hatch covers and shifting boards.
72.05-40 Insulation, other than for structural fire protection.
72.05-45 Paint.
72.05-50 Ventilation.
72.05-55 Furniture and furnishings.
72.05-90 Vessels contracted for prior to May 26, 1965.

                      Subpart 72.10_Means of Escape

72.10-1 Application.
72.10-5 Two means required.
72.10-10 Location.
72.10-15 Vertical ladders not acceptable.
72.10-20 No means for locking door.
72.10-25 Stairway size.
72.10-30 Dead end corridors.
72.10-35 Public spaces.
72.10-40 Access to lifeboats.
72.10-45 Weather deck communications.
72.10-90 Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

                        Subpart 72.15_Ventilation

72.15-1 Application.
72.15-5 Structural fire protection.
72.15-10 Vessels using fuel having a flashpoint of 110 degrees F. or 
          lower.
72.15-15 Ventilation for closed spaces.
72.15-20 Ventilation for crew quarters and passenger spaces.
72.15-90 Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

            Subpart 72.20_Accomodations for Officers and Crew

72.20-1 Application.
72.20-5 Intent.
72.20-10 Location of crew spaces.
72.20-15 Construction.
72.20-20 Sleeping accommodations.
72.20-25 Washrooms and toilet rooms.
72.20-30 Messrooms.
72.20-35 Hospital space.
72.20-40 Other spaces.
72.20-45 Lighting.
72.20-50 Heating and cooling.
72.20-55 Insect screens.
72.20-90 Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

                 Subpart 72.25_Passenger Accommodations

72.25-1 Application.
72.25-10 Location of passenger quarters.
72.25-15 Passenger accommodations for excursion boats, ferryboats, and 
          passenger barges.

                 Subpart 72.30_Subdivision and Stability

72.30-1 Application.

                     Subpart 72.40_Rails and Guards

72.40-1 Application.
72.40-5 Where rails required.
72.40-10 Storm rails.
72.40-15 Vehicular ferries.
72.40-20 Guards in dangerous places.
72.40-90 Vessels contracted for prior to July 1, 1969.

    Authority: 46 U.S.C. 3306; E.O. 12234, 45 FR 58801, 3 CFR, 1980 
Comp., p. 277; Department of Homeland Security Delegation No. 0170.1.

    Source: CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16903, Dec. 30, 1965, unless otherwise 
noted.

[[Page 39]]


<R04>
                      Subpart 72.01_Hull Structure


<R05>
Sec. 72.01-1  Application.

    The provisions of this subpart, with the exception of Sec. 72.01-
90, shall apply to all vessels contracted for on or after November 19, 
1952. Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall meet the 
requirements of Sec. 72.01-90.

[CGD 95-028, 62 FR 51204, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 72.01-5  Vessels subject to load line.

    (a) For vessels assigned a load line, see subchapter E (Load Lines) 
of this chapter, for special requirements as to strength, closure of 
openings, etc.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 72.01-10  Vessels using fuel having a flashpoint of 
110 degrees F. or lower.

    (a) Where liquid fuel having a flashpoint of 110 degrees F. or lower 
is carried for main or auxiliary machinery or for starting purposes, 
such machinery and fuel tanks shall be in separate vapor tight 
compartments separating each from the other and from the remainder of 
the vessel.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 72.01-15  Structural standards.

    (a) In general, compliance with the standards established by the 
American Bureau of Shipping, see subpart 70.35 of this subchapter, will 
be considered satisfactory evidence of the structural efficiency of the 
vessel. However, in special cases, a detailed analysis of the entire 
structure or some integral part may be made by the Coast Guard to 
determine the structural requirements.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 72.01-20  Special consideration.

    (a) Special consideration will be given to the structural 
requirements for vessels, such as small vessels or vessels of unusual 
design not contemplated by the standards established by the American 
Bureau of Shipping, see subpart 70.35 of this subchapter.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 72.01-25  Additional structural requirements.

    (a) Vessels required by part 171 of this chapter to have subdivision 
bulkheads, double bottoms, etc. must comply with the following 
structural requirements:
    (1) Each watertight subdivision bulkhead, whether transverse or 
longitudinal, shall be constructed in such a manner that it shall be 
capable of supporting, with a proper margin of resistance, the pressure 
due to the maximum head of water which it might have to sustain in the 
event of damage to the vessel, but at least the pressure due to a head 
of water up to the margin line. The construction of the bulkheads shall 
be to the satisfaction of the Commandant.
    (2) Steps and recesses in subdivision bulkheads shall be watertight 
and as strong as the bulkhead at the place where each occurs. Decks, 
trunks, tunnels, duct keels, ventilators, etc., that are made watertight 
to maintain the subdivision requirements for a vessel shall be of the 
same strength as the bulkhead at the corresponding levels. The means 
used for making them watertight and the arrangements adopted for closing 
openings in them shall be to the satisfaction of the Commandant. 
Watertight ventilators and trunks shall be carried at least up to the 
bulkhead deck.
    (3) Where frames or beams pass through a watertight bulkhead or 
deck, such bulkhead or deck shall be made structurally watertight 
without the use of wood, cement, or similar materials.
    (4) Subdivision bulkheads, including steps, recesses, trunks, 
tunnels, ventilators, etc., which might form part of such bulkheads, 
shall be thoroughly examined and hose tested upon completion of 
construction. The water pressure for such tests shall be at least 30 
p.s.i. Testing of main compartments by filling them with water is not 
compulsory.
    (5) The forepeak, double bottoms (including duct keels), and inner 
skins shall be tested with water to-a-head corresponding to the 
requirements of paragraph (a)(1) of this section upon completion of 
construction.
    (6) The watertight space enclosing the stern tube shall be tested by 
filling with water to-a-head up to the deepest subdivision load line.

[[Page 40]]

    (7) Tanks which are intended to hold liquids, and which form part of 
the subdivision of the vessel, shall be tested for tightness upon 
completion of construction with water to-a-head up to the deepest 
subdivision load line or to-a-head corresponding to \2/3\ of the depth 
from the top of the keel to the margin line in way of the tanks, 
whichever is greater; but in no case shall the test-head be less than 3 
feet above the top of the tank.
    (8) The tests referred to in the preceding paragraphs (a) (5), (6), 
and (7) of this section are for the purpose of insuring that the 
subdivision structural arrangements are watertight and are not regarded 
as a test of the fitness of any compartment for the storage of oil, fuel 
or for other specific purposes for which a test of a superior character 
may be required depending upon the height to which the liquid has access 
in the tank or its connections.
    (b) [Reserved]

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16903, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 79-023, 48 FR 
51007, Nov. 4, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 72.01-90  Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

    (a) Existing structure previously approved will be considered 
satisfactory so long as it is maintained in good condition to the 
satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection. Minor repairs 
and alterations may be made to the same standard as the original 
construction.
    (b) [Reserved]

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16903, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGFR 66-33, 31 FR 
15281, Dec. 6, 1966]


<R04>
                  Subpart 72.03_General Fire Protection


<R05>
Sec. 72.03-1  Application.

    (a) The provisions of this subpart shall apply to all vessels.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 72.03-5  Fire hazards to be minimized.

    (a) The general construction of the vessel shall be such as to 
minimize fire hazards insofar as is reasonable and practicable.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 72.03-10  Woodwork insulated from heated surfaces.

    (a) Internal combustion engine exhausts, boiler and galley uptakes 
and similar sources of ignition shall be kept clear of and suitably 
insulated from any woodwork or other combustible matter.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 72.03-15  Lamp room construction.

    (a) Lamp, paint, and oil lockers and similar compartments shall be 
constructed of steel or shall be wholly lined with metal.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
               Subpart 72.04_Navigation Bridge Visibility


<R05>
Sec. 72.04-1  Navigation bridge visibility.

    Each passenger vessel which is 100 meters (328 feet) or more in 
length and contracted for on or after September 7, 1990, must meet the 
following requirements:
    (a) The field of vision from the navigation bridge, whether the 
vessel is in a laden or unladen condition, must be such that:
    (1) From the conning position, the view of the sea surface is not 
obscured forward of the bow by more than the lesser of two ship lengths 
or 500 meters (1640 feet) from dead ahead to 10 degrees on either side 
of the vessel. Within this arc of visibility any blind sector caused by 
cargo, cargo gear, or other permanent obstruction must not exceed 5 
degrees.
    (2) From the conning position, the horizontal field of vision 
extends over an arc from at least 22.5 degrees abaft the beam on one 
side of the vessel, through dead ahead, to at least 22.5 degrees abaft 
the beam on the other side of the vessel. Blind sectors forward of the 
beam caused by cargo, cargo gear, or other permanent obstruction must 
not exceed 10 degrees each, nor total more than 20 degrees, including 
any blind sector within the arc of visibility described in paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section.
    (3) From each bridge wing, the field of vision extends over an arc 
from at least 45 degrees on the opposite bow,

[[Page 41]]

through dead ahead, to at least dead astern.
    (4) From the main steering position, the field of vision extends 
over an arc from dead ahead to at least 60 degrees on either side of the 
vessel.
    (5) From each bridge wing, the respective side of the vessel is 
visible forward and aft.
    (b) Windows fitted on the navigation bridge must be arranged so 
that:
    (1) Framing between windows is kept to a minimum and is not 
installed immediately in front of any work station.
    (2) Front windows are inclined from the vertical plane, top out, at 
an angle of not less than 10 degrees and not more than 25 degrees.
    (3) The height of the lower edge of the front windows is limited to 
prevent any obstruction of the forward view previously described in this 
section.
    (4) The height of the upper edge of the front windows allows a 
forward view of the horizon at the conning position, for a person with a 
height of eye of 1.8 meters (71 inches), when the vessel is at a forward 
pitch angle of 20 degrees.
    (c) Polarized or tinted windows must not be fitted.

[CGD 85-099, 55 FR 32247, Aug. 8, 1990]


<R04>
                Subpart 72.05_Structural Fire Protection


<R05>
Sec. 72.05-1  Application.

    (a) The provisions of this subpart shall apply to the following 
vessels:
    (1) All vessels of 100 gross tons and over.
    (2) All vessels which carry more than 150 passengers.
    (3) All vessels on an international voyage.
    (b) The provisions of this subpart, with the exception of Sec. 
72.05-90, shall apply to all vessels noted in paragraph (a) of this 
section contracted for on or after May 26, 1965. Such vessels contracted 
for prior to May 26, 1965, shall meet the requirements of Sec. 72.05-
90.


<R05>
Sec. 72.05-5  Definitions.

    Note: The parenthetical number after each space refers to the 
applicable column and row number in tables 72.05-10 (d) through (g).

    (a) Safety areas will be considered as including the following 
spaces:
    (1) Control stations, i.e., spaces containing the emergency source 
of power, and those spaces in which a continuous watch is maintained and 
in which navigating, radio, or fire-control equipment is located. (1)
    (2) Passenger and crew stairway and elevator enclosures. (2)
    (3) Passenger and crew communicating corridors. (3)
    (4) Open decks and enclosed promenades in way of lifeboat 
embarkation or lowering positions. (4) (See also paragraph (l) of this 
section.)
    (b) Accommodation spaces will be considered as including the 
following spaces:
    (1) Public spaces, such as halls, dining rooms, messrooms, lounges, 
cafes, and other similar spaces normally accessible during the voyage. 
(5) through (7) (Depending upon size and furnishings.)
    (2) Public sales rooms and similar spaces. (6) or (7) (Depending on 
size.)
    (3) Staterooms, including passenger and crew rooms, barber shops, 
beauty parlors, offices, dispensaries, etc. (5) or (6) (Depending on 
furnishings.)
    (4) Washrooms and toilet spaces, both public and private. (8)
    (5) Isolated lockers and small storerooms in accommodation areas. 
(6)
    (6) Isolated serving pantries, etc., in accommodation areas, with 
incombustible furnishings. (8)
    (7) Operating rooms. (8)
    (8) Small laundries containing only tubs and washing machines, with 
no facilities for drying other than small electric driers. (8)
    (9) Small cleaning gear lockers containing only slop sinks, and 
having no room for stowing materials other than a broom, mop, cleaning 
powder, soap, etc. (8)
    (10) Large cleaning gear lockers having considerable stowage space. 
(6) or (9)
    (c) Service spaces will be considered as including the following 
spaces:
    (1) Motion picture projection rooms and film stowage rooms. (6) or 
(9)
    (2) Galleys, main pantries, and storerooms, including alleyways and 
stairs, part of and for the exclusive use of such spaces. (9)

[[Page 42]]

    (3) Diet kitchens. (6) or (9) (Depending on furnishing.)
    (4) Work shops (not part of machinery spaces, galleys, etc.), large 
laundries, drying rooms, mail and baggage rooms, etc. (9)
    (5) Garbage disposal and stowage rooms, and trash stowage rooms. (9)
    (6) Paint and lamp rooms, and similar spaces containing highly 
combustible materials. (9)
    (d) Machinery spaces--will be considered as including the following 
spaces:
    (1) Main machinery spaces, including trunks and casings, alleyways, 
gratings, and stairways, part of and for the exclusive use of these 
spaces, auxiliary machinery spaces containing internal combustion 
machinery or other oil burning, heating, or pumping units, and fuel oil 
filling stations. (10)
    (2) Auxiliary machinery spaces containing only pumps, tanks, 
electrical machinery, ventilation or air conditioning equipment, 
resistors, steering machinery, stabilizer machinery, etc. (12) (Where 
such spaces contain considerable stowage space for combustibles.) (10)
    (e) Cargo spaces will be considered as including the following 
spaces:
    (1) Cargo holds, lockers, and trunks, both accessible and 
inaccessible and including refrigerated cargo spaces and cargo oil tanks 
intended for the alternate carriage of dry cargo. (11)
    (2) Cargo oil tanks if not intended for the alternate carriage of 
dry cargo. (12)
    (f) Miscellaneous spaces will be considered as including the 
following spaces:
    (1) Fuel and water tanks and voids. (12)
    (2) Open decks and enclosed promenades except in way of lifeboat 
embarkation and lowering positions. (13) (See also paragraph (l) of this 
section.)
    (3) Shaft alleys when separated from machinery spaces, and 
containing no space assigned for the stowage of combustibles. (12)
    (g) A standard fire test is one which develops in the test furnace a 
series of time-temperature relationships as follows:

5 minutes.................................  1,000 [deg]F.
10 minutes................................  1,300 [deg]F.
30 minutes................................  1,550 [deg]F.
60 minutes................................  1,700 [deg]F.
 

    (h) Main vertical zones are those sections, the mean length of which 
does not, in general, exceed 131 feet on any one deck, into which the 
hull, superstructure, and deckhouses are required to be divided by fire-
resisting bulkheads.
    (i) Where the term steel or other equivalent metal is used in this 
part, it is intended to require a material which, by itself or due to 
insulation provided, has structural and integrity qualities equivalent 
to steel at the end of the applicable fire exposure.
    (j) Working spaces will be considered as only those service and 
machinery spaces where personnel are normally employed as contrasted to 
those where personnel may occasionally visit or be employed for short 
periods of time.
    (k) Passenger or crew corridors over 8 feet in width will be 
considered as public spaces for the purpose of this subpart.
    (l) Spaces which might be considered as open decks due to the 
presence of permanent openings to the weather in one or more sides, or 
where any or all sides may be completely open to the weather, will be 
considered as interior or enclosed spaces for the purpose of this 
subpart if any spot on the overhead is more than 15 feet from the 
nearest opening to the weather. This requirement shall only apply to 
those portions of the space as are under a deck or canopy, but it shall 
not be considered as a restriction against permanent opening or a 
restriction against the materials used for a canopy. This paragraph 
shall not apply to open or enclosed promenades having a nominal width of 
15 feet or less.
    (m) Where balconies are installed opening into a space, the 
following general requirements shall be met:
    (1) For the purpose of meeting main vertical zone bulkhead spacing, 
the length of the space to which the balcony is open will be considered 
as being increased by an amount equal to the gross area of the balcony 
divided by the average width of the space.
    (2) Where balconies are formed by penetrating one or more decks, the 
bulkheads in the upper portion of the space are, in effect, part of a 
stepped or recessed deck and should be treated as such for fire control 
purposes. In this regard, particular attention should be given to the 
protection of openings

[[Page 43]]

with proper doors of the type indicated in Sec. 72.05-25(b)(9).
    (3) Two means of escape shall be provided for each balcony, at least 
one of which shall be independent of the space to which the balcony is 
open.


<R05>
Sec. 72.05-10  Type, location, and construction of fire control
bulkheads and decks.

    (a) The hull, structural bulkheads, decks, and deckhouses shall be 
constructed of steel or other equivalent metal construction of 
appropriate scantlings.
    (b) The hull, superstructure, and deck houses shall be subdivided by 
suitable structural steel or other equivalent metal bulkheads into main 
vertical zones, the mean length of which shall not, in general, exceed 
131 feet on any one deck. Where practicable, the main vertical zone 
bulkheads shall be kept in a single vertical plane. However, on vessels 
designed for special purposes, such as automobile or railroad car 
ferries, where the installation of such bulkheads would defeat the 
purpose for which the vessel is intended, equivalent means for 
controlling and limiting a fire may be substituted if specifically 
approved by the Commandant.
    (c) All bulkheads and decks shall be classed as A-60, A-30, A-15, A-
0, B-15, B-0, or C, depending upon the type of space on each side of the 
bulkhead or above and below the deck.
    (1) Bulkheads or decks of the ``A'' Class shall be composed of steel 
or equivalent metal construction, suitably stiffened and made intact 
with the main structure of the vessel, such as shell, structural 
bulkheads, and decks. They shall be so constructed that, if subjected to 
the standard fire test, they would be capable of preventing the passage 
of smoke and flame for 1 hour. In addition, they shall be so insulated 
with approved structural insulation, bulkhead panels, or deck covering 
that the average temperatures on the unexposed side would not rise more 
than 250 [deg]F. above the original temperature, nor would the 
temperature at any one point, including any joint, rise more than 325 
[deg]F. above the original temperature, within the time listed below:

Class A-60................................  60 minutes.
Class A-30................................  30 minutes.
Class A-15................................  15 minutes.
Class A-0.................................  0 minutes (i.e., no
                                             insulation requirements).
 

    (2) Bulkheads of the ``B'' Class shall be constructed with approved 
incombustible materials and made intact from deck to deck (or to ceiling 
as provided in paragraph (h) of this section) and to shell or other 
boundaries. They shall be so constructed that, if subjected to the 
standard fire test, they would be capable of preventing the passage of 
flame for \1/2\ hour. In addition, their insulation value shall be such 
that the average temperature of the unexposed side would not rise more 
than 250 [deg]F. above the original temperature, nor would the 
temperature at any one point, including any joint, rise more than 405 
[deg]F. above the original temperature within the time listed below:

Class B-15................................  15 minutes.
Class B-0.................................  0 minutes (i.e., no
                                             insulation requirements).
 

    (3) Class C bulkheads or decks shall be constructed of approved 
incombustible materials, but need meet no requirements relative to the 
passage of flame nor the limiting of temperature rise.
    (d) The minimum requirements for the bulkheads between the various 
spaces, where such bulkheads form the boundaries of main vertical zones, 
shall be as noted in table 72.05-10(d).
    (e) The minimum requirements for the bulkheads between the various 
spaces, where such bulkheads do not form the boundaries of main vertical 
zones, shall be as noted in table 72.05-10(e).
    (f) The minimum requirements for the decks between the various 
spaces, where such decks form the boundaries of stepped main vertical 
zones, shall be as noted in table 72.05-10(f).
    (g) The minimum requirements for the decks between the various 
spaces, where such decks do not form the boundaries of stepped main 
vertical zones, shall be as noted in table 72.05-10(g).

[[Page 44]]



                                                                        Table 72.05-10(d)--Bulkheads--Main Vertical Zone
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                             THIS SPACE:
                                   -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                       Staterooms
                                                                                         Staterooms    and public
                                                                                          and all      spaces of                  Washrooms                                           Open decks
                                                                                       public spaces   500 square     Public        toilet       Galley,                        Fuel      and
            ADJACENT TO                             Stairway               Life boat        with        feet or    spaces over   spaces, and       main                  Dry    and    enclosed
                                          Control      and     Corridors  embarkation  incombustible   less with    500 square     isolated     pantries,   Machinery   cargo  water  promenades
                                         stations   elevator              or lowering   veneers and   combustible   feet with   pantries with  storerooms,    spaces   spaces  tanks     (not
                                                   enclosures               stations   trim and fire  furnishings  combustible  incombustible      and                          and     safety
                                                                                         resistant        and      furnishings     fittings     workshops                      voids    areas)
                                                                                        furnishings     isolated
                                                                                                       storerooms
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 THIS SPACE:
-----------------------------------
Control stations..................   1     A-60       A-15       A-15         A-0          A-30          A-60         A-60           A-0          A-60        A-60      A-60    A-0       A-0
Stairway and elevator enclosures..   2   ........      A-0        A-0         A-0           A-0          A-60         A-60           A-0          A-60        A-60      A-60    A-0       A-0
Corridors.........................   3   ........  ..........     A-0         A-0           A-0           A-0          A-0           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
Lifeboat embarkation or lowering     4   ........  ..........  .........        C           A-0           A-0          A-0           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0         C
 stations.........................
Staterooms and all public spaces     5   ........  ..........  .........  ...........      A-15          A-15         A-15           A-0          A-30        A-30      A-30    A-0       A-0
 with incombustible veneers and
 trim and fire resistant
 furnishings......................
Staterooms and public spaces of      6   ........  ..........  .........  ...........  .............     A-60         A-60           A-0          A-60        A-60      A-60    A-0       A-0
 500 square feet or less with
 combustible furnishings, and
 isolated storerooms..............
Public spaces over 500 square feet   7   ........  ..........  .........  ...........  .............  ...........     A-60           A-0          A-60        A-60      A-60    A-0       A-0
 with combustible furnishings.....
Washrooms, toilet spaces, and        8   ........  ..........  .........  ...........  .............  ...........  ...........       A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
 isolated pantries with
 incombustible fittings...........
Galleys, main pantries,              9   ........  ..........  .........  ...........  .............  ...........  ...........  .............      A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
 storerooms, and workshops........
Machinery spaces..................  10   ........  ..........  .........  ...........  .............  ...........  ...........  .............  ...........     A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
Dry cargo spaces..................  11   ........  ..........  .........  ...........  .............  ...........  ...........  .............  ...........  .........    A-0    A-0       A-0
Fuel and water tanks and voids....  12   ........  ..........  .........  ...........  .............  ...........  ...........  .............  ...........  .........  ......   A-0       A-0
Open decks and enclosed promenades  13   ........  ..........  .........  ...........  .............  ...........  ...........  .............  ...........  .........  ......  .....        C
 (not safety areas)...............
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 45]]


                                                                      Table 72.05-10(e)--Bulkheads--Not Main Vertical Zones
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                             THIS SPACE:
                                   -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                       Staterooms
                                                                                         Staterooms    and public
                                                                                          and all      spaces of                  Washrooms                                           Open decks
                                                                                       public spaces   500 square     Public        toilet       Galley,                        Fuel      and
            ADJACENT TO                             Stairway               Life boat        with        feet or    spaces over   spaces, and       main                  Dry    and    enclosed
                                          Control      and     Corridors  embarkation  incombustible   less with    500 square     isolated     pantries,   Machinery   cargo  water  promenades
                                         stations   elevator              or lowering   veneers and   combustible   feet with   pantries with  storerooms,    spaces   spaces  tanks     (not
                                                   enclosures               stations   trim and fire  furnishings  combustible  incombustible      and                          and     safety
                                                                                         resistant        and      furnishings     fittings     workshops                      voids    areas)
                                                                                        furnishings     isolated
                                                                                                       storerooms
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 THIS SPACE:
-----------------------------------
Control stations..................   1      B-0        A-0        A-0         A-0          A-15          A-60         A-60           A-0          A-60        A-60      A-60    A-0       A-0
Stairway and elevator enclosures..   2   ........        C        A-0         A-0           A-0          A-60         A-60           A-0          A-60        A-60      A-60    A-0       A-0
Corridors.........................   3   ........  ..........       C         A-0           B-0           B-0          A-0           B-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
Lifeboat embarkation or lowering     4   ........  ..........  .........        C           A-0           A-0          A-0           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0         C
 stations.........................
Staterooms and all public spaces     5   ........  ..........  .........  ...........       B-0          B-15         A-15           B-0          A-15        A-15      A-15    A-0       A-0
 with incombustible veneers and
 trim and fire-resistant
 furnishings......................
Staterooms and public spaces of      6   ........  ..........  .........  ...........  .............     B-15         A-30           B-0          A-60        A-60      A-60    A-0       A-0
 500 square feet or less with
 combustible furnishings, and
 isolated storerooms..............
Public spaces over 500 square feet   7   ........  ..........  .........  ...........  .............  ...........     A-60           B-0          A-60        A-60      A-60    A-0       A-0
 with combustible furnishings.....
Washrooms, toilet spaces and         8   ........  ..........  .........  ...........  .............  ...........  ...........         C           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
 isolated pantries with
 incombustible fittings...........
Galleys, main pantries,              9   ........  ..........  .........  ...........  .............  ...........  ...........  .............    C \1\         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
 storerooms, and workshops........
Machinery spaces..................  10   ........  ..........  .........  ...........  .............  ...........  ...........  .............  ...........       C       A-0    A-0       A-0
Dry cargo spaces..................  11   ........  ..........  .........  ...........  .............  ...........  ...........  .............  ...........  .........    A-0    A-0       A-0
Fuel and water tanks and voids....  12   ........  ..........  .........  ...........  .............  ...........  ...........  .............  ...........  .........  ......   A-0       A-0
Open decks and enclosed promenades  13   ........  ..........  .........  ...........  .............  ...........  ...........  .............  ...........  .........  ......  .....        C
 (not safety areas)...............
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Class C bulkheads may be used between two similar spaces, such as between two similar storerooms. However, a Class A-0 bulkhead shall be used between dissimilar spaces, such as a storeroom
  and a dissimilar workshop.


[[Page 46]]


                                                                          Table 72.05-10(f)--Decks--Main Vertical Zones
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                             THIS SPACE:
                                   -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                       Staterooms
                                                                                         Staterooms    and public
                                                                                          and all      spaces of                  Washrooms                                           Open decks
                                                                                       public spaces   500 square     Public        toilet       Galley,                        Fuel      and
            ADJACENT TO                             Stairway               Life boat        with        feet or    spaces over   spaces, and       main                  Dry    and    enclosed
                                          Control      and     Corridors  embarkation  incombustible   less with    500 square     isolated     pantries,   Machinery   cargo  water  promenades
                                         stations   elevator              or lowering   veneers and   combustible   feet with   pantries with  storerooms,    spaces   spaces  tanks     (not
                                                   enclosures               stations   trim and fire  furnishings  combustible  incombustible      and                          and     safety
                                                                                         resistant        and      furnishings     fittings     workshops                      voids    areas)
                                                                                        furnishings     isolated
                                                                                                       storerooms
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 THIS SPACE:
-----------------------------------
Control stations..................   1     A-60       A-60       A-30         A-0          A-15          A-60         A-60           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
Stairway and elevator enclosures..   2     A-15        A-0        A-0         A-0           A-0           A-0          A-0           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
Corridors.........................   3     A-30        A-0        A-0         A-0           A-0           A-0         A-15           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
Lifeboat embarkation or lowering     4      A-0        A-0        A-0           C           A-0           A-0          A-0           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0         C
 stations.........................
Staterooms and all public spaces     5     A-30       A-30       A-15         A-0          A-15          A-15         A-30           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
 with incombustible veneers and
 trim and fire resistant
 furnishings......................
Staterooms and public spaces of      6     A-60       A-60       A-30        A-15          A-15          A-60         A-60           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
 500 square feet or less with
 combustible furnishings, and
 isolated storerooms..............
Public spaces over 500 square feet   7     A-60       A-60       A-60        A-30          A-30          A-60         A-60           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
 with combustible furnishings.....
Washrooms, toilet spaces, and        8      A-0        A-0        A-0         A-0           A-0           A-0          A-0           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
 isolated pantries with
 incombustible fittings...........
Galleys, main pantries,              9     A-60       A-60       A-60        A-30          A-30          A-60         A-60           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
 storerooms, and workshops........
Machinery spaces..................  10     A-60       A-60       A-60        A-30          A-30          A-60         A-60           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
Dry cargo spaces..................  11     A-60       A-60       A-60        A-30          A-30          A-60         A-60           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
Fuel and water tanks and voids....  12      A-0        A-0        A-0         A-0           A-0           A-0          A-0           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
Open decks and enclosed promenades  13      A-0        A-0        A-0           C           A-0           A-0          A-0           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0         C
 (not safety areas)...............
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 47]]


                                                                        Table 72.05-10(g)--Decks--Not Main Vertical Zones
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                             THIS SPACE:
                                   -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                       Staterooms
                                                                                         Staterooms    and public
                                                                                          and all      spaces of                  Washrooms                                           Open decks
                                                                                       public spaces   500 square     Public        toilet       Galley,                        Fuel      and
            ADJACENT TO                             Stairway               Life boat        with        feet or    spaces over   spaces, and       main                  Dry    and    enclosed
                                          Control      and     Corridors  embarkation  incombustible   less with    500 square     isolated     pantries,   Machinery   cargo  water  promenades
                                         stations   elevator              or lowering   veneers and   combustible   feet with   pantries with  storerooms,    spaces   spaces  tanks     (not
                                                   enclosures               stations   trim and fire  furnishings  combustible  incombustible      and                          and     safety
                                                                                         resistant        and      furnishings     fittings     workshops                      voids    areas)
                                                                                        furnishings     isolated
                                                                                                       storerooms
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 THIS SPACE:
-----------------------------------
Control stations..................   1     A-30       A-30       A-15         A-0           A-0          A-15         A-30           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
Stairway and elevator enclosures..   2      A-0          C        A-0         A-0           A-0           A-0          A-0           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
Corridors.........................   3     A-15        A-0        A-0         A-0           A-0           A-0         A-15           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
Lifeboat embarkation or lowering     4      A-0        A-0        A-0           C           A-0           A-0          A-0           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0         C
 stations.........................
Staterooms and all public spaces     5     A-15       A-15        A-0         A-0           A-0           A-0         A-15           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
 with incombustible veneers and
 trim and fire resistant
 furnishings......................
Staterooms and public spaces of      6     A-60       A-60       A-30        A-15           A-0          A-30         A-60           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
 500 square feet or less with
 combustible furnishings and
 isolated storerooms..............
Public spaces over 500 square feet   7     A-60       A-60       A-60        A-30          A-15          A-60         A-60           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
 with combustible furnishings.....
Washrooms, toilet spaces, and        8      A-0        A-0        A-0         A-0           A-0           A-0          A-0           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
 isolated pantries with
 incombustible fittings...........
Galleys, main pantries,              9     A-60       A-60       A-60        A-30          A-15          A-60         A-60           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
 storerooms, and workshops........
Machinery spaces..................  10     A-60       A-60       A-60        A-30          A-15          A-60         A-60           A-0           A-0           C       A-0    A-0       A-0
Dry cargo spaces..................  11     A-60       A-60       A-60        A-30          A-15          A-60         A-60           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
Fuel and water tanks and voids....  12      A-0        A-0        A-0         A-0           A-0           A-0          A-0           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0       A-0
Open decks and enclosed promenades  13      A-0        A-0        A-0           C           A-0           A-0          A-0           A-0           A-0         A-0       A-0    A-0         C
 (not safety areas)...............
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 48]]

    (h) Where ceilings or linings are fitted, ``B'' Class bulkheads, 
with the exception of those forming passageways, may stop at the ceiling 
or lining and need not continue to the deck or shell, provided the 
ceiling and/or lining is erected as indicated in paragraph (j) of this 
section. However, draft stops meeting at least Class B-0 requirements 
shall be fitted not more than 45 feet apart between the ceiling or 
lining and the deck or shell. The space behind the linings of stairways 
and similar trunks shall have similar draft stops at each deck.
    (i) Where Class B-15 bulkhead panels are required to go beyond the 
ceiling to the deck above, or beyond the lining to the shell, the 
portion of the bulkhead panel within the void space need only meet B-0 
requirements.
    (j) Where ``B'' Class panels are used, all four edges of the panel 
shall be retained by continuous steel or equivalent metal flanges on 
both sides of the panel offering at least \3/4\ inch coverage. The top 
and bottom flanges shall be so attached to the structural decks above 
and below so as to support and restrain the panels in the event of fire. 
Other methods of construction may be specifically approved by the 
Commandant if determined to be equivalent.
    (k) Any sheathing, furring, or holding pieces incidental to the 
securing of structural insulation shall be of approved incombustible 
materials.
    (l) Where linings or bulkhead panels are framed away from the shell 
or structural bulkheads, the deck within the void space so formed need 
only meet Class A-0 requirements.
    (m) Decks within accommodation spaces and inside safety areas may 
have an overlay for leveling or finishing purposes which need not meet 
the requirements for an approved deck covering. Such an overlay will not 
be considered as giving any insulating value and may not in general 
exceed \3/8\ of an inch in thickness. Greater thicknesses may be 
specifically approved by the Commandant for specific locations.
    (n) Rugs and carpets may be used in addition to any deck covering or 
overlay installed. Rugs and carpets used in stairways or corridors shall 
be of wool, or other materials having equivalent fire-resistive 
qualities.
    (o) Decking within surgical operating rooms shall be of a type which 
is acceptably conductive to prevent accumulation of dangerous 
electrostatic charges, and shall be in general agreement with ``Code for 
Flammable Anesthetics'' of issue in effect at the time the construction 
or alteration of the vessel is contracted for, published by the National 
Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269.
    (p) Decks in washrooms and toilet spaces, service, cargo, and 
machinery spaces, open decks, exterior safety areas, and enclosed 
promenades may have an overlay in any thickness. This overlay need not 
meet the requirements for an approved deck covering.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16903, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 95-072, 60 FR 
50463, Sept. 29, 1995; CGD 95-028, 62 FR 51204, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 72.05-15  Ceilings, linings, trim, and decorations in accommodation
spaces and safety areas.

    (a) Ceilings and linings and any furring incidental to their 
erection shall be of approved incombustible materials. Where such 
ceilings or linings are given credit for their insulating value in 
obtaining a bulkhead or deck classification they shall be of Class B-15 
bulkhead panel material, and the construction shall be as required by 
Sec. 72.05-10(j).
    (b) Bulkheads, linings, and ceilings may have a combustible veneer 
within a room not to exceed \2/28\ of an inch in thickness. However, 
combustible veneers shall not be used in passageways or stairway 
enclosures, or in spaces specifically restricted by tables 72.05-10 (d) 
through (g).
    (c) The total volume of combustible face trim, moldings, and 
decorations, including veneers, in any compartment shall not exceed a 
volume equivalent to \1/10\ inch veneer on the combined area of the 
walls of the compartment. Such trim, molding, or decorations shall not 
perform any structural function, and shall not be used in corridors or 
stairway enclosures.
    (d) Combustible veneers, trim, decorations, etc., shall not be used 
in or extend into hidden spaces such as behind

[[Page 49]]

linings or ceilings or in the matter of double bulkheads.
    (e) Nothing in this subpart shall be construed as prohibiting the 
covering of any surface with a reasonable number of coats of paint or 
with a Marine Finish meeting the requirements of subpart 164.012 of 
subchapter Q (Specifications) of this chapter. This includes corridors, 
stairway enclosures, and hidden spaces.
    (f) Partial bulkheads or decks used to subdivide a space for 
artistic treatment, privacy, etc., shall meet the requirements of Class 
C bulkheads.


<R05>
Sec. 72.05-20  Stairways, ladders, and elevators.

    (a)(1) Except as further noted the provisions of this section apply 
to all vessels.
    (2) For small vessels, special consideration for relief may be given 
where it is shown to be unreasonable or impracticable to meet the 
detailed requirements for stairway size, slope, dimensioning, and 
landing area.
    (3) Stairways, ladders, and elevators within main machinery spaces 
or cargo holds are not covered by the general provisions of this 
section, but shall meet the requirements of paragraph (b) of this 
section.
    (b) Stairways, ladders, and elevators within main machinery spaces 
and cargo holds shall meet the following requirements:
    (1) All stairways, ladders, and elevators shall be of steel.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (c) Deck penetrations shall meet the following requirements:
    (1) Where a continuous vertical deck penetration for a stairway or 
elevator exceeds one deck, the integrity of all decks involved shall be 
assured by enclosure bulkheads and decks meeting the applicable 
requirements of Sec. 72.05-10 (d) through (g), and by doors at all 
levels meeting the requirements of Sec. 72.05-25(b)(9).
    (2) Where only two decks are served by a stairway or elevator, the 
integrity of the deck involved may be assured as noted in the preceding 
paragraph. Alternately, the integrity may be maintained at one level 
only by means of bulkheads and by doors meeting the requirements of 
Sec. 72.05-25(b)(9). If the latter method is used, it should be noted 
that the integrity of a deck is involved, and accordingly, the bulkhead 
classifications should be selected from tables 72.05-10(f) or 72.05-
10(g), the spaces above or below being assumed to extend to the 
bulkheads and doors.
    (3) Stairways or elevators to a balcony within a space need not be 
enclosed, provided the stairway or elevator serves only the space and 
the balcony within the space.
    (d) For the purpose of this section, stairways are identified as 
follows:

Type 1--Main Vertical Zone enclosed stair towers.
Type 2--Enclosed stairways other than Type 1.
Type 3--Interior stairway not enclosed.
Type 4--Exterior stairways or exterior inclined ladders.

    (e) Each Main Vertical Zone shall be served by at least one Type 1 
stairway, so that independent of adjoining Main Vertical Zones, escape 
may be effected from any accommodation space or any other space where 
persons may be normally quartered or employed, to ALL other decks having 
any such spaces within the same Main Vertical Zone without coming out of 
the stair tower enclosure. Each Type 1 stairway shall give access to the 
Embarkation Deck or, if the Embarkation Deck does not extend to the 
portion of the vessel in question, to at least one weather deck from 
which convenient communication to the Embarkation Deck is provided by 
means of Type 4 stairways. In cases where a Type 1 stairway is 
accessible from two Main Vertical Zones, it may be considered as the 
required Type 1 stairway for both zones provided all boundaries of the 
stairway meet Main Vertical Zone requirements.
    (f) Insofar as is reasonable and practicable, Types 1 and 2 
stairways, and all elevator enclosures, should not give direct access to 
accommodations or other enclosed spaces in which a fire may originate.
    (g) The furnishings for Types 1 and 2 stairways, and all elevator 
enclosures, shall be as set forth in Sec. 72.05-55(c).
    (h) In general, curved, spiral, or winding stairways will not be 
permitted. Relaxation from this requirement may be permitted, provided, 
in the opinion of the Commandant, the

[[Page 50]]

proposed stairway is equivalent with respect to safety and dimensions to 
the stairways covered by this section.
    (i) For all types of stairways, the stairs, platforms, and landings 
shall be of sufficient strength to sustain a load of 100 pounds per 
square foot with a factor of safety of 4 based on the ultimate strength.
    (j) The stringers, treads, and all platforms and landings of all 
Types 1, 2, and 3 stairways shall be of solid steel construction. Risers 
shall be of approved incombustible material.
    (k) For all types of stairways, handrails shall be fitted on both 
sides of the stairs. For stairways in excess of 66 inches in width, 
additional center handrails shall be provided. All handrails shall be 
fitted at a vertical height above the tread at its nosing of between 33 
and 36 inches.
    (l) For all types of stairways, the stair width shall be clear of 
all obstructions other than the handrails.
    (m) Handrails and trim for all Types 1, 2, and 3 stairways shall be 
of approved ``incombustible materials.''
    (n) For all types of stairways, there shall be no variation in the 
width of the stairs, the depth of the tread, or the height of the risers 
in any flight. Where variation in height of riser or depth of tread in 
different flights is necessary, such variations shall be minimized.
    (o) For all types of stairways, the sum of the riser height and 
tread depth shall be at least 17 inches and not more than 18 inches. 
Types 1, 2, and 3 stairways having treads less than 10 inches in depth 
shall have a nosing of one inch or other means to provide additional 
room on the tread.
    (p) All stairways shall be dimensioned in accordance with table 
72.05-20(p), depending upon the type of stairway and the number of 
persons served.

                                                                    Table 72.05-20(p)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                              Maximum       Minimum stair tread width, in inches, based upon number of
                                                                              angle of          persons served by the stairway--Number of persons
              Type of stairway                        Primary use           inclination ----------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                             (degrees)     1-10    11-20    21-30    31-40    41-50    51-60    Over 60
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1..........................................  Passenger or crew............          40        28       30       32       34       36       40         44
2 or 3.....................................  Passenger....................          40        28       30       32       34       36       36         36
2 or 3.....................................  Crew.........................          50        28       30       30       30       30       30         30
4..........................................  Passenger or embarkation               45        28       30       30       30       30       30         30
                                              route.
4..........................................  Crew.........................          55        24       24       24       24       24       24         24
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (1) The maximum angle of inclination from the horizontal for any 
stairway shall be as given in table 72.05-20(p).
    (2) For all types of stairways, the minimum width shall be 
determined on a deck-by-deck basis. Except as further noted, on any 
particular deck, only those persons on that deck using the stairway are 
involved in the width determination. However, once a minimum required 
width has been established at any one level, that width may not be 
reduced at any subsequent deck level in the direction of normal escape. 
This does not prohibit the use of stair widths exceeding the required 
minimum for any particular flight or flights.
    (3) The various spaces shall be considered to have the number of 
persons in them as follows:
    (i) Passenger staterooms--designed capacity.
    (ii) Crew staterooms--two-thirds designed capacity.
    (iii) Theaters, dining halls, and similar spaces having fixed 
seating--maximum seating capacity.
    (iv) Lounges, club rooms, etc.--1 person for every 20 square feet of 
deck area.
    (v) Working spaces--normal operating capacity.
    (4) Type 1 stairways shall be dimensioned on a deck-by-deck basis as 
described in the previous subparagraphs. In determining the number of 
persons using a Type 1 stairway, all persons within the Main Vertical 
Zone or Zones

[[Page 51]]

in question are assumed to be using Type 1 stairways. No consideration 
is given to any Type 2 or 3 stairways that may be available. If more 
than one Type 1 stairway serves a particular Main Vertical Zone, the 
persons shall be distributed between the stairways dependent upon the 
arrangements, and the stairways shall be dimensioned accordingly. If in 
the normal operation of the vessel, a Type 1 stairway is intended for a 
greater number of persons than given by the foregoing, the larger number 
shall be used.
    (5) Types 2, 3, and 4 stairways shall be dimensioned on a deck-by-
deck basis as described in this paragraph. In determining the number of 
persons using the stairways, the normal operation of the vessel shall be 
the determining factor. In this respect, if any particular stairway 
forms part of a normal debarkation route, the number of persons using 
the stairway for that purpose shall be considered.
    (q) All types of stairways designed with a broken flight between any 
two decks shall conform to the additional requirements of this 
paragraph.
    (1) Any interruption of the slope or change of direction of the 
stairway shall be accomplished by means of an intermediate landing of 
rectangular or nearly rectangular shape based on the actual dimensions 
of the stairs landing thereon.
    (2) Each set of stairs of a broken flight shall be dimensioned 
independently, and shall conform to the minimum stair widths given in 
table 72.05-20(p).
    (r) Landings for stairways shall be provided in accordance with the 
applicable requirements of this paragraph.
    (1) For all types of stairways, at the top and bottom of each flight 
of stairs, there shall be a clear landing having an area at least equal 
to the square of the actual stair tread width.
    (2) For Type 1 stairways, there shall be provided within the 
enclosure at each deck level a landing having a minimum clear area in 
square feet, exclusive of the stairs, equal to 1.2 times the number of 
persons from that deck using the stairway.
    (3) Where an aisle around a stairway is required due to the 
relationship of the flights, such aisle shall have a clear width at all 
points at least equal to the actual stair tread width.
    (s) The total clear width of doors to stairways shall be as set 
forth in table 72.05-20(s), and shall meet all of the other applicable 
requirements of this paragraph.

                                                Table 72.05-20(s)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Minimum clear opening, in inches, of doors to
                                                          stairways based on number of persons served by doors--
         Type of stairway                Primary use                       Number of persons (N)
                                                         -------------------------------------------------------
                                                            1-10    11-20    21-30    31-40    41-50    Over 50
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.................................  Passenger or crew...       28       30       32       34       36  \1\ 0.75N
2 or 3............................  Passenger...........       28       30       32       34       36         36
2 or 3............................  Crew................       28       30       30       30       30         30
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Obtain clear opening in inches by multiplying the number of persons served (N) by 0.75.

    (1) The dimensioning of doors shall be based on the same 
fundamentals as described in paragraphs (p)(2) through (5) of this 
section for stairways. However, the number of people involved for a 
particular door shall be determined from the arrangements, each door 
being calculated independent of any other doors to the stairway at the 
same level.
    (2) In no case shall a clear door width be less than 28 inches.
    (3) On the Embarkation Deck, each Type 1 stairway shall provide at 
least 44 inches of exit door width to each side of the vessel. Exit may 
be provided directly to the weather or indirectly by passageways and/or 
corridors which lead to the weather.


<R05>
Sec. 72.05-25  Doors, other than watertight.

    (a) The general requirement for doors, other than watertight doors, 
are as follows:
    (1) All doors shall be capable of operation from either side by 1 
person.

[[Page 52]]

    (2) In public spaces, stairway enclosures, corridors, etc., all 
doors shall open in the direction of escape where practicable.
    (3) If it is desired to use decorative doors in addition to those 
required, they shall be constructed of approved incombustible materials 
and shall not interfere with the normal operation of the required doors, 
and shall open in the same direction if the required doors are in a main 
avenue of escape.
    (4) For the purpose of this subpart, all glass permitted in doors 
shall be at least \1/4\-inch thick. However, greater thickness may be 
required for strength purposes in certain locations. Except for hardwood 
doors permitted by paragraph (b)(8) of this section, all glass shall be 
fitted in steel or equivalent metal frames and shall be retained by 
steel or equivalent metal glazing beads or angles.
    (5) Where wire-inserted glass is required, and the single wire type 
is employed, the strands shall run horizontally and shall be not more 
than 2 inches apart.
    (6) Where hose ports are fitted, they shall be cut in the lower 
corner of the door on the side opposite the hinge so that if the hose is 
passed through the doorway when the door is open, it may be closed over 
the hose. The cut for the hose port should be approximately 6 inches 
square. A hinged or pivoted steel or equivalent metal cover shall be 
fitted in the cut, equipped with a bullet catch or similar method of 
fastening which will permit easy and automatic operation of the hinged 
cover.
    (7) Combustible veneers may be used in doors where permitted for, 
and subject to the same conditions as, the bulkheads in which the doors 
are hung.
    (8) The locking of doors may be permitted, except as noted in Sec. 
72.10-20.
    (b) Doors in ``A'' Class bulkheads shall meet the following 
requirements:
    (1) Doors in bulkheads required to be Class A-60, A-30, or A-15 
shall be of hollow steel or equivalent metal construction solidly filled 
with approved structural insulation capable of meeting the requirements 
for a Class A-15 bulkhead.
    (2) Doors in bulkheads required to be Class A-0 shall be of solid or 
hollow steel or equivalent metal construction capable of meeting the 
requirements of a Class A-0 bulkhead.
    (3) Doors shall have a latch with a minimum throw of \3/4\ inch 
which can be operated from either side of the door. Double swing doors, 
where permitted for the proper utility of the space, may have the latch 
normally inoperative.
    (4) Except as noted in paragraph (b)(8) of this section, doors may 
be fitted with not more than 100 square inches of glass, which shall be 
of the wire inserted type.
    (5) Vent grilles or louvers shall not be used in doors of this type.
    (6) The bottoms of doors may be undercut not to exceed \1/2\ inch 
above the door sill or top of approved deck covering. Rugs, and carpets, 
shall not pass through doorways, but linoleum and similar coverings may 
do so.
    (7) Door frames shall be of rigid construction, and shall provide at 
least a \1/2\ inch door stop at the sides and top, except:
    (i) Double doors capable of independent operation and latching may 
have a clearance between the doors not to exceed \1/8\ inch. However, if 
one door must always be closed first, a doorstop of at least \1/2\ inch 
shall be provided for the second door.
    (ii) Double swing doors, where permitted, may have a maximum 
clearance of \1/8\ inch at the tops and sides.
    (8) Doors opening out onto open decks shall either meet the 
applicable requirements of this paragraph, or they may be of hardwood 
having a minimum thickness of 1\3/4\ inches. In any case, no restriction 
as to the area of glass will be made for such doors insofar as this 
subpart is concerned. Only glass of the wire-inserted type may be fitted 
in such doors opening onto safety areas from accommodation spaces 
containing combustible type furniture and service, cargo, and machinery 
spaces.
    (9) Doors in stairway enclosures and Main Vertical Zone bulkheads 
shall, in addition to meeting the requirements of this paragraph, also 
meet the following requirements:
    (i) Doors, other than those which are normally locked, such as from 
staterooms, fan rooms, lockers, etc., shall be of the self-closing type 
capable of closing against a 3\1/2\ degree list, and

[[Page 53]]

such doors shall be numbered in accordance with Sec. 78.47-35 of this 
subchapter.
    (ii) All doors, except those that are kept normally closed, shall be 
of a type which are capable of release from the control station and from 
a position at the door. The release mechanism shall be so designed that 
the door will automatically close in the event of disruption to the 
control system; however, approved power operated watertight doors will 
be considered acceptable for this purpose. Holdback hooks, or other 
means of permanently holding the door open, not subject to control 
station release, will not be permitted. When double swing doors are 
permitted, they shall have a latch arrangement which is automatically 
engaged by the operation of the door release system.
    (iii) Double doors shall be so arranged that either door may be 
closed and latched independently.
    (iv) For additional requirements for stairway doors, see Sec. 
72.05-20(s).
    (c) Doors in ``B'' Class bulkheads shall meet the following 
requirements:
    (1) Doors may be of solid or hollow steel or equivalent metal 
construction or may be of steel or equivalent metal frame with glass 
panes or may be of approved incombustible materials of such construction 
as specifically approved by the Commandant.
    (2) No restriction as to the area of glass will be made for such 
doors, but all glass shall be of the wire-inserted type.
    (3) The lower half of such doors may contain vent grilles or louvers 
with a net area not to exceed 2 square feet.
    (4) Doors shall have a latch with a minimum throw of \3/8\ inch 
which can be operated from either side of the door. Double swing doors, 
where permitted for the proper utility of the space, may have the latch 
normally inoperative.
    (5) The bottoms of doors may be undercut not to exceed 1 inch above 
the door sill or top of approved deck covering. Rugs and carpets shall 
not pass through doorways but linoleum and similar covering may do so.
    (6) Door frames shall be of rigid construction, and shall provide at 
least a \1/2\ inch doorstop at the sides and top, except:
    (i) Double doors capable of independent operation and latching may 
have a clearance between the doors not to exceed \1/8\ inch. However, if 
one door must always be closed first, a door stop of at least \1/2\ inch 
shall be provided for the second door.
    (ii) Double swing doors, where permitted, may have a maximum 
clearance of \1/8\ inch at the tops and sides.
    (d) Doors in bulkheads required to be Class C shall be of approved 
incombustible materials.


<R05>
Sec. 72.05-30  Windows and airports.

    (a) For the purpose of this subpart, all glass in windows or 
airports shall be at least \1/4\ inch thick. However, greater thickness 
may be required for strength purposes in certain locations. All glass 
shall be fitted in steel or equivalent metal frames and shall be 
retained by steel or equivalent metal glazing beads or angles.
    (b) Where wire-inserted glass is required, and the single wire type 
is employed, the strands shall run horizontally and shall be not more 
than 2 inches apart.
    (c) Windows in Class B-0 bulkheads shall be fitted with wire 
inserted glass. Such windows opening onto passageways may not extend 
below the normal height of the storm rails.
    (d) Windows in Class B-15 bulkheads shall be fitted with wire 
inserted glass. In addition, such windows shall be fitted with a 
suitable steel or equivalent metal shutter capable of being operated 
manually as well as automatically by means of a fusible link.
    (e) Windows in interior ``A'' Class bulkheads shall be fitted with 
suitable steel or equivalent metal shutter capable of being operated 
manually as well as automatically from the control station by the same 
system used for the fire doors as noted in Sec. 72.05-25(b)(9)(ii). The 
metal shutter shall be insulated to meet the applicable bulkhead 
requirements.
    (f) Windows or air ports opening onto lifeboat embarkation or 
lowering spaces from service, cargo, or machinery spaces, or from 
control or accommodation spaces other than those containing only 
incombustible veneers and trim and fire resistant furnishings, shall be 
fitted with wire inserted glass.

[[Page 54]]

Other windows or air ports opening onto open decks or enclosed 
promenades need not have wire inserted glass.
    (g) Skylights to spaces containing auxiliary internal combustion 
machinery having an aggregate horsepower of 1,000 or more, and to boiler 
and main enginerooms, shall be capable of being closed from outside the 
space. If glass is fitted in such skylights, it shall be of the wire 
inserted type. The glass panels shall be fitted with permanently 
attached shutters of steel or equivalent metal.


<R05>
Sec. 72.05-35  Hatch covers and shifting boards.

    (a) Wood hatch covers may be used between cargo spaces. Hatch covers 
in other locations shall meet the requirements for deck construction 
noted in tables 72.05-10 (f) and (g).
    (b) Tonnage openings in ``A'' Class bulkheads shall be closed by 
means of steel plates.


<R05>
Sec. 72.05-40  Insulation, other than for structural fire protection.

    (a) Any insulation installed for heat and comfort, refrigeration 
(including air conditioning), or for any other purpose, and all material 
incidental to its installation, shall be approved Incombustible 
Materials. This paragraph shall not apply to such insulation installed 
in cargo spaces, refrigerated storerooms, individual refrigerator boxes, 
nor to pipe and machinery coverings or laggings within the machinery 
spaces.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 72.05-45  Paint.

    (a) An excessive number of coats of paint will be discouraged unless 
noncombustible paint is used.
    (b) Nitrocellulose or other highly flammable or noxious fume-
producing paints or lacquers shall not be used.


<R05>
Sec. 72.05-50  Ventilation.

    (a) Where the term duct is used in this section, it shall include 
trunks, plenums, and any other type of ventilation piping, chambers, or 
duct work.
    (b) Where automatic fire dampers are required, they shall be 
designed to operate at approximately 165 degrees F. for normal 
locations, and approximately 212 degrees F. for locations such as 
galleys. The dampers shall be so designed as to close against the 
anticipated draft in the duct. The damper shall be made accessible for 
periodic inspection by means of a hinged or bolted plate in the duct. 
The damper and the portion of duct containing the damper shall be 
constructed of at least \1/8\ inch steel plate suitably stiffened. No 
insulation need be applied to the damper blade.
    (c) Where ventilation ducts are required to meet bulkhead 
requirements, the space within the duct shall be considered to be the 
same as the space served by the ventilator, and the duct shall be 
insulated to meet the applicable requirements of tables 72.05-10(d) and 
72.05-10(e).
    (d) All ventilation systems shall be designed, where practicable, so 
that all ducts leading to the various enclosures are kept within the 
main vertical zones. No duct may serve spaces in more than one main 
vertical zone.
    (e) Where of necessity, ducts pass through main vertical zone 
bulkheads, automatic fire dampers shall be fitted adjacent to the 
bulkhead. The duct between the bulkhead and the damper shall meet the 
applicable bulkhead requirements. The damper shall be fitted on at least 
one side of the bulkhead with a visible indicator showing whether the 
damper is in the open or closed position. The indicator may be connected 
to the manual operating device rather than the damper blade so that it 
might show as being open when it had automatically closed, but could 
never be open if the indicator showed it to be closed. The damper shall 
be capable of being manually closed from both sides of the bulkhead. The 
operating positions for the damper shall be marked as required by Sec. 
78.47-53 of this subchapter.
    (f) Vent ducts serving stairway enclosures shall serve no other 
spaces.
    (g) Ventilation ducts serving cargo or main machinery spaces which 
pass through accommodation spaces or safety areas shall be fitted with 
an automatic fire damper adjacent to the point of entry. Between the 
bulkhead or deck and the damper, and in addition, on vertical ducts for 
a distance of

[[Page 55]]

6 feet above the damper, the duct shall meet the applicable bulkhead 
requirements.
    (h) Exhausts from galleys shall meet the applicable bulkhead 
requirements. In addition, an automatic damper shall be installed in 
exhaust ducts over frying vats, etc.
    (i) In all ventilation systems, manually operated dampers or other 
suitable means shall be provided in accessible locations, outside the 
spaces served by the system, for shutting off the passage of air in the 
event of fire; however, no dampers shall be placed in exhaust ducts from 
film lockers or projection rooms.
    (j) For information regarding controls of electrically powered 
ventilation systems, see subchapter J (Electrical Engineering) of this 
chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 72.05-55  Furniture and furnishings.

    (a) For the purpose of this subpart, rooms containing ``fire 
resistant furnishings'' will be considered to be those in which:
    (1) All case furniture such as desks, wardrobes, dressing tables, 
bureaus, dressers, etc., shall be constructed entirely of approved 
incombustible materials; except that a combustible veneer not exceeding 
\1/8\ inch may be used on the top surface of such articles.
    (2) All free standing furniture such as chairs, sofas, tables, etc., 
shall be constructed with frames of approved incombustible materials.
    (3) All draperies shall be of approved fire resistant fabrics.
    (4) All rugs and carpets shall be of wool or other material having 
equivalent fire resistive qualities.
    (b) Waste paper baskets shall be constructed of approved 
incombustible materials with solid sides and bottoms.
    (c) Passageways and stairway enclosures shall contain only fire 
resistant furnishings. In addition, all upholstery and padding of 
chairs, sofas, etc., in these areas, shall be of approved fire resistant 
materials.


<R05>
Sec. 72.05-90  Vessels contracted for prior to May 26, 1965.

    (a) Vessels of 100 gross tons and over, contracted for prior to May 
26, 1965, on an international voyage; and vessels of 100 gross tons and 
over, contracted for on or after May 28, 1936, and prior to May 26, 
1965, not on an international voyage; shall meet the following 
requirements:
    (1) Existing structure, arrangements, and materials previously 
approved will be considered satisfactory so long as they meet the 
minimum requirements of this paragraph and are maintained in good 
condition to the satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspection. Minor repairs and alterations may be made to the same 
standards as the original construction.
    (2) The details shall be in general agreement with Sec. Sec. 72.05-
5 through 72.05-60.
    (b) Vessels of 100 gross tons and over, contracted for prior to May 
28, 1936, not on an international voyage, shall meet the following 
requirements:
    (1) Existing structure, arrangements, and materials previously 
approved will be considered satisfactory so long as they meet the 
minimum requirements of this paragraph and are maintained in good 
condition to the satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspection. Minor repairs and alterations may be made to the same 
standards as the original construction.
    (2) All vessels in ocean or coastwise service shall be fitted above 
the bulkhead deck with fire-resisting bulkheads and doors spaced not 
more than 131 feet apart which are capable of resisting the passage of 
flame for a period of at least 1 hour.
    (3) All vessels with berth or stateroom accommodations for 50 or 
more passengers shall be fitted with an approved automatic sprinkling 
system unless deemed unnecessary by the Commandant. This system shall be 
so installed as to protect all enclosed parts of the vessel accessible 
to passengers or crew while the vessel is being navigated, except cargo 
holds, machinery spaces, and when of fire-resisting construction, 
toilets, bathrooms, and spaces of similar construction. Where, in the 
case of a particular vessel, the Commandant does not consider the 
installation of an automatic water-sprinkling system necessary, such 
vessel shall be protected in such enclosed parts of the vessel as the 
Commandant shall deem necessary, with an automatic electric or pneumatic 
fire-

[[Page 56]]

detecting and alarm system, used singly or in combination, of a type 
approved by the Commandant.
    (c) Vessels of less than 100 gross tons, contracted for prior to May 
26, 1965, which carry more than 150 passengers, shall meet the following 
requirements:
    (1) Existing structure, arrangements, and materials previously 
approved will be considered satisfactory so long as they meet the 
minimum requirements of this paragraph and are maintained in good 
condition to the satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspection. Minor repairs and alterations may be made to the same 
standards as the original construction.
    (2) For such vessels, contracted for on or after November 19, 1952, 
and prior to May 26, 1965, on an international voyage, the details shall 
be in general agreement with Sec. Sec. 72.05-5 through 72.05-60.

[CGFR 67-87, 32 FR 19180, Dec. 20, 1967]


<R04>
                      Subpart 72.10_Means of Escape


<R05>
Sec. 72.10-1  Application.

    (a) The provisions of this subpart, with the exception of Sec. 
72.10-90, shall apply to all vessels contracted for on or after November 
19, 1952. Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall meet 
the requirements of Sec. 72.10-90.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 72.10-5  Two means required.

    (a) There shall be at least two means of escape from all general 
areas accessible to the passengers or where the crew may be quartered or 
normally employed. At least one of these two means of escape shall be 
independent of watertight doors. For stairway continuity and general 
requirements for stairways see Sec. 72.05-20.
    (b) Elevators shall not be considered as one of the required means 
of escape.
    (c) Stairways serving only a space and a balcony to a space shall 
not be considered as one of the required means of escape.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16903, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 72-104R, 37 
FR 14233, July 18, 1972]


<R05>
Sec. 72.10-10  Location.

    (a) The two means of escape shall be as remote as practicable so as 
to minimize the possibility of one incident blocking both escapes.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 72.10-15  Vertical ladders not acceptable.

    (a) Vertical ladders and deck scuttles shall not in general be 
considered satisfactory as one of the required means of escape. However, 
where it is demonstrated that the installation of a stairway would be 
impracticable, a vertical ladder may be used as the second means of 
escape.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 72.10-20  No means for locking door.

    (a) No means shall be provided for locking doors giving access to 
either of the 2 required means of escape, except that crash doors or 
locking devices, capable of being easily forced in an emergency, may be 
employed provided a permanent and conspicuous notice to this effect is 
attached to both sides of the door. This paragraph shall not apply to 
outside doors to deckhouses where such doors are locked by key only and 
such key is under the control of one of the vessel's officers.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 72.10-25  Stairway size.

    (a) Stairways shall be of sufficient width to satisfactorily 
accommodate the number of persons having access to such stairs for 
escape purposes.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 72.10-30  Dead end corridors.

    (a) Dead end corridors, or the equivalent, more than 40 feet in 
length shall not be permitted.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 72.10-35  Public spaces.

    (a) In all cases, public spaces having a deck area of over 300 
square feet shall have at least two exits. Where practicable, these 
exits shall give egress to different corridors, rooms, or spaces to 
minimize the possibility of one incident blocking both exits.
    (b) [Reserved]

[[Page 57]]


<R05>
Sec. 72.10-40  Access to lifeboats.

    (a) The stairways, corridors, and doors shall be so arranged as to 
permit a ready and direct access to the various lifeboat embarkation 
areas.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 72.10-45  Weather deck communications.

    (a) Vertical communication shall be provided between the various 
weather decks by means of permanent inclined ladders. Where ladders are 
for the exclusive use of the crew for rapid communication, and do not 
form part of a normal escape route, vertical ladders may be employed.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 72.10-90  Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

    (a) Existing arrangements previously approved will be considered 
satisfactory so long as they are maintained in good condition to the 
satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection. Minor repairs 
and alterations may be made to the same standards as the original design 
provided that in no case will a greater departure from the standards of 
Sec. Sec. 72.10-5 through 72.10-45 be permitted than presently exists. 
Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as exempting any vessel 
from having 2 suitable means of escape from all main compartments which 
are accessible to the passengers or where the crew are normally 
quartered or employed.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
                        Subpart 72.15_Ventilation


<R05>
Sec. 72.15-1  Application.

    (a) The provisions of this subpart with the exception of Sec. 
72.15-90, shall apply to all vessels contracted for on or after November 
19, 1952. Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall meet 
the requirements of Sec. 72.15-90.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 72.15-5  Structural fire protection.

    See Sec. 72.05-50 for ventilation requirements pertaining to 
structural fire protection.

[CGD 72-104R, 37 FR 14233, July 18, 1972]


<R05>
Sec. 72.15-10  Vessels using fuel having a flashpoint of 
110 degrees F. or lower.

    (a) Where liquid fuel having a flashpoint of 110 degrees F. or lower 
is used for main or auxiliary machinery or for starting purposes, the 
spaces containing such machinery or fuel tanks shall have natural supply 
and mechanical ventilation as required by this section.
    (b) The requirements for the mechanical exhaust system shall be such 
as to assure the air changes as noted in table 72.15-10(b), depending 
upon the size of the space.

                            Table 72.15-10(b)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Size of space, cubic feet                     Minutes
--------------------------------------------------------------  per air
                       Over                          Not over    change
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                          500          2
500...............................................      1,000          3
1,000.............................................      1,500          4
1,500.............................................  .........          5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) Exhaust blower motors shall be outside of the ducts, and if 
mounted in any compartment required to be ventilated by this section, 
shall be of the explosion proof type. Blower blades shall be non-
sparking with reference to their housings.
    (d) Exhaust blower switches shall be located outside of any space 
required to be ventilated by this section, and shall be of the type 
interlocked with the ignition switch so that the blowers are started 
before the engine ignition is switched on. A red warning sign at the 
switch shall state that the blowers shall be operated prior to starting 
the engines for a sufficient time to insure at least one complete change 
of air in the compartments.
    (e) The area of the ducts shall be such as to limit the air velocity 
to a maximum of 2,000 feet per minute. Ducts may be of any shape, 
provided that in no case shall 1 dimension exceed twice the other.
    (f) At least 2 inlet ducts shall be located at 1 end of the 
compartment and they shall extend to the lowest part of the compartment 
or bilge on each side. Simliar exhaust ducts shall be led to the 
mechanical exhaust system from the lowest part of the compartment or 
bilge on each side of the compartment

[[Page 58]]

at the end opposite from that at which the inlet ducts are fitted.
    (g) All ducts shall be constructed of non-ferrous metal or 
galvanized ferrous metal not less than No. 22 USSG, intact and gastight 
from end to end and shall be of substantial construction. The ducts 
shall lead as direct as possible and be properly fastened and supported.
    (h) All supply ducts shall be provided with cowls or scoops having a 
free area not less than twice the required duct area. When the cowls or 
scoops are screened, the mouth area shall be increased to compensate for 
the area of the screen wire. Dampers shall not be fitted in the supply 
ducts. Cowls or scoops shall be kept open at all times except when the 
stress of weather is such as to endanger the vessel if the openings are 
not temporarily closed. Supply and exhaust openings shall not be located 
where the natural flow of air is unduly obstructed, or adjacent to 
possible sources of vapor ignition, nor shall they be so located that 
exhaust air may be taken into the supply vents.


<R05>
Sec. 72.15-15  Ventilation for closed spaces.

    (a) All enclosed spaces within the vessel shall be properly vented 
or ventilated. Means shall be provided to close off all vents and 
ventilators.
    (b) Means shall be provided for stopping all fans in ventilation 
systems serving machinery and cargo spaces and for closing all doorways, 
ventilators and annular spaces around funnels and other openings to such 
spaces, from outside these spaces, in case of fire.
    (c) The ventilation of spaces which are ``specially suitable for 
vehicles'' shall be in accordance with the provisions of this paragraph. 
In addition, if vehicles are operated inside of enclosed spaces, the 
ventilation shall be in accordance with subpart 78.83 of this 
subchapter.
    (1) Areas below the weather deck shall be provided with continuous 
pressure-positive ventilation at each level on which vehicles are 
transported.
    (2) The quantity of ventilating air shall be not less than 1 cubic 
foot per minute per square foot of deck area.
    (3) The ventilation shall be such as to prevent air stratification 
as well as to prevent accumulation of air pockets.
    (4) An alarm system shall be provided which will indicate the loss 
of required ventilation. The alarm location shall be in a normally 
manned space acceptable to the Commandant.

[CGFR 66-50, 30 FR 16903, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGFR 66-33, 31 FR 
15281, Dec. 6, 1966]


<R05>
Sec. 72.15-20  Ventilation for crew quarters and passenger spaces.

    (a) All crew and passenger spaces shall be adequately ventilated in 
a manner suitable to the purpose of the space.
    (b) On vessels of 100 gross tons and over, except for such spaces as 
are so located that under all ordinary conditions of weather, windows, 
ports, skylights, etc., and doors to passageways can be kept open, all 
crew spaces shall be ventilated by a mechanical system, unless it can be 
shown that a natural system will provide adequate ventilation. However, 
vessels which trade regularly in the tropics shall, in general, be 
fitted with a mechanical ventilation system.


<R05>
Sec. 72.15-90  Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

    (a) Existing arrangements previously approved will be considered 
satisfactory so long as they are maintained in good condition to the 
satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection. Minor repairs 
and alterations may be made to the same standards as the original design 
provided that in no case will a greater departure from the standards of 
Sec. Sec. 72.15-5 through 72.15-20 be permitted than presently exists.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
           Subpart 72.20_Accommodations for Officers and Crew

    Source: CGD 95-027, 61 FR 26002, May 23, 1996, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R05>
Sec. 72.20-1  Application.

    The provisions of this part, except Sec. 72.20-90, apply to all 
vessels contracted for after November 18, 1952. Vessels contracted for 
before November

[[Page 59]]

19, 1952, must meet the requirements of Sec. 72.20-90.


<R05>
Sec. 72.20-5  Intent.

    Accomodations provided for officers and crew on all vessels shall be 
securely constructed, properly lighted, heated, drained, ventilated, 
equipped, located, arranged, and insulated from undue noise, heat, and 
odors.


<R05>
Sec. 72.20-10  Location of crew spaces.

    (a) Crew quarters must not be located farther forward in the vessel 
than a vertical plane located at 5 percent of the vessel's length abaft 
the forward side of the stem at the designed summer load water line. 
However, for vessels in other than ocean or coastwise service, this 
distance need not exceed 8.5 meters (28 feet). For the purpose of this 
paragraph, the vessel's length must be as defined in Sec. 43.15-1 of 
subchapter E (Load Lines) of this chapter. Unless approved by the 
Commandant, no section of the deck head of the crew spaces may be below 
the deepest load line.
    (b) There must be no direct communication, except through solid, 
close fitted doors or hatches between crew spaces and chain lockers, or 
machinery spaces.


<R05>
Sec. 72.20-15  Construction.

    All crew spaces are to be constructed and arranged in a manner 
suitable to the purpose for which they are intended and so that they can 
be kept in a clean, workable, and sanitary condition.


<R05>
Sec. 72.20-20  Sleeping accommodations.

    (a) Where practicable, each licensed officer shall be provided with 
a separate stateroom.
    (b) Sleeping accommodations for the crew must be divided into rooms, 
no one of which shall berth more than 4 persons.
    (c) Each room shall be of such size that there is at least 2.78 
square meters (30 square feet) of deck area and a volume of at least 5.8 
cubic meters (210 cubic feet) for each person accommodated. The clear 
head room shall be not less than 190 centimeters (75 inches). In 
measuring sleeping accommodations any furnishings contained therein for 
the use of the occupants are not to be deducted from the total volume or 
from the deck area.
    (d) Each person shall have a separate berth and not more than one 
berth may be placed above another. The berth must be composed of 
materials not likely to corrode. The overall size of a berth must not be 
less than 68 centimeters (27 inches) wide by 190 centimeters (75 inches) 
long, except by special permission of the Commandant. Where two tiers of 
berths are fitted, the bottom of the lower berth must not be less than 
30 centimeters (12 inches) above the deck. The berths must not be 
obstructed by pipes, ventilating ducts, or other installations.
    (e) A locker must be provided for each person accommodated in a 
room.


<R05>
Sec. 72.20-25  Washrooms and toilet rooms.

    (a) There must be at least 1 toilet, 1 washbasin, and 1 shower or 
bathtub for each 8 members or portion thereof in the crew who do not 
occupy sleeping accommodations to which private or semi-private 
facilities are attached.
    (b) The toilet rooms and washrooms shall be located convenient to 
the sleeping quarters of the crew to which they are allotted but must 
not open directly into such quarters except when they are provided as 
private or semi-private facilities.
    (c) All washbasins, showers, and bathtubs must be equipped with 
adequate plumbing, including hot and cold running water. All toilets 
must be installed with adequate plumbing for flushing.
    (d) At least 1 washbasin must be fitted in each toilet room, except 
where private or semi-private facilities are provided and washbasins are 
installed in the sleeping rooms.
    (e) Where more than 1 toilet is located in a space or compartment, 
each toilet must be separated by partitions.


<R05>
Sec. 72.20-30  Messrooms.

    (a) Messrooms must be located as near to the galley as practicable 
except where the messroom is equipped with a steam table.
    (b) Each messroom must seat the number of persons expected to eat in 
the messroom at one time.

[[Page 60]]


<R05>
Sec. 72.20-35  Hospital space.

    (a) Each vessel which in the ordinary course of its trade makes 
voyages of more than 3 days duration between ports and which carries a 
crew of 12 or more, must be provided with a hospital space. This space 
must be situated with due regard to the comfort of the sick so that they 
may receive proper attention in all weathers.
    (b) The hospital must be suitably separated from other spaces and 
must be used for the care of the sick and for no other purpose.
    (c) The hospital must be fitted with berths in the ratio of 1 berth 
to every 12 members of the crew, or portion thereof, who are not berthed 
in single occupancy rooms, but the number of berths need not exceed 6.
    (d) The hospital must have a toilet, washbasin, and bathtub or 
shower conveniently situated. Other necessary suitable equipment such as 
a clothes locker, a table, and a seat must be provided.


<R05>
Sec. 72.20-40  Other spaces.

    Each vessel must have--
    (a) Sufficient facilities where the crew may wash and dry their own 
clothes, including at least 1 sink supplied with hot and cold fresh 
water;
    (b) Recreation spaces; and
    (c) A space or spaces of adequate size on an open deck to which the 
crew has access when off duty.


<R05>
Sec. 72.20-45  Lighting.

    Each berth must have a light.


<R05>
Sec. 72.20-50  Heating and cooling.

    (a) All manned spaces must be adequately heated and cooled in a 
manner suitable to the purpose of the space.
    (b) The heating and cooling system for accommodations must be 
capable of maintaining a temperature of 21 [deg]C (70 [deg]F) under 
normal operating conditions without curtailing ventilation.
    (c) Radiators and other heating apparatus must be so placed and 
shielded, where necessary, to avoid risk of fire, danger or discomfort 
to the occupants. Pipes leading to radiators or heating apparatus must 
be insulated where those pipes create a hazard to persons occupying the 
space.


<R05>
Sec. 72.20-55  Insect screens.

    Provisions must be made to protect the crew quarters against the 
admission of insects.


<R05>
Sec. 72.20-90  Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

    (a) Vessels of 100 gross tons and over, contracted for prior to 
March 4, 1915, must meet the requirements of this paragraph.
    (1) Existing structure, arrangements, materials, and facilities, 
previously approved will be considered satisfactory so long as they are 
maintained in a suitable condition to the satisfaction of the Officer in 
Charge, Marine Inspection.
    (2) Minor repairs and alterations may be made to the same standard 
as the original construction provided that in no case will a greater 
departure from the standards of Sec. Sec. 72.20-5 through 72.20-55 be 
permitted than presently exists.
    (b) Vessels of 100 gross tons and over, contracted for on or after 
March 4, 1915, but prior to January 1, 1941, must meet the following 
requirements:
    (1) Existing structure, arrangements, materials, and facilities, 
previously accepted or approved will be considered satisfactory so long 
as they are maintained in good condition to the satisfaction of the 
Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection. Minor repairs and alterations may 
be made to the same standard as the original construction.
    (2) Where reasonable and practicable, a minimum of 1 toilet, shower, 
and washbasin must be provided for each 10 members of the crew or 
fraction thereof.
    (3) Crew spaces must have a volume of at least 3.4 cubic meters (120 
cubic feet) and a deck area of at least 1.5 square meters (16 square 
feet) for each person accommodated.
    (4) Each crewmember shall have a separate berth, and berths may not 
be placed more than 2 high.
    (5) Each vessel, which in the ordinary course of its trade makes a 
voyage of more than 3 days duration between ports and which carries a 
crew of 12 or more persons, must be provided with a suitable hospital 
space for the exclusive use of the sick or injured. Berths must be 
provided in the ratio of 1 berth for each 12 members of the crew or

[[Page 61]]

fraction thereof, but the number of berths need not exceed 6.
    (6) The crew spaces must be securely constructed, properly lighted, 
heated, drained, ventilated, equipped, located, and arranged, and, 
practicable, must be insulated from undue noise and odors.
    (c) Vessels of 100 gross tons and over, contracted for on or after 
January 1, 1941, but prior to November 19, 1952, must meet the 
requirements of this paragraph.
    (1) Existing structure, arrangements, materials, and facilities, 
previously accepted or approved will be considered satisfactory so long 
as they are maintained in a good condition to the satisfaction of the 
Office in Charge, Marine Inspection. Minor repairs and alterations may 
be made to the same standard as the original construction.
    (2) There must be a minimum of 1 toilet, 1 shower, and 1 washbasin 
for each 8 members of the crew or fraction thereof who are not 
accommodated in rooms having attached private or semi-private 
facilities. Washbasins, showers, and bathtubs, if substituted for 
showers, must be equipped with adequate plumbing, including hot and cold 
running water.
    (3) Crew spaces must have a volume of at least 3.4 cubic meters (120 
cubic feet) and a deck of at least 1.5 square meters (16 square feet) 
for each person accommodated.
    (4) Each crewmember shall have a separate berth, and berths may not 
be placed more than two high.
    (5) Each vessel, which in the ordinary course of its trade makes a 
voyage of more than 3 days duration between ports and which carries a 
crew of 12 or more persons, must be provided with a suitable hospital 
space for the exclusive use of the sick or injured. Berths must be 
provided in the ratio of 1 berth for each 12 members of the crew or 
fraction thereof, but the member of berths need not exceed 6.
    (6) The crew spaces must be securely constructed, properly lighted, 
heated, drained, ventilated, equipped, located, and arranged, and, where 
practicable, must be insulated from undue noise heat, and odors.

[CGD 95-027, 61 FR 26002, May 23, 1996; 61 FR 35138, July 5, 1996]


<R04>
                 Subpart 72.25_Passenger Accommodations


<R05>
Sec. 72.25-1  Application.

    (a) The provisions of this subpart shall apply to all vessels.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 72.25-10  Location of passenger quarters.

    (a) The deck forming the deckhead of passenger quarters between 
adjacent watertight bulkheads shall not be below the deepest load line 
at any point within the watertight compartment in question.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 72.25-15  Passenger accommodations for excursion boats,
ferryboats, and passenger barges.

    (a) Except as specifically excluded by this section, separate public 
toilet spaces shall be provided for male and female passengers with at 
least the minimum equipment in each based upon the number of passengers 
permitted to be carried as set forth in table 72.25-15(a).

                            Table 72.25-15(a)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Number of passengers
--------------------------------------------------  Toilets   Washbasins
                 Over                    Not over
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                              100          1           1
100...................................        300          2           1
300...................................        500          3           2
500...................................      1,000          4           2
1,000.................................      1,500          5           3
1,500.................................      2,000          6           3
2,000.................................      2,500          7           4
2,500.................................      3,000          8           4
3,000.................................      3,500          9           5
3,500.................................      4,000         10           5
4,000.................................  .........      (\1\)       (\1\)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Additional facilities by extrapolation.

    (b) In the men's spaces, urinals may be substituted for toilets, 
provided at least one-half the required toilets are fitted.
    (c) On ferryboats and barges having a short run, passenger toilet 
facilities need not be fitted.

[[Page 62]]


<R04>
                 Subpart 72.30_Subdivision and Stability


<R05>
Sec. 72.30-1  Application.

    Each vessel must meet the applicable requirements in subchapter S of 
this chapter.

[CGD 79-023, 48 FR 51007, Nov. 4, 1983]


<R04>
                     Subpart 72.40_Rails and Guards


<R05>
Sec. 72.40-1  Application.

    (a) The provisions of this subpart, with the exception of Sec. 
72.40-90, shall apply to all vessels contracted for on or after July 1, 
1969. Vessels contracted for prior to July 1, 1969, shall meet the 
requirements of Sec. 72.40-90.
    (b) [Reserved]

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16903, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGFR 69-72, 34 FR 
17483, Oct. 29, 1969]


<R05>
Sec. 72.40-5  Where rails required.

    (a) All passenger vessels shall have efficient guard rails or 
bulwarks on decks and bridges as follows: The height of rails or 
bulwarks shall be at least 39\1/2\ inches from the deck. At the 
peripheries of the freeboard and superstructure decks and at the 
peripheries of all decks accessible to passengers, rails shall be in at 
least three courses including the top. The opening below the lowest 
course shall not be more than 9 inches. The courses shall not be more 
than 15 inches apart. In the case of ships with rounded gunwales the 
guard rail supports shall be placed on the flat of the deck. On other 
decks and bridges the rails shall be in at least two courses, including 
the top, approximately evenly spaced.
    (b) Where the height of the rails interferes with the business of 
the vessel, as in the case of a sport fishing vessel, other arrangements 
may be specifically approved by the Commandant. However, in general, the 
effective rail or bulwark height above the deck on which the passengers 
stand shall be at least 30 inches.
    (c) On the passenger decks of ferryboats, excursion vessels, and 
vessels of a similar type, the space below the top of the rail shall be 
fitted with suitable wire mesh or the equivalent. Depending upon the 
type of construction, the lower rail courses may not be required.
    (d) Where it can be shown to the satisfaction of the Commandant that 
a vessel is engaged exclusively in voyages of a sheltered nature, the 
provisions of paragraph (a) of this section may be relaxed.

[CGFR 69-72, 34 FR 17483, Oct. 29, 1969]


<R05>
Sec. 72.40-10  Storm rails.

    (a) Suitable storm rails shall be installed in all passageways and 
at the deckhouse sides where passengers or crew might have normal 
access. Storm rails shall be installed on both sides of passageways 
which are 6 feet or more in width.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 72.40-15  Vehicular ferries.

    (a) On vehicular ferries, suitable chains, cables, or other barriers 
shall be installed at the ends of the vehicle runways. In addition, 
suitable gates, rails, or other devices shall be installed as a 
continuation of the regularly required rails.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 72.40-20  Guards in dangerous places.

    (a) Suitable covers, guards, or rails shall be installed in way of 
all exposed and dangerous places such as gears, machinery, etc.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 72.40-90  Vessels contracted for prior to July 1, 1969.

    (a) Passenger vessels contracted for prior to July 1, 1969, assigned 
a deeper load line under part 42 of subchapter E (Load Lines) of this 
chapter shall have efficient guard rails or bulwarks as required by 
Sec. 72.40-5. Otherwise, existing structure, arrangements, materials, 
and facilities previously approved will be considered satisfactory so 
long as they are maintained in good condition to the satisfaction of the 
Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection. Minor repairs and alterations may 
be made to the same standards as the original construction provided that 
in no case will greater departure from the standards of Sec. Sec. 
72.40-5 through 72.40-20 be permitted than presently exists.

[[Page 63]]

    (b) [Reserved]

[CGFR 69-72, 34 FR 17483, Oct. 29, 1969]


<R03>
PART 76_FIRE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT--Table of Contents



                        Subpart 76.01_Application

Sec.
76.01-1 General.
76.01-2 Incorporation by reference.
76.01-5 Equipment installed but not required.

Subpart 76.05_Fire Detecting and Extinguishing Equipment, Where Required

76.05-1 Fire detecting systems.
76.05-5 Manual alarm system.
76.05-10 Supervised patrol system.
76.05-15 Fire main system.
76.05-20 Fixed fire extinguishing systems.
76.05-25 Hand portable fire extinguishers and semiportable fire 
          extinguishing systems.

                 Subpart 76.10_Fire Main System, Details

76.10-1 Application.
76.10-3 Water availability.
76.10-5 Fire pumps.
76.10-10 Fire station hydrants, hose and nozzles--T/All.
76.10-15 Piping.
76.10-90 Installations contracted for prior to May 26, 1965.

                 Subpart 76.13_Steam Smothering Systems

76.13-1 Application.
76.13-90 Installations contracted for prior to January 1, 1962.

       Subpart 76.15_Carbon Dioxide Extinguishing Systems, Details

76.15-1 Application.
76.15-5 Quantity, pipe sizes, and discharge rate.
76.15-10 Controls.
76.15-15 Piping
76.15-20 Carbon dioxide storage.
76.15-25 Discharge outlets.
76.15-30 Alarms.
76.15-35 Enclosure openings.
76.15-40 Pressure relief.
76.15-90 Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

            Subpart 76.17_Foam Extinguishing Systems, Details

76.17-1 Application.
76.17-5 Quantity of foam required.
76.17-10 Controls.
76.17-15 Piping.
76.17-20 Discharge outlets.
76.17-25 Additional protection required.
76.17-90 Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

             Subpart 76.23_Manual Sprinkling System, Details

76.23-1 Application.
76.23-5 Zoning.
76.23-10 Quantity, pipe sizes, and discharge rates.
76.23-15 Controls.
76.23-20 Piping.
76.23-25 Sprinkler heads.
76.23-90 Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

           Subpart 76.25_Automatic Sprinkling System, Details

76.25-1 Application.
76.25-5 Zoning.
76.25-10 Size and arrangement of sprinkler heads and pipe sizes.
76.25-15 Pumps and water supply.
76.25-20 Pressure tank.
76.25-25 Controls.
76.25-30 Piping.
76.25-35 Operation and installation.
76.25-90 Installations contracted for prior to September 30, 1997.

          Subpart 76.27_Electric Fire Detecting System, Details

76.27-1 Application.
76.27-5 Zoning.
76.27-10 Location and spacing of detectors.
76.27-15 Operation and installation.
76.27-90 Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

         Subpart 76.30_Pneumatic Fire Detecting System, Details

76.30-1 Application.
76.30-5 Zoning.
76.30-10 Location and spacing of tubing.
76.30-15 Operation and installation.
76.30-90 Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

              Subpart 76.33_Smoke Detecting System, Details

76.33-1 Application.
76.33-5 Zoning.
76.33-10 Location and spacing of accumulators.
76.33-15 Piping.
76.33-20 Operation and installation.
76.33-90 Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

[[Page 64]]

               Subpart 76.35_Manual Alarm System, Details

76.35-1 Application.
76.35-5 Zoning.
76.35-10 Location and spacing of manual alarm boxes.
76.35-15 Operation and installation.
76.35-90 Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

  Subpart 76.50_Hand Portable Fire Extinguishers and Semiportable Fire 
             Extinguishing Systems, Arrangements and Details

76.50-1 Application.
76.50-5 Classification.
76.50-10 Location.
76.50-15 Spare charges.
76.50-20 Semiportable fire extinguishers.
76.50-90 Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

                         Subpart 76.60_Fire Axes

76.60-1 Application.
76.60-5 Number required.
76.60-10 Location.

    Authority: 46 U.S.C. 3306; E.O. 12234, 45 FR 58801, 3 CFR, 1980 
Comp., p. 277; Department of Homeland Security Delegation No. 0170.1.

    Source: CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16940, Dec. 30, 1965, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R04>
                        Subpart 76.01_Application


<R05>
Sec. 76.01-1  General.

    (a) The provisions of this part shall apply to all vessels except as 
specifically noted in this part.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 76.01-2  Incorporation by reference.

    (a) Certain material is incorporated by reference into this part 
with the approval of the Director of the Federal Register under 5 U.S.C. 
552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. To enforce any edition other than that 
specified in this section, the Coast Guard must publish notice of change 
in the Federal Register and the material must be available to the 
public. All approved material is available for inspection at the 
National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). For information on 
the availability of this material at NARA, call 202-741-6030 or go to 
http://www.archives.gov/federal--register/code--of--federal--
regulations/ibr--locations.html. The material is also available for 
inspection at the U.S. Coast Guard, Office of Design and Engineering 
Standards (CG-521), 2100 2nd St., SW., Stop 7126, Washington, DC 20593-
7126, and is available from the sources listed below.
    (b) ASTM International (formerly American Society for Testing and 
Materials) (ASTM), 100 Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, PA 19428-
2959. ASTM F 1121-87 (1993), Standard Specification for International 
Shore Connections for Marine Fire Applications (``ASTM F 1121'')--76.10-
10.
    (c) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), 1 Batterymarch 
Park, Quincy, MA 02269-9101. NFPA 13-1996, Standard for the Installation 
of Sprinkler Systems (``NFPA 13'')--76.25-1, 76.25-90.
    (d) Underwriters Laboratories Inc. (UL), 12 Laboratory Drive, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709-3995. UL 19 Standard for Safety, Lined 
Fire Hose and Hose Assemblies (2001) (``UL 19''), Sec. 76.10-10.

[USCG-2003-16630, 73 FR 65192, Oct. 31, 2008, as amended by USCG-2009-
0702, 74 FR 49231, Sept 25, 2009]


<R05>
Sec. 76.01-5  Equipment installed but not required.

    (a) Where fire detecting or extinguishing systems or equipment are 
not required, but are installed, the system or equipment and its 
installation shall meet the requirements of this part.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
Subpart 76.05_Fire Detecting and Extinguishing Equipment, Where Required


<R05>
Sec. 76.05-1  Fire detecting systems.

    (a) Approved fire detecting systems shall be installed in locations 
as required by table 76.05-1(a) on the following vessels:
    (1) Any vessel on an international voyage.
    (2) Any vessel of more than 150 feet in length having sleeping 
accommodations for passengers.

[[Page 65]]



                            Table 76.05-1(a)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Fixed
             Space                 Detecting systems      extinguishing
                                                             systems
------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Safety areas
 
Wheelhouse or fire-control      None required \1\.....  None required
 room.                                                   \1\
Stairway and elevator            do \1\...............   Do.\1\
 enclosures.
Communication corridors.......   do \1\...............   Do.\1\
Lifeboat embarkation and         do...................   Do.
 lowering stations.
Radio room....................   do \1\...............   Do.\1\
 
        Accommodations
 
Staterooms, toilet spaces,       do \1\...............   Do.\1\
 isolated pantries, etc.
Offices, lockers, and isolated  Electric, pneumatic,     Do.\1\
 storerooms.                     or automatic
                                 sprinkling\1\.
Public spaces.................  None required with 20-   Do.\1\
                                 minute patrol.
                                 Electric, pneumatic,
                                 or automatic
                                 sprinkling with 1
                                 hour patrol\1\.
Open decks or enclosed          None required.........   Do.
 promenades.
 
        Service spaces
 
Galleys.......................   do \1\...............   Do.\1\
Main pantries.................   do \1\...............   Do.\1\
Motion picture booths and film  Electric, pneumatic,     Do.\1,2\
 lockers.                        or automatic
                                 sprinkling \1,2\.
Paint and lamp rooms..........  Smoke detecting \3\...  Carbon dioxide.
                                                         \4\
Inaccessible baggage, mail,     Smoke detecting \3\...  Carbon dioxide.
 and specie rooms and                                    \4\
 storerooms.
Accessible baggage, mail, and   Electric, pneumatic,    None required.
 specie rooms and storerooms.    or automatic            \1\
                                 sprinkling..
Refrigerated storerooms.......  None required.........   Do.
Carpenter, valet,               Electric, pneumatic,     Do.\1\
 photographic, and printing      or automatic
 shops, sales rooms, etc.        sprinkling..
 
       Machinery spaces
 
Coal fired boilers: Bunker and  None required.........   Do.\1\
 boiler space.
Oil fired boilers: Spaces        do...................  Carbon dioxide
 containing oil fired boilers                            or foam.\5\
 either main or auxiliary,
 their fuel oil service pumps,
 and/or such other fuel oil
 units as the heaters,
 strainers, valves, manifolds,
 etc., that are subject to the
 discharge pressure of the
 fuel oil service pumps,
 together with adjacent spaces
 to which oil can drain.
Internal combustion or gas       do...................  Carbon
 turbine propelling machinery                            dioxide.\6\
 spaces.
Electric propulsive motors or    do...................  None required.
 generators of open type.
Enclosed ventilating systems     do...................  Carbon dioxide
 for motors and generators of                            (in ventilating
 electric propelling machinery.                          system) \7\
Auxiliary spaces, internal       do...................  Carbon
 combustion or gas turbine.                              dioxide.\8\
Auxiliary spaces, electric       do...................  None required.
 motors or generators.
Auxiliary spaces, steam.......   do...................   Do.
Trunks to machinery spaces....   do...................   Do.
Fuel tanks....................   do...................   Do.\9\
 
         Cargo spaces
 
Inaccessible during voyage      Smoke detecting.......  Carbon
 (combustible cargo),                                    dioxide.\4\
 including trunks (excluding
 tanks).
Accessible during voyage        Smoke detecting,        Automatic or
 (combustible cargo).            electric, pneumatic     manual
                                 or automatic            sprinkling.
                                 sprinkling.
Vehicular deck (except where    None required.........  Manual
 no overhead deck is 30 feet                             sprinkling.
 in length or less).
Cargo oil tanks...............   do...................  Carbon dioxide
                                                         or foam.\4\
Specially suitable for          Smoke detecting,        Carbon dioxide,
 vehicles.                       electric, pneumatic     automatic or
                                 or automatic            manual
                                 sprinkling.             sprinkling.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Vessels of 100 gross tons and over contracted for on or before May
  27, 1936, and having combustible joiner work; shall be fitted with an
  automatic sprinkling system, except in relatively incombustible
  spaces.
\2\ Sprinkler heads may be attached to sanitary system provided
  electrical or pneumatic detecting is installed.
\3\ On vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, electric or
  pneumatic detecting may be substituted.
\4\ On vessels contracted for prior to January 1, 1962, a steam
  smothering system may be accepted. However, although existing steam
  smothering systems may be repaired, replaced, or extended, no new
  system contracted for on or after January 1, 1962, will be permitted.
\5\ Protection of auxiliary boilers, fuel oil units, valves and
  manifolds not required on vessels contracted for prior to November 19,
  1952.
\6\ Not required on vessels of less than 300 gross tons (except on an
  international voyage) using fuel with a flashpoint higher than 110
  [deg]F., where the space is normally manned.
\7\ Not required on vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.
\8\ Not required on vessels of less than 300 gross tons nor on vessels
  contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, except where fuel,
  including starting fuel, has a flashpoint of 110 [deg]F. or less.

[[Page 66]]

 
\9\ Where fuel having a flashpoint of 110 [deg]F. or lower is used, the
  space containing the fuel tanks shall be protected by a carbon dioxide
  system.

    (3) Any vessel of 150 feet or less in length, not on an 
international voyage, having sleeping accommodations for 50 or more 
passengers. Vessels in this category are not required to have a 
detecting system in the cargo spaces.
    (b) The arrangements and details of the fire detecting systems shall 
be as set forth in subparts 76.25 through 76.33.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16940, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGFR 65-33, 31 FR 
15282, Dec. 6, 1966]


<R05>
Sec. 76.05-5  Manual alarm system.

    (a) An approved manual alarm system shall be installed in all areas, 
other than the main machinery spaces, which are normally accessible to 
the passengers or crew on any vessel having sleeping accommodations for 
passengers or on any vessel on an international voyage.
    (b) The arrangement and details of the manual alarm system shall be 
as set forth in subpart 76.35.


<R05>
Sec. 76.05-10  Supervised patrol system.

    (a) A supervised patrol or watchman system shall be provided on all 
vessels as set forth in Sec. Sec. 78.30-10 and 78.30-15 of this 
subchapter.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 76.05-15  Fire main system.

    (a) Fire pumps, hydrants, hose, and nozzles shall be installed on 
the following vessels:
    (1) On all self-propelled vessels.
    (2) After July 1, 1957, on all barges with sleeping accommodations 
for more than six persons.
    (b) The arrangement and details of the fire main system shall be as 
set forth in subpart 76.10.


<R05>
Sec. 76.05-20  Fixed fire extinguishing systems.

    Approved fire extinguishing systems must be installed, as required 
by table 76.05-1(a) on all self-propelled vessels and on all barges with 
sleeping accommodations for more than six persons. Previously approved 
installations may be retained as long as they are maintained in good 
condition to the satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspection.

[CGD 95-027, 61 FR 35138, July 5, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 76.05-25  Hand portable fire extinguishers and semiportable 
fire extinguishing systems.

    (a) Approved hand portable fire extinguishers and semiportable fire 
extinguishing systems shall be installed on all vessels as set forth in 
subpart 76.50.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
                 Subpart 76.10_Fire Main System, Details


<R05>
Sec. 76.10-1  Application.

    (a) The provisions of this subpart, with the exception of Sec. 
76.10-90, shall apply to all fire main installations contracted for on 
or after May 26, 1965. Installations contracted for prior to May 26, 
1965, shall meet the requirements of Sec. 76.10-90.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 76.10-3  Water availability.

    (a) On all vessels on an international voyage, regardless of the 
date of construction, water pressure from the firemain protecting 
enclosed spaces shall be immediately available by maintenance of water 
pressure on the firemain at all times when passengers are aboard the 
vessel, or by remote control of fire pumps which control shall be easily 
operable and readily accessible.
    (b) Where approved remote controls are not installed, an alarm shall 
be fitted which will sound in the engine room indicating a drop of water 
pressure on the system.

[CGFR 67-87, 32 FR 19181, Dec. 20, 1967]


<R05>
Sec. 76.10-5  Fire pumps.

    (a) Vessels shall be equipped with independently driven fire pumps 
in accordance with table 76.10-5(a).

[[Page 67]]



                                                Table 76.10-5(a)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Gross tons                               Minimum number of     Hose
-----------------------------------------------------------------         pumps           and     Nozzle  Length
                                                                 ---------------------- hydrant  orifice    of
                          Over                              Not   International          size,    size,    hose,
                                                           over       voyage     Other   inches   inches   feet
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             100         2          1   1\1/2\    \1/2\       50
100.....................................................     500         2          1   1\1/2\    \5/8\       50
500.....................................................   1,500         2          2   1\1/2\    \5/8\       50
1,500...................................................   4,000         2          2   \1\ 2\1/ \1\ \7/  \1\ 50
                                                                                            2\       8\
4,000...................................................  ......         3          3   \1\ 2\1/ \1\ \7/  \1\ 50
                                                                                            2\       8\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 75 feet of 1\1/2\-inch hose and \5/8\-inch nozzles may be used where specified by Sec. 76.10-10(b).

    (b) Vessels on an international voyage shall have a minimum total 
fire pump capacity at least equal to two-thirds of the required total 
bilge pump capacity, but in no case less than that required by this 
section. Each of the required fire pumps shall have a capacity not less 
than 80 percent of the total required capacity divided by the number of 
required pumps.
    (c) Each pump shall be capable of delivering water simultaneously 
from the two highest outlets at a Pitot tube pressure of approximately 
50 p. s. i. Where one or both of these outlets is a 1\1/2\-inch siamese 
fitting, both branches of the siamese fitting at each such outlet shall 
be utilized for the purpose of this requirements.
    (d) Fire pumps shall be fitted on the discharge side with relief 
valves set to relieve at 25 p. s. i. in excess of the pressure necessary 
to maintain the requirements of paragraph (c) of this section or 125 p. 
s. i., whichever is greater. Relief valves may be omitted if the pumps, 
operating under shutoff conditions, are not capable of developing a 
pressure exceeding this amount.
    (e) Fire pumps shall be fitted with a pressure gauge on the 
discharge side of the pumps.
    (f) Fire pumps may be used for other purposes provided at least one 
of the required pumps is kept available for use on the fire system at 
all times. In no case shall a pump having connection to an oil line be 
used as a fire pump. Branch lines connected to the fire main for 
purposes other than fire and deck wash shall be arranged so that the 
requirements of paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section and any other 
services installed on the fire main can be met simultaneously.
    (g) The total area of the pipes leading from a pump shall not be 
less than the discharge area of the pump.
    (h) On vessels with oil fired boilers, either main or auxiliary, or 
with internal combustion propulsion machinery, where 2 fire pumps are 
required, they shall be located in separate spaces and the arrangement 
of pumps, sea connections, and sources of power shall be such as to 
insure that a fire in any one space will not put all of the fire pumps 
out of operation. However, in vessels of less than 300 feet in length, 
where it is shown to the satisfaction of the Commandant that it is 
unreasonable or impracticable to meet this requirement due to the size 
or arrangement of the vessel, or for other reasons, the installation of 
a total flooding carbon dioxide system may be accepted as an alternate 
method of extinguishing any fire which would affect the powering and 
operation of at least one of the required fire pumps.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16940, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 95-028, 62 FR 
51204, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 76.10-10  Fire station hydrants, hose and nozzles-T/ALL.

    (a) The size of fire hydrants, hose, and nozzles and the length of 
hose required shall be as noted in table 76.10-5(a).
    (b) In lieu of the 2\1/2\-inch hose and hydrants specified in table 
76.10-5(a), on vessels over 1,500 gross tons, the hydrants in interior 
locations may have siamese connections for 1\1/2\-inch hose. In these 
cases the hose shall be 75 feet in length, and only one hose will be 
required at each fire station; however, if all such stations can be 
satisfactorily served with 50-foot lengths, 50-foot hose may be used.
    (c) On vessels of 500 gross tons and over there must be at least one 
shore connection to the fire main available to each side of the vessel 
in an accessible location. Suitable cut-out valves and check valves must 
be provided. Suitable adaptors also must be provided for furnishing the 
vessel's shore connections with couplings mating those on the shore fire 
lines. Vessels of

[[Page 68]]

500 gross tons and over on an international voyage, must be provided 
with at least one international shore connection complying with ASTM F 
1121 (incorporated by reference, see Sec. 76.01-2). Facilities must be 
available enabling an international shore connection to be used on 
either side of the vessel.
    (d) Fire hydrants shall be of sufficient number and so located that 
any part of the vessel, other than main machinery spaces, accessible to 
the passengers or crew while the vessel is being navigated and all cargo 
holds may be reached with at least two streams of water from separate 
outlets, at least one of which shall be from a single length of hose. 
For the purpose of this requirement, all watertight doors and all doors 
in main vertical zone bulkheads and stairway enclosures shall be closed, 
although hose ports may be installed in doors other than watertight 
doors and doors in main vertical zone bulkheads for the passage of the 
hose. In main machinery spaces, all portions at such spaces shall be 
capable of being reached by at least two streams of water, each of which 
shall be from a single length of hose from separate outlets; however, 
this requirement need not apply to shaft alleys containing no assigned 
space for the stowage of combustibles. Fire hydrants shall be numbered 
as required by Sec. 78.47-20 of this subchapter.
    (e) All parts of the fire main located on exposed decks shall either 
be protected against freezing or be fitted with cut-out valves and drain 
valves so that the entire exposed parts of such piping may be shut off 
and drained in freezing weather. Except when closed to prevent freezing, 
such valves shall be sealed open.
    (f) The outlet at each fire hydrant shall be provided with a cock or 
valve fitted in such a position that the fire hose may be removed while 
the firemain is under pressure. In addition, the outlet shall be limited 
to any position from the horizontal to the vertical pointing downward, 
so that the hose will lead horizontally or downward to minimize the 
possibility of kinking.
    (g) Each fire hydrant must have at least one length of fire hose, a 
spanner, and a hose rack or other device for stowing the hose.
    (h) Fire hose shall be connected to the outlets at all times. 
However, on open decks where no protection is afforded to the hose in 
heavy weather, or where the hose may be liable to damage from the 
handling of cargo the hose may be temporarily removed from the hydrant 
and stowed in an accessible nearby location.
    (i) Fire hose shall not be used for any other purpose than fire 
extinguishing and fire drills.
    (j) Each firehose on each hydrant must have a combination solid 
stream and water spray firehose nozzle that meets the requirements in 
subpart 162.027 of this chapter. Firehose nozzles previously approved 
under subpart 162.027 of this chapter may be retained so long as they 
are maintained in good condition to the satisfaction of the Officer in 
Charge, Marine Inspection.
    (k) Firehose nozzles previously approved under subpart 162.027 of 
this chapter must have low-velocity water spray applicators also 
previously approved under subpart 162.027 of this chapter as follows--
    (1) In accommodation and service areas--two firehoses; and
    (2) In each propulsion machinery space containing an oil-fired 
boiler, internal combustion machinery, or oil fuel unit on a vessel on 
an international voyage or of 1000 gross tons or more--each firehose. 
The length of each applicator must be not more than 1.8 meters (6 feet).
    (l) Fixed brackets, hooks, or other means for stowing an applicator 
must be next to each fire hydrant that has an applicator under paragraph 
(k) of this section.
    (m) Fire hydrants, nozzles, and other fittings shall have threads to 
accommodate the hose connections noted in paragraph (l) of this section.
    (n) Firehose and couplings must be as follows:
    (1) Fire station hydrant connections shall be brass, bronze, or 
other equivalent metal. Couplings shall either--
    (i) Use National Standard fire hose coupling threads for the 1\1/2\ 
inch (38 millimeter) and 2\1/2\ inch (64 millimeter) hose sizes, i.e., 9 
threads per inch for

[[Page 69]]

1\1/2\ inch hose, and 7\1/2\ threads per inch for 2\1/2\ inch hose; or
    (ii) Be a uniform design for each hose diameter throughout the 
vessel.
    (2) Each section of firehose must be lined commercial firehose that 
conforms to UL 19 (incorporated by reference; see 46 CFR 76.01-2). Hose 
that bears the label of Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. as lined 
firehose is accepted as conforming to this requirement.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16940, Dec. 30, 1965]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
76.10-90, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.


<R05>
Sec. 76.10-15  Piping.

    (a) All piping, valves, and fittings shall meet the applicable 
requirements of subchapter F (Marine Engineering) of this chapter.
    (b) All distribution cut-off valves shall be marked as required by 
Sec. 78.47-15 of this subchapter.
    (c) For vessels on an international voyage, the diameter of the fire 
main shall be sufficient for the effective distribution of the maximum 
required discharge from two fire pumps operating simultaneously. This is 
in addition to Sec. 76.10-5(c). The discharge of this quantity of water 
through hoses and nozzles at a sufficient number of adjacent hydrants 
shall be at a minimum Pitot tube pressure of approximately 50 pounds per 
square inch.


<R05>
Sec. 76.10-90  Installations contracted for prior to May 26, 1965.

    (a) Installations contracted for prior to May 26, 1965, shall meet 
the following requirements:
    (1) Except as specifically modified by this paragraph, the 
requirements of Sec. Sec. 76.10-5 through 76.10-15 shall be complied 
with insofar as the number and general type of equipment is concerned. 
Existing equipment, except firehose nozzles and low-velocity water spray 
applicators, previously approved but not meeting the applicable 
requirements of Sec. Sec. 76.10-5 through 76.10-15 may be continued in 
service so long as they are maintained in good condition to the 
satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection. Minor repairs, 
alterations, and replacements may be permitted to the same standards as 
the original installation. However, all new installations or major 
replacements shall meet the applicable requirements in this part.
    (2) All vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall be 
fitted with fire pumps, hoses, and nozzles in accordance with table 
76.10-90(a)(2).

                          Table 76.10-90(a)(2)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Gross tons                        Minimum
-------------------------------------- Minimum    hose    Nozzle  Length
                                        number    and    orifice    of
                                Not       of    hydrant   size,    hose,
            Over                over    pumps    size,    inches   feet
                                                 inches
------------------------------------------------------------------------
100.........................    4,000       2   \1\ 1\1/ \1\ \5/  \1\ 50
                                                    2\       8\
4,000.......................  .......       3   \1\ 1\1/ \1\ \5/  \1\ 50
                                                    2\       8\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ May use 50 feet of 2\1/2\-inch hose with \7/8\-inch nozzles for
  exterior stations. May use 75 feet of 1\1/2\-inch hose with \5/8\-inch
  nozzles for interior station in which case such interior stations
  shall have siamese connections.

    (3) When reasonable and practicable, where two or more fire pumps 
are required, they shall not all be located in the same space. Vessels 
on an international voyage shall, however, comply with the requirements 
of Sec. 76.10-5(h).
    (4) The general requirements of Sec. 76.10-5(c) through (h), Sec. 
76.10-10(d) through (i), and Sec. 76.10-15, shall be complied with 
insofar as is reasonable and practicable. In addition, vessels on an 
international voyage shall comply with the requirements of Sec. 76.10-
5(b).
    (5) Vessels on an international voyage shall comply with the 
requirements of Sec. 76.10-3.
    (6) Firehose nozzles and low-velocity spray applicators must meet 
the requirements of Sec. Sec. 76.10-10(j), 76.10-10(k), and 76.10-10(l)
    (b) [Reserved]

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16940, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGFR 67-87, 32 FR 
19181, Dec. 20, 1967; CGD 76-086, 44 FR 2392, Jan. 11, 1979; CGD 95-027, 
61 FR 26004, May 23, 1996; USCG-2000-7790, 65 FR 58461, Sept. 29, 2000]


<R04>
                 Subpart 76.13_Steam Smothering Systems


<R05>
Sec. 76.13-1  Application.

    Steam smothering systems are not permitted on vessels contracted for 
on or after January 1, 1962. Previously approved installations may be 
retained as

[[Page 70]]

long as they are maintained in good condition to the satisfaction of the 
Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection.

[CGD 95-027, 61 FR 26004, May 23, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 76.13-90  Installations contracted for prior to January 1, 1962.

    (a) Installations contracted for prior to July 1, 1935, shall meet 
the following requirements:
    (1) Existing arrangements, materials, and facilities previously 
approved will be considered satisfactory so long as they meet the 
minimum requirements of this paragraph and they are maintained in good 
condition to the satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspection. Minor repairs and alterations may be made to the same 
standard as the original installation.
    (2) The main pipes and their branches to the cargo compartments and 
similar spaces shall be not less than 1\1/2\-inch pipe size and shall 
emanate from not more than two stations in easily accessible locations. 
If located on the open deck, the distribution manifolds shall be 
suitably protected by an enclosing cabinet or casing which shall be 
marked as required by Sec. 78.47-17 of this subchapter. Each branch 
line shall have a valve at the manifold which shall be marked as 
required by Sec. 78.47-15 of this subchapter.
    (3) Branches to paint lockers and similar small spaces may be taken 
from the nearest stream supply line and shall be not less than \3/4\-
inch pipe size. The valve shall be marked as required by Sec. 78.47-15 
of this subchapter.
    (b) Installations contracted for on or after July 1, 1935, but prior 
to November 19, 1952, shall meet the following requirements:
    (1) Existing arrangements, materials and facilities previously 
approved will be considered satisfactory so long as they meet the 
minimum requirements of this paragraph and they are maintained in good 
condition to the satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspection. Minor repairs, and alterations may be made to the same 
standard as the original installation.
    (2) Steam shall be available from the main or auxiliary boilers to 
provide at least one pound of steam per hour for each 50 cubic feet of 
gross volume of the largest compartment protected. Where reasonable and 
practicable, the steam pressure shall be at least 100 p.s.i.
    (3) The piping system shall meet the general requirements of 
paragraphs (c)(5) through (12) of this section insofar as is reasonable 
and practicable.
    (4) The minimum size of distribution piping and the number of 
branches to the various spaces shall be as given in table 76.13-90(b)(4) 
or by the following formula:

D=[radic]C/30,000 (1)

where:

D=Required diameter of pipe in inches.
C=Volume of compartment in cubic feet.

                          Table 76.13-90(b)(4)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
       Volume of compartment in cubic feet                     Pipe size
-------------------------------------------------  Number of    of each
                                                  branches to   branch,
                 Over                   Not over  compartment    inches
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                          30,000           1           1
30,000...............................     46,000           1      1\1/4\
46,000...............................     67,000           1      1\1/2\
67,000...............................     94,000  ...........     1\1/4\
94,000...............................    135,000           2      1\1/2\
135,000..............................    203,000           3      1\1/2\
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (5) The minimum size of the steam supply line from the boiler to the 
distribution and manifold shall be as given by the following formula:

D=[radic]C/60,000

(2)

where:

D=Diameter of pipe in inches.
C=Volume of all compartments in cubic feet.

    (c) Installations contracted for on or after November 19, 1952, but 
prior to January 1, 1962, shall meet the following requirements:
    (1) Existing arrangements, materials and facilities previously 
approved will be considered satisfactory so long as they meet the 
minimum requirements of this paragraph and they are maintained in good 
condition to the satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspection. Minor repairs and alterations may be made to the same 
standard as the original installation.
    (2) Steam shall be available from main or auxiliary boilers to 
provide at least one pound of steam per hour for each 12 cubic feet of 
the gross volume of the largest compartment to be protected.

[[Page 71]]

    (3) Although separate piping shall be led to each cargo hold and 
'tween deck, for the purpose of determining the amount of steam 
required, a cargo compartment will be considered as the space between 
adjacent watertight or firescreen bulkheads and from tank top or lowest 
deck to the deck head of the uppermost deck on which cargo may be 
carried. If a trunk extends beyond such deck, the trunk space shall be 
included. Tonnage openings shall be considered as sealed for this 
purpose.
    (4) A steam pressure of at least 100 p.s.i. shall be available 
unless specifically approved otherwise.
    (5) All piping, valves, and fittings shall meet the applicable 
requirements of subchapter F (Marine Engineering) of this chapter.
    (6) The distribution piping shall emanate from not more than three 
stations in easily accessible locations on the weather deck, and shall 
lead to the lower portion of each cargo hold, cargo 'tween deck, and 
other compartments protected. However, lines to paint lockers and 
similar small spaces may be taken from the nearest steam supply line.
    (7) The distribution line to each compartment shall be fitted with a 
shutoff valve. The valve shall be marked as required by Sec. 78.47-15 
of this subchapter.
    (8) The manifold steam supply line shall be fitted with a master 
valve at the manifold.
    (9) Provisions shall be made for draining the manifold and 
distribution lines to prevent them from freezing.
    (10) If located on the open deck, the distribution manifolds shall 
be suitably protected by an enclosing cabinet or casing. In any case, it 
shall be marked as required by Sec. 78.47-17 of this subchapter.
    (11) Piping shall not be led into or through spaces accessible to 
the passengers or crew while the vessel is being navigated, with the 
exception of machinery spaces and corridors. However, in special cases, 
arrangements to run piping through such spaces may be specifically 
approved by the Commandant, provided all joints are welded, suitable 
expansion bends are provided, and all piping is extra heavy.
    (12) Piping shall be used for no other purpose except that it may be 
incorporated with the fire detecting system, and where suitable 
provisions are made, it may be used for steaming out tanks.
    (13) The minimum size and number of branches to the various spaces 
shall be as given in table 76.13-90(c)(13). The distribution piping from 
the manifold to the branch lines shall have an area approximately equal 
to the combined areas of the branch lines served.

                          Table 76.13-90(c)(13)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
          Volume of spaces in cubic feet                       Pipe size
--------------------------------------------------- Number of   of each
                                                     branches   branch,
                  Over                    Not over  to spaces    inches
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               500          1      \3/4\
500....................................      5,000          1          1
5,000..................................     15,000          1     1\1/4\
15,000.................................     30,000          1     1\1/2\
30,000.................................     60,000          2     1\1/2\
60,000.................................    100,000          3     1\1/2\
100,000................................    190,000          4     1\1/2\
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (14) The steam supply line from the boiler to any distribution 
manifold shall be of sufficient size to supply all the branch lines to 
the largest compartment and to all adjacent compartments.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16940, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGFR 66-33, 31 FR 
15283, Dec. 6, 1966]


<R04>
       Subpart 76.15_Carbon Dioxide Extinguishing Systems, Details


<R05>
Sec. 76.15-1  Application.

    (a) Where a carbon dioxide extinguishing system is installed, the 
provisions of this subpart, with the exception of Sec. 76.15-90, shall 
apply to all installations contracted for on or after November 19, 1952. 
Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall meet the 
requirements of Sec. 76.15-90.
    (b) The requirements of this subpart are based on a ``high pressure 
system'', i.e., one in which the carbon dioxide is stored in liquid form 
at atmospheric temperature. Details for ``low pressure systems'', i.e., 
those in which the carbon dioxide is stored in liquid form at a 
continuously controlled low temperature, may be specifically approved by 
the Commandant where it is demonstrated that a comparable degree of

[[Page 72]]

safety and fire extinguishing ability is achieved.


<R05>
Sec. 76.15-5  Quantity, pipe sizes, and discharge rate.

    (a) General. The amount of carbon dioxide required for each space 
shall be as determined by the following paragraphs in this section.
    (b) Total available supply. A separate supply of carbon dioxide need 
not be provided for each space protected. The total available supply 
shall be at least sufficient for the space requiring the greatest 
amount.
    (c) Cargo spaces. (1) The number of pounds of carbon dioxide 
required for each space in cubic feet shall be equal to the gross volume 
of the space in cubic feet divided by 30.
    (2) Although separate piping shall be led to each cargo hold and 
'tween deck, for the purpose of determining the amount of carbon dioxide 
required, a cargo compartment will be considered as the space between 
adjacent watertight or firescreen bulkheads and from the tank top or 
lowest deck to the deck head of the uppermost space on which cargo may 
be carried. If a trunk extends beyond such deck, the trunk volume shall 
be included. Tonnage openings shall be considered as sealed for this 
purpose.
    (3) Branch lines to the various cargo holds and 'tween decks shall 
not be less than \3/4\ inch standard pipe size.
    (4) No specific discharge rate need be applied to such systems.
    (d) Machinery spaces, paint lockers, tanks, and similar spaces. (1) 
Except as provided in paragraph (d)(3) of this section, the number of 
pounds of carbon dioxide required for each space shall be equal to the 
gross volume of the space divided by the appropriate factor noted in 
table 76.15-5(d)(1). If fuel can drain from the compartment being 
protected to an adjacent compartment, or if the compartments are not 
entirely separate, the requirements for both compartments shall be used 
to determine the amount of carbon dioxide to be provided. The carbon 
dioxide shall be arranged to discharge into both such compartments 
simultaneously.

                           Table 76.15-5(d)(1)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Gross volume of compartment, cubic feet
--------------------------------------------------------------   Factor
                       Over                          Not over
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                          500         15
500...............................................      1,600         16
1,600.............................................      4,500         18
4,500.............................................     50,000         20
50,000............................................  .........         22
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (2) For the purpose of the above requirement of this paragraph, the 
volume of a machinery space shall be taken as exclusive of the normal 
machinery casing unless the boiler, internal combustion machinery, or 
fuel oil installations extend into such space in which case the volume 
shall be taken to the top of the casing or the next material reduction 
in casing area, whichever is lower. For installations contracted for on 
or after October 1, 1959, ``normal machinery casing'' and ``material 
reduction in casing area'' shall be defined as follows:
    (i) By ``normal machinery casing'' shall be meant a casing the area 
of which is not more than 40 percent of the maximum area of the 
machinery space.
    (ii) By ``material reduction in casing area'' shall be meant a 
reduction to at least 40 percent of the casing area.
    (3) For vessels on an international voyage contracted for on or 
after May 26, 1965, the amount of carbon dioxide required for a space 
containing propulsion boilers or internal combustion propulsion 
machinery shall be as given by paragraphs (d) (1) and (2) of this 
section or by dividing the entire volume, including the casing, by a 
factor of 25, whichever is the larger.
    (4) Branch lines to the various spaces shall be as noted in table 
76.15-5(d)(4).

                           Table 76.15-5(d)(4)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   Minimum                       Minimum
                                   nominal  Maximum quantity of  nominal
    Maximum quantity of carbon       pipe      carbon dioxide      pipe
     dioxide required, pounds       size,     required, pounds    size,
                                    inches                        inches
------------------------------------------------------------------------
100..............................   \1/2\   2,500..............  2\1/2\
225..............................   \3/4\   4,450..............       3
300..............................       1   7,100..............  3\1/2\
600..............................  1\1/4\   10,450.............       4
1,000............................  1\1/2\   15,000.............  4\1/2\
2,450............................       2
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 73]]

    (5) Distribution piping within the space shall be proportioned from 
the supply line to give proper distribution to the outlets without 
throttling.
    (6) The number, type, and location of discharge outlets shall be 
such as to give a uniform distribution throughout the space.
    (7) The total area of all discharge outlets shall not exceed 85 
percent nor be less than 35 percent of the nominal cylinder outlet area 
or the area of the supply pipe, whichever is smaller. The nominal 
cylinder outlet area in square inches shall be determined by multiplying 
the factor 0.0022 by the number of pounds of carbon dioxide required, 
except that in no case shall this outlet area be less than 0.110 square 
inch.
    (8) The discharge of at least 85 percent of the required amount of 
carbon dioxide shall be complete within 2 minutes.
    (e) Spaces specially suitable for vehicles. (1) The number of pounds 
of carbon dioxide required shall be equal to the gross volume of the 
largest ``tight'' space divided by 22. In no case, however, shall it be 
less than that required by paragraph (c) of this section.
    (2) The arrangement of valves and piping shall be such that the 
required quantity of carbon dioxide may be discharged into any ``tight'' 
space. The discharge of the required quantity of carbon dioxide shall be 
completed within 2 minutes.
    (3) Except as noted in paragraphs (e) (1) and (2) of this section, 
the requirements of paragraph (d) of this section shall apply.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16940, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGFR, 66-33, 31 
FR 15283, Dec. 6, 1966; CGD 95-028, 62 FR 51204, Sept. 30, 1997; USCG-
1999-6216, 64 FR 53225, 53226, Oct. 1, 1999; USCG-2010-0759, 75 FR 
60003, Sept. 29, 2010]


<R05>
Sec. 76.15-10  Controls.

    (a) Except as noted in Sec. 76.15-20(b), all controls and valves 
for the operation of the system shall be outside the space protected, 
and shall not be located in any space that might be cut off or made 
inaccessible in the event of fire in any of the spaces protected.
    (b) If the same cylinders are used to protect more than one hazard, 
a manifold with normally closed stop valves shall be used to direct the 
carbon dioxide into the proper space. If cylinders are used to protect 
only one hazard, a normally closed stop valve shall be installed between 
the cylinders and the hazard except for systems of the type indicated in 
Sec. 76.15-5(d) which contain not more than 300 pounds of carbon 
dioxide.
    (c) Distribution piping to the various cargo spaces shall be 
controlled from not more than two stations. One of the stations 
controlling the system for the main machinery space shall be located as 
convenient as practicable to one of the main escapes from the space. All 
control stations and the individual valves and controls shall be marked 
as required by Sec. Sec. 78.47-15 and 78.47-17 of this subchapter.
    (d) Systems of the type indicated in Sec. 76.15-5(d) shall be 
actuated by one control operating the valve to the space and a separate 
control releasing at least the required amount of carbon dioxide. These 
two controls shall be located in a box or other enclosure clearly 
identified for the particular space. Those systems installed without a 
stop valve shall be operated by one control releasing at least the 
required amount of carbon dioxide.
    (e) Where provisions are made for the simultaneous release of a 
given amount of carbon dioxide by operation of a remote control, 
provisions shall also be made for manual control at the cylinders. Where 
gas pressure from pilot cylinders is used as a means for releasing the 
remaining cylinders, not less than two pilot cylinders shall be used for 
systems consisting of more than two cylinders. Each of the pilot 
cylinders shall be capable of manual control at the cylinder, but the 
remaining cylinders need not be capable of individual manual control.
    (f) Systems of the type indicated in Sec. 76.15-5(d), other than 
systems for tanks, which are of more than 300 pounds of carbon dioxide, 
shall be fitted with an approved delayed discharge so arranged that the 
alarm will be sounded for at least 20 seconds before the carbon dioxide 
is released into the space. Such systems of not more than 300 pounds of 
carbon dioxide shall also have a similar delayed discharge, except for 
those systems for tanks and

[[Page 74]]

for spaces which have a suitable horizontal escape. This paragraph shall 
be applicable only to systems installed on or after July 1, 1957.
    (g) All distribution valves and controls shall be of an approved 
type. All controls shall be suitably protected.
    (h) Complete but simple instructions for the operation of the 
systems must be located in a conspicuous place at or near all pull 
boxes, stop valve controls and in the CO<INF>2</INF> cylinder storage 
room. On systems in which the CO<INF>2</INF> cylinders are not within 
the protected space, these instructions must also include a schematic 
diagram of the system and instructions detailing alternate methods of 
discharging the system should the manual release or stop valve controls 
fail to operate. Each control valve to branch lines must be marked to 
indicate the related space served.
    (i) If the space or enclosure containing the carbon dioxide supply 
or controls is to be locked, a key to the space or enclosure shall be in 
a break-glass-type box conspicuously located adjacent to the opening.

[CGFR 65-60, 30 FR 16940, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 74-100R, 40 
FR 6209, Feb. 10, 1975; USCG-1999-6216, 64 FR 53226, Oct. 1, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 76.15-15  Piping.

    (a) The piping, valves, and fittings shall have a bursting pressure 
of not less than 6,000 p.s.i.
    (b) All piping, in nominal sizes not over \3/4\ inch, shall be at 
least Schedule 40 (standard weight), and in nominal sizes over \3/4\ 
inch, shall be at least Schedule 80 (extra heavy).
    (c) All piping, valves, and fittings of ferrous materials shall be 
protected inside and outside against corrosion unless specifically 
approved otherwise by the Commandant.
    (d) A pressure relief valve or equivalent set to relieve between 
2,400 and 2,800 p.s.i. shall be installed in the distributing manifold 
or such other location as to protect the piping in the event that all 
branch line shut-off valves are closed.
    (e) All dead end lines shall extend at least 2 inches beyond the 
last orifice and shall be closed with cap or plug.
    (f) All piping, valves, and fittings shall be securely supported, 
and where necessary, protected against injury.
    (g) Drains and dirt traps shall be fitted where necessary to prevent 
the accumulation of dirt or moisture. Drains and dirt traps shall be 
located in accessible locations where possible.
    (h) Piping shall be used for no other purpose except that it may be 
incorporated with the fire detecting system.
    (i) Piping passing through living quarters shall not be fitted with 
drains or other openings within such spaces.
    (j) Installation test requirements:
    (1) Upon completion of the piping installation, and before the 
cylinders are connected, a pressure test shall be applied as set forth 
in this paragraph. Only carbon dioxide or other inert gas shall be used 
for this test.
    (2) The piping from the cylinders to the stop valves in the manifold 
shall be subjected to a pressure of 1,000 p.s.i. With no additional gas 
being introduced to the system, it shall be demonstrated that the 
leakage of the system is such as not to permit a pressure drop of more 
than 150 p.s.i. per minute for a 2-minute period.
    (3) The individual branch lines to the various spaces protected 
shall be subjected to a test similar to that described in the preceding 
paragraph with the exception that the pressure used shall be 600 p.s.i. 
in lieu of 1,000 p.s.i. For the purpose of this test, the distribution 
piping shall be capped within the space protected at the first joint 
ahead of the nozzles.
    (4) In lieu of the tests prescribed in the preceding paragraphs in 
this section, small independent systems protecting spaces such as 
emergency generator rooms, lamp lockers, etc., may be tested by blowing 
out the piping with air at a pressure of at least 100 p.s.i.


<R05>
Sec. 76.15-20  Carbon dioxide storage.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, the 
cylinders shall be located outside the spaces protected, and shall not 
be located in any space that might be cut off or made inaccessible in 
the event of a fire in any of the spaces protected.
    (b) Systems of the type indicated in Sec. 76.15-5(d), consisting of 
not more than 300 pounds of carbon dioxide, may have the cylinders 
located within the space protected. If the cylinder stowage is

[[Page 75]]

within the space protected, the system shall be arranged in an approved 
manner to be automatically operated by a heat actuator within the space 
in addition to the regular remote and local controls.
    (c) The space containing the cylinders shall be properly ventilated 
and designed to preclude an anticipated ambient temperature in excess of 
130 degrees F.
    (d) Cylinders shall be securely fastened and supported, and, where 
necessary, protected against injury.
    (e) Cylinders shall be so mounted as to be readily accessible and 
capable of easy removal for recharging and inspection. Provisions shall 
be available for weighing the cylinders.
    (f) Where subject to moisture, cylinders shall be so installed as to 
provide a space of at least 2 inches between the flooring and the bottom 
of the cylinders.
    (g) Cylinders shall be mounted in an upright position or inclined 
not more than 30 degrees from the vertical. However, cylinders which are 
fitted with flexible or bent syphon tubes may be inclined not more than 
80 degrees from the vertical.
    (h) Where check valves are not fitted on each independent cylinder 
discharge, plugs or caps shall be provided for closing outlets when 
cylinders are removed for inspection or refilling.
    (i) All cylinders used for storing carbon dioxide must be 
fabricated, tested, and marked in accordance with Sec. Sec. 147.60 and 
147.65 of this chapter.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16940, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 84-044, 53 FR 
7748, Mar. 10, 1988; USCG-1999-6216, 64 FR 53226, Oct. 1, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 76.15-25  Discharge outlets.

    (a) Discharge outlets shall be of an approved type.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 76.15-30  Alarms.

    (a) Spaces which are protected by a carbon dioxide extinguishing 
system and are normally accessible to persons on board while the vessel 
is being navigated, other than paint and lamp lockers and similar small 
spaces, shall be fitted with an approved audible alarm in such spaces 
which will be automatically sounded when the carbon dioxide is admitted 
to the space. The alarm shall be conspicuously and centrally located and 
shall be marked as required by Sec. 78.47-9 of this subchapter. For 
systems installed on or after July 1, 1957, alarms will be mandatory 
only for systems required to be fitted with a delayed discharge. Such 
alarms shall be so arranged as to sound during the 20 second delay 
period prior to the discharge of carbon dioxide into the space, and the 
alarm shall depend on no source of power other than the carbon dioxide.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 76.15-35  Enclosure openings.

    (a) Where mechanical ventilation is provided for spaces other than 
cargo and similar spaces which are protected by a carbon dioxide 
extinguishing system, provisions shall be made so that the ventilation 
system is automatically shut down with the operation of the system to 
that space.
    (b) Where natural ventilation is provided for spaces protected by a 
carbon dioxide extinguishing system, provisions shall be made for easily 
and effectively closing off the ventilation.
    (c) Means shall be provided for closing all openings to the space 
protected from outside such space. In this respect, relatively tight 
doors, shutters, or dampers shall be provided for openings in the lower 
portion of the space. The construction shall be such that openings in 
the upper portion of the space can be closed off either by permanently 
installed means or by the use of canvas or other material which is 
normally carried by the vessel.


<R05>
Sec. 76.15-40  Pressure relief.

    (a) Where necessary, relatively tight compartments such as 
refrigeration spaces, paint lockers, etc., shall be provided with 
suitable means for relieving excessive pressure accumulating within the 
compartment when the carbon dioxide is injected.
    (b) [Reserved]

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16940, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGFR 66-33, 31 FR 
15283, Dec. 6, 1966]

[[Page 76]]


<R05>
Sec. 76.15-90  Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

    (a) Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall 
meet the following requirements:
    (1) Existing arrangements, materials, and facilities previously 
approved shall be considered satisfactory so long as they meet the 
minimum requirements of this paragraph and they are maintained in good 
condition to the satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspection. Minor repairs and alterations may be made to the same 
standards as the original installation.
    (2) The details of the systems shall be in general agreement with 
Sec. Sec. 76.15-5 through 76.15-40 insofar as is reasonable and 
practicable, with the exception of Sec. 76.15-5(d) (1) through (3) 
covering spaces other than cargo spaces, which systems may be installed 
in accordance with paragraphs (a) (3) through (6) of this section. 
However, the foregoing exception shall not be permitted for vessels on 
an international voyage.
    (3) In boilerrooms, the bilges shall be protected by a system 
discharging principally below the floor plates. Perforated pipe may be 
used in lieu of discharge nozzles for such systems. The number of pounds 
of carbon dioxide shall be equal to the gross volume of the boiler room 
taken to the top of the boilers divided by 36. In the event of an 
elevated boilerroom which drains to the machinery space, the system 
shall be installed in the engine room bilge and the gross volume shall 
be taken to the flat on which the boilers are installed.
    (4) In machinery spaces where main propulsion internal combustion 
machinery is installed, the number of pounds of carbon dioxide required 
shall be equal to the gross volume of the space taken to the underside 
of the deck forming the hatch opening divided by 22.
    (5) In miscellaneous spaces other than cargo or main machinery 
spaces, the number of pounds of carbon dioxide required shall be equal 
to the gross volume of the space divided by 22.
    (6) Branch lines to the various spaces other than cargo and similar 
spaces, shall be as noted in table 76.15-90(a)(6). This table is based 
on cylinders having discharge outlets and siphon tubes of \3/8\-inch 
diameter.

                          Table 76.15-90(a)(6)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Number of cylinders                   Nominal pipe size
------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Over                Not over    Inches          Type
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         2      \1/2\  Standard.
2..............................          4      \3/4\   Do.
4..............................          6          1  Extra heavy.
6..............................         12     1\1/4\   Do.
12.............................         16     1\1/2\   Do.
16.............................         27          2   Do.
27.............................         39     2\1/2\   Do.
39.............................         60          3   Do.
60.............................         80     3\1/2\   Do.
80.............................        104          4   Do.
104............................        165          5   Do.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) [Reserved]

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16940, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGFR 67-87, 32 FR 
19181, Dec. 20, 1967; USCG-1999-6216, 64 FR 53226, Oct. 1, 1999]


<R04>
            Subpart 76.17_Foam Extinguishing Systems, Details


<R05>
Sec. 76.17-1  Application.

    (a) Where a foam extinguishing system is installed, the provisions 
of this subpart, with the exception of Sec. 76.17-90, shall apply to 
all installations contracted for on or after November 19, 1952. 
Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall meet the 
requirements of Sec. 76.17-90.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 76.17-5  Quantity of foam required.

    (a) Area protected. (1) For machinery and similar spaces, the system 
shall be so designed and arranged as to spread a blanket of foam over 
the entire tank top or bilge of the space protected. The arrangement of 
piping shall be such as to give a uniform distribution over the entire 
area protected.
    (2) Where an installation is made to protect an oil fired boiler 
installation on a flat which is open to or can drain to the lower engine 
room or other space, both the flat and the lower space shall be 
protected simultaneously. The flat shall be fitted with suitable 
coamings on all openings other than deck drains to properly restrain the 
oil and foam at that level. Other installations of a similar nature will 
be considered in a like manner.
    (3) Where a system is installed to protect a tank, it shall be so 
designed

[[Page 77]]

and arranged as to spread a blanket of foam over the entire liquid 
surface of the tank within the range of usual trim. The arrangement of 
piping shall be such as to give a uniform distribution over the entire 
area protected.
    (b) Rate of application. (1) For spaces other than tanks, the rate 
of discharge to foam outlets protecting the hazard shall be at least as 
set forth in this subparagraph.
    (i) For chemical foam systems with stored ``A'' and ``B'' solutions, 
a total of at least 1.6 gallons per minute of the two solutions shall be 
discharged for each 10 square feet of area protected.
    (ii) For other types of foam systems, the water rate to the dry 
powder generators or air foam production equipment shall be at least 1.6 
gallons per minute for each 10 square feet of area protected.
    (2) For tanks, the rate of discharge to foam outlets protecting the 
hazard shall be as set forth in paragraph (b)(1) of this section except 
that the value of 1 gallon per minute shall be substituted in both cases 
for the value of 1.6 gallons per minute.
    (c) Supply of foam producing material. (1) There shall be provided a 
quantity of foam producing material sufficient to operate the equipment 
at the discharge rate specified in paragraph (b) of this section for a 
period of at least 3 minutes for spaces other than tanks, and for at 
least 5 minutes for tanks.
    (2) A separate supply of foam agent need not be provided for each 
space protected. The total available supply shall be at least sufficient 
for the space requiring the greatest amount.
    (3) Where pumps are required, the water supply shall be from outside 
the space protected and shall in no way be dependent upon power from the 
space protected.


<R05>
Sec. 76.17-10  Controls.

    (a) The foam agent, its container, and all controls and valves for 
the operation of the system shall be of an approved type.
    (b) The foam agent container and all controls and valves for the 
operation of the system shall be outside the space protected and shall 
not be located in such space as might be cut off or made inaccessible in 
the event of fire in any of the spaces protected. The control space 
shall be as convenient as practicable to one of the main escapes from 
spaces protected, and shall be marked as required by Sec. 78.47-17 of 
this subchapter. Where pumps are required, it shall not be necessary 
that they be started from the control space.
    (c) Complete, but simple instructions for the operation of the 
system shall be located in a conspicuous place at or near the controls.
    (d) The valves to the various spaces served shall be marked as 
required by Sec. 78.47-15 of this chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 76.17-15  Piping.

    (a) All piping, valves, and fittings shall meet the applicable 
requirements of subchapter F (Marine Engineering) of this chapter.
    (b) All piping, valves, and fittings of ferrous materials shall be 
protected inside and outside against corrosion unless specifically 
approved otherwise by the Commandant.
    (c) All piping, valves, and fittings shall be securely supported, 
and where necessary, protected against injury.
    (d) Drains and dirt traps shall be fitted where necessary to prevent 
the accumulation of dirt or moisture.
    (e) Piping shall be used for no other purpose.


<R05>
Sec. 76.17-20  Discharge outlets.

    (a) Discharge outlets shall be of an approved type.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 76.17-25  Additional protection required.

    (a) In order that any residual fires above the floor plates may be 
extinguished when a foam system is installed for the protection of 
spaces other than tanks, at least 2 fire hydrants, in addition to those 
required for the machinery space by subpart 76.10, shall be installed 
outside of the machinery space entrances. Such hydrants shall be fitted 
with sufficient hose so that any part of the machinery space may be 
reached with at least 2 streams of water, and each hose shall be 
equipped with an approved combination nozzle, applicator, and self-
cleaning strainer as described in Sec. 76.10-10(j)(3).

[[Page 78]]

    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 76.17-90  Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

    (a) Installation contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall 
meet the following requirements:
    (1) Existing arrangements, materials, and facilities previously 
approved shall be considered satisfactory so long as they meet the 
minimum requirements of this paragraph and they are maintained in good 
condition to the satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspection. Minor repairs and alterations may be made to the same 
standards as the original installation.
    (2) The details of the systems shall be in general agreement with 
Sec. Sec. 76.17-5 through 76.17-20, with the exception of Sec. 76.17-
5(a)(2), insofar as is reasonable and practicable. A 6-inch blanket of 
foam in 5 minutes for tanks and 3 minutes for other spaces will be 
considered as meeting the requirements of Sec. 76.17-5.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
             Subpart 76.23_Manual Sprinkling System, Details


<R05>
Sec. 76.23-1  Application.

    (a) Where a manual sprinkling system is installed, the provisions of 
this subpart, with the exception of Sec. 76.23-90, shall apply to all 
installations contracted for on or after November 19, 1952. 
Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall meet the 
requirements of Sec. 76.23-90.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 76.23-5  Zoning.

    (a) Separate zones may be used for each deck, and on any particular 
deck, spaces separated by ``A'' or ``B'' Class bulkheads may be 
separately zoned.
    (b) On any particular deck, large common areas may be zoned in 
accordance with table 76.23-5(b). All such zones within one common area 
shall be of approximately the same size. Zones of this type shall 
overlap in such a manner that the end sprinkler heads of both adjoining 
zones will cover the identical area.

                            Table 76.23-5(b)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Square feet of common deck area                  Maximum
-------------------------------------------------------------- number of
                       Over                          Not over    zones
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                          800          1
800...............................................      1,800          2
1,800.............................................      3,000          3
3,000.............................................      5,000          4
5,000.............................................      9,000          5
9,000.............................................     16,000          6
16,000............................................     30,000          7
30,000............................................  .........          8
------------------------------------------------------------------------


<R05>
Sec. 76.23-10  Quantity, pipe sizes, and discharge rates.

    (a) General. (1) The system shall be so designed and arranged that 
the overhead is effectively sprayed and all portions of the deck are 
covered. The capacity shall be such that at least 12 gallons of water 
per minute are applied to each 100 square feet of deck area.
    (2) Piping, fittings, sprinkler heads, and pumps installed in 
accordance with the remainder of this section will be considered as 
meeting the above requirements. If alternate sizes or arrangements are 
used, it shall be demonstrated that these minimum requirements have been 
met.
    (b) Sprinkler heads. (1) Three-eighth inch open type sprinkler heads 
shall be used. Sprinkler heads shall be so arranged that no portion of 
the overhead is more than 7 feet from a sprinkler head.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (c) Pipe sizes. (1) The various pipe sizes shall be in proportion to 
the number of heads served. Minimum pipe sizes shall be as given in 
table 76.23-10(c).

                            Table 76.23-10(c)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Number of 3/8 inch heads served                  Minimum
--------------------------------------------------------------  nominal
                                                                  pipe
                       Over                          Not over    sizes,
                                                                 inches
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                            1      \3/4\
1.................................................          2          1
2.................................................          4     1\1/4\
4.................................................          6     1\1/2\
6.................................................         12          2
12................................................         18     2\1/2\
18................................................         30          3
30................................................         46     3\1/2\
46................................................         66          4
66................................................        120          5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (d) Fire pumps. (1) The fire pumps may be used for the sprinkling 
system

[[Page 79]]

provided there is sufficient total capacity to operate the largest zone 
of the sprinkling system with a Pitot tube pressure of at least 15 
p.s.i. at all heads and at the same time to deliver water from the two 
highest fire hose outlets in a manner similar to that described in Sec. 
76.10-5(c). In addition, on vessels over 750 gross tons, there shall be 
sufficient pumping capacity to also operate the second largest zone.


<R05>
Sec. 76.23-15  Controls.

    (a) The controls for the system shall be outside the spaces 
protected, and shall not be located in such space as might be cut off or 
made inaccessible in the event of fire in any of the spaces protected. 
The control space shall be marked as required by Sec. 78.47-18 of this 
subchapter. It shall not be necessary to start the pumps from the 
control space.
    (b) Distribution piping to the various zones shall be controlled 
from one station. Each branch line to the various zones shall be fitted 
with a stop valve which shall be marked as required by Sec. 78.47-15 of 
this subchapter.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16940, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by USCG-2004-18884, 
69 FR 58347, Sept. 30, 2004]


<R05>
Sec. 76.23-20  Piping.

    (a) All piping, valves, and fittings shall meet the applicable 
requirements of subchapter F (Marine Engineering) of this chapter.
    (b) All piping, valves, and fittings of ferrous materials shall be 
protected inside and outside against corrosion unless specifically 
approved by the Commandant.
    (c) All piping, valves, fittings, and sprinkler heads shall be 
securely supported, and where necessary, protected against injury.
    (d) Drains and dirt traps shall be fitted where necessary to prevent 
the accumulation of dirt or moisture.
    (e) Piping shall be used for no other purpose.


<R05>
Sec. 76.23-25  Sprinkler heads.

    (a) Sprinkler heads shall be of an approved type.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 76.23-90  Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

    (a) Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall 
meet the following requirements:
    (1) Existing arrangements, materials, and facilities previously 
approved shall be considered satisfactory so long as they meet the 
minimum requirements of this paragraph and they are maintained in good 
condition to the satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspection. Minor repairs and replacements may be made to the same 
standards as the original installation.
    (2) The details of the system shall be in general agreement with 
Sec. Sec. 76.23-5 through 76.23-25 insofar as is reasonable and 
practicable. Existing piping, pumping facilities, and sprinkler heads or 
perforated pipes may be retained provided all portions of the overhead 
are effectively sprayed and all portions of the deck are covered.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
           Subpart 76.25_Automatic Sprinkling System, Details


<R05>
Sec. 76.25-1  Application.

    Where an automatic sprinkling system is installed, the systems must 
comply with NFPA 13 (incorporated by reference; see 46 CFR 76.01-2).

[USCG-2003-16630, 73 FR 65192, Oct. 31, 2008]


<R05>
Sec. 76.25-5  Zoning.

    (a) The automatic sprinkling system shall be divided into separate 
zones to restrict the area covered by any particular alarm signal.
    (b) No sprinkling zone shall contain more than 250 sprinkler heads.
    (c) The sprinkling zone may cover more than one deck, in which case, 
the boundaries shall be maintained in a vertical line insofar as is 
reasonable and practicable. The boundaries of the zone shall be 
coincident with bulkheads of Class ``A'' construction such as main 
vertical zone or watertight bulkheads.
    (d) Spaces in different main vertical zones shall not be included in 
the same sprinkling zone.

[[Page 80]]


<R05>
Sec. 76.25-10  Size and arrangement of sprinkler heads and pipe sizes.

    (a) General. (1) The system shall be so designed and arranged that 
the overhead is effectively sprayed and that all portions of the deck 
are covered.
    (2) One-half inch sprinkler heads shall be used. Sprinkler heads 
shall be so arranged that no portion of the overhead or vertical 
projection of the deck is more than 7 feet from a sprinkler head.
    (b) Pipe sizes. (1) The sizes of branch lines, single cross mains, 
feed mains, and risers shall be in proportion to the number of sprinkler 
heads served. The minimum pipe sizes shall be as given in table 76.25-
10(b)(1).

                          Table 76.25-10(b)(1)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                Maximum number of heads
                                                        served
                                             ---------------------------
                                                 Vessels
                                                  whose        Vessels
                                              construction   constructed
                                                 is more     in general
      Minimum nominal pipe size, inches        combustible    agreement
                                                than that     with Sec.
                                              set forth in  Sec. 72.05-
                                               Sec. Sec. 5 through
                                                 72.05-5      72.05-60
                                                 through
                                                72.05-60
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1...........................................             2             2
1\1/4\......................................             3             3
1\1/2\......................................             5             5
2...........................................            10            10
2\1/2\......................................            20            40
3...........................................            40           250
3\1/2\......................................            65  ............
4...........................................           100  ............
5...........................................           160  ............
6...........................................           250  ............
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (2) If a complete loop cross main is employed, the size of such 
cross main shall be in proportion to the number of sprinkler heads 
served. The minimum pipe sizes shall be as given in table 76.25-
10(b)(2). The entire loop shall be of the same size pipe.

                          Table 76.25-10(b)(2)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                Maximum number of heads
                                                        served
                                             ---------------------------
                                                 Vessels
                                                  whose        Vessels
                                              construction   constructed
                                                 is more     in general
      Minimum nominal pipe size, inches        combustible    agreement
                                                than that     with Sec.
                                              set forth in  Sec. 72.05-
                                               Sec. Sec. 5 through
                                                 72.05-5      72.05-60
                                                 through
                                                72.05-60
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1...........................................             5             5
1\1/4\......................................             9             9
1\1/2\......................................            13            13
2...........................................            22            30
2\1/2\......................................            40            80
3...........................................            80           250
3\1/2\......................................           130  ............
4...........................................           250  ............
------------------------------------------------------------------------


<R05>
Sec. 76.25-15  Pumps and water supply.

    (a) An automatically controlled pump shall be provided to supply the 
sprinkling system and shall be used for no other purpose. The size and 
capacity of the pump shall be governed by the zone having the greatest 
capacity need for any one deck, and shall be suitable to operate at 
least the number of heads noted in table 76.25-15(a) with a Pitot tube 
pressure of at least 15 p.s.i. at all heads (approximately 20 GPM per 
head). There shall also be sufficient pumping capacity available, either 
from the automatic pump, the fire pumps, or other source, so that in 
conjunction with the automatic pump the total number of heads noted in 
table 76.25-15(a) may be operated with the same efficiency as noted 
above, and at the same time to deliver water from the two highest fire 
hose outlets in a manner similar to that described in Sec. 76.10-5(c). 
Intermediate values may be obtained by interpolation.

                            Table 76.25-15(a)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                 Number of    Number of
                                                   heads        heads
  Maximum number of heads on one deck in one     automatic    additional
                     zone                         pump to      pumps to
                                                   supply       supply
------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.............................................            5  ...........
10............................................           10  ...........
20............................................           10           10
30............................................           12           16
40............................................           15           18
50............................................           15           25
60............................................           20           25
80............................................           20           30
100...........................................           20           40
120...........................................           20           50
150...........................................           20           60
200...........................................           20           75

[[Page 81]]

 
250...........................................           20          100
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 76.25-20  Pressure tank.

    (a) A pressure tank or other suitable means shall be installed to 
permit early action of the system pending the starting of the pump. 
Sufficient fresh water shall be carried in the tank to fill the piping 
of the largest zone, and in addition, force out at least 200 gallons at 
the least effective head in the zone at a Pitot tube pressure of at 
least 15 p.s.i. Suitable check valves shall be installed to prevent salt 
water from entering the pressure tank, and low water and low pressure 
alarms shall be fitted.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 76.25-25  Controls.

    (a) The controls for the system shall be outside the spaces 
protected, and shall not be located in such space as might be cut off or 
made inaccessible in the event of fire in any of the spaces protected. 
The control space shall be marked as required by Sec. 78.47-17 of this 
subchapter.
    (b) Each supply line to the various zones shall be fitted with a 
stop valve which shall be marked as required by Sec. 78.47-15 of this 
subchapter. These valves shall be normally open, and shall indicate by 
an alarm if they are closed.


<R05>
Sec. 76.25-30  Piping.

    (a) All piping, valves, and fittings of ferrous materials shall be 
protected inside and outside against corrosion unless specifically 
approved by the Commandant.
    (b) All piping, valves, fittings, and sprinkler heads shall be 
securely supported, and, where necessary, protected against injury.
    (c) Drains and dirt traps shall be fitted where necessary to prevent 
the accumulation of dirt or moisture.
    (d) Piping shall be used for no other purpose.


<R05>
Sec. 76.25-35  Operation and installation.

    (a) The system shall be so arranged and installed that a fire in any 
of the protected spaces will open the affected sprinkler heads. Water 
from the pressure tank shall be immediately available to the affected 
sprinkler head and before the supply from the pressure tank is 
exhausted, the sprinkler pump shall be automatically started and shall 
supply the system until manually shut off. Suitable test stations shall 
be installed in each zone to test the operation of the system.
    (b) The system shall be so arranged and installed that the presence 
of a fire in any of the protected spaces will automatically be 
registered visibly and audibly in the pilothouse or fire control 
station. The visible notice shall automatically indicate the zone in 
which the alarm originated. On vessels over 150 feet in length, there 
shall also be an audible alarm in the engine room.
    (c) There shall be not less than two sources of power supply for the 
sea water pumps, air compressors and automatic alarms. Where the sources 
of power are electrical, these shall be a main generator and an 
emergency source of power. One supply shall be taken from the main 
switchboard, by separate feeders reserved solely for that purpose. Such 
feeders shall be run to a change-over switch situated near to the 
sprinkler unit and the switch shall normally be kept closed to the 
feeder from the emergency switchboard. The change-over switch shall be 
clearly labeled and no other switch shall be permitted in these feeders.
    (d) Where subject to freezing, sprinkler systems shall be of the dry 
pipe type.
    (e) The sprinkler heads, the cabinet, alarms, dry valves and 
actuating mechanisms shall be of an approved type.
    (f) In general, the sprinkler heads shall be rated not lower than 
135 degrees F. nor higher than 165 degrees F. However, in spaces where a 
high ambient temperature may be expected, sprinkler heads rated at 212 
degrees F. shall be used.
    (g) The automatic sprinkling system and all its components shall be 
used for no other purpose.

[[Page 82]]

    (h) All wiring and electrical circuits and equipment shall meet the 
applicable requirements of subchapter J (Electrical Engineering) of this 
chapter.
    (i) All piping, valves, fittings, pressure tanks, etc., must meet 
the applicable requirements of subchapter F (Marine Engineering) of this 
chapter.
    (j) A framed chart or diagram shall be installed in the wheelhouse 
or control station adjacent to the detecting cabinet indicating the 
location of the various detecting zones and giving instructions for the 
operation, maintenance, and testing of the system. This chart, or a 
separate card or booklet to be kept near the chart, shall have tabulated 
spaces for the date and signature of the licensed officer of the vessel 
who shall witness or conduct the periodic tests.
    (k) The audible alarms shall be identified as required by Sec. 
78.47-13 of this subchapter.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16940, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 74-125A, 47 
FR 15231, Apr. 8, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 76.25-90  Installations contracted for prior to September 30, 1997.

    (a) Existing arrangements, materials, and facilities previously 
approved shall be considered satisfactory so long as they meet the 
minimum requirements of this paragraph, and they are maintained in good 
condition to the satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspection. Minor repairs and replacements may be made to the same 
standards as the original installation.
    (b) The details of the system must be in general agreement with NFPA 
13 (incorporated by reference, see 46 CFR 76.01-2) insofar as is 
reasonable and practicable. Existing piping, pumping facilities, 
sprinkler heads, and operating devices may be retained provided a 
reasonable coverage of the spaces protected is assured.

[CGD 95-028, 62 FR 51204, Sept. 30, 1997, as amended by USCG-2003-16630, 
73 FR 65192, Oct. 31, 2008]


<R04>
          Subpart 76.27_Electric Fire Detecting System, Details


<R05>
Sec. 76.27-1  Application.

    (a) Where an electric fire detecting system is installed, the 
provisions of this subpart, with the exception of Sec. 76.27-90, shall 
apply to all installations contracted for on or after November 19, 1952. 
Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall meet the 
requirements of Sec. 76.27-90.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 76.27-5  Zoning.

    (a) The fire detecting system shall be divided into separate zones 
to restrict the area covered by any particular alarm signal.
    (b) All spaces in a fire detecting zone shall be accessible from one 
to another without leaving the deck involved. All doors in watertight 
subdivision bulkheads and main vertical zone bulkheads shall be assumed 
closed for the purpose of this requirement.
    (c) The fire detecting zone shall not include spaces on more than 
one deck, except:
    (1) Adjacent and communicating spaces on different decks in the ends 
of the vessel having a combined ceiling area of not more than 3,000 
square feet.
    (2) Isolated rooms or lockers in such spaces as mast houses, 
wheelhouse top, etc., which are easily communicable with the area of the 
fire-detecting circuit to which they are connected.
    (3) Systems with indicators for individual spaces.
    (d) The fire detecting zone shall not contain more than 50 protected 
rooms or spaces.


<R05>
Sec. 76.27-10  Location and spacing of detectors.

    (a) The detectors shall be located close to the overhead in the 
space protected. Where liable to physical damage, the detector shall be 
suitably protected.
    (b) Unless specifically approved otherwise, no spot on the overhead 
of a protected space shall be more than 10 feet from a detector. Where 
beams or girders extend below the ceiling, or where the ceiling is 
installed at more than one level, the detectors shall be so located as 
to be most effective.

[[Page 83]]


<R05>
Sec. 76.27-15  Operation and installation.

    (a) The system shall be so arranged and installed that the presence 
of a fire in any of the protected spaces will be automatically 
registered visibly and audibly in the pilothouse or fire control 
station. The visible notice shall indicate the zone in which the alarm 
originated. On vessels over 150 feet in length, there shall also be an 
audible alarm in the engine room.
    (b) The detectors, the detecting cabinet and alarms shall be of an 
approved type.
    (c) In general, the detectors, shall be rated not lower than 135 
degrees F. and not higher than 165 degrees F. However, in spaces where a 
high ambient temperature may be expected, detectors shall be rated not 
lower than 175 degrees F. and not higher than 225 degrees F.
    (d) The fire detecting system shall be used for no other purpose, 
except that it may be incorporated with the manual alarm system.
    (e) All wiring and electrical circuits and equipment shall meet the 
applicable requirements of subchapter J (Electrical Engineering) of this 
chapter.
    (f) A framed chart or diagram shall be installed in the wheelhouse 
or control station adjacent to the detecting cabinet indicating the 
location of the various detecting zones and giving instructions for the 
operation, maintenance, and testing of the system. This chart, or a 
separate card or booklet to be kept near the chart, shall have tabulated 
spaces for the date and signature of the licensed officer of the vessel 
who shall witness or conduct the periodic tests.
    (g) The audible alarms shall be identified as required by Sec. 
78.47-13 of this subchapter.


<R05>
Sec. 76.27-90  Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

    (a) Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall 
meet the following requirements:
    (1) Existing arrangements, materials, and equipment previously 
approved shall be considered satisfactory so long as they meet the 
minimum requirements of this paragraph, and they are maintained in good 
condition to the satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspection. Minor repairs and alterations may be made to the same 
standards as the original installation.
    (2) The details of the systems shall be in general agreement with 
Sec. Sec. 76.27-5 through 76.27-15 insofar as is reasonable and 
practicable.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
         Subpart 76.30_Pneumatic Fire Detecting System, Details


<R05>
Sec. 76.30-1  Application.

    (a) Where a pneumatic fire detecting system is installed, the 
provisions of this subpart, with the exception of Sec. 76.30-90, shall 
apply to all installations contracted for on or after November 19, 1952. 
Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall meet the 
requirements of Sec. 76.30-90.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 76.30-5  Zoning.

    (a) The fire detecting system shall be divided into separate zones 
to restrict the area covered by any particular alarm signal.
    (b) All spaces in a fire detecting zone shall be accessible from one 
to another without leaving the deck involved. All doors in watertight 
subdivision bulkheads and main vertical zone bulkheads shall be assumed 
closed for the purpose of this requirement.
    (c) The fire detecting zone shall not include spaces on more than 
one deck, except:
    (1) Adjacent and communicating spaces on different decks in the ends 
of the vessel, having a combined deck area of not more than 3,000 feet.
    (2) Isolated rooms or lockers in such spaces as mast houses, 
wheelhouse top, etc., which are easily communicable with the area of the 
fire-detecting circuit to which they are connected.
    (d) The fire detecting zone shall not include more than 50 protected 
rooms or spaces.
    (e) Individual tubing circuits shall not contain more than 1,000 
feet of pneumatic tubing or its equivalent. However, more than one 
tubing circuit may be included in the same fire detecting zone.

[[Page 84]]


<R05>
Sec. 76.30-10  Location and spacing of tubing.

    (a) The tubing shall be located on the overhead or within 12 inches 
of the overhead on the bulkheads. Where liable to physical damage, the 
tubing shall be suitably protected.
    (b) In each enclosed space or separate room there shall be exposed 
at least 5 percent of the total length of tubing in that circuit, but in 
no case shall the amount be less than 25 feet.
    (c) No spot on the overhead of a protected space shall be more than 
12 feet from the nearest point of tubing. Where beams or girders extend 
below the ceiling, or where the ceiling is installed at more than one 
level, the tubing shall be so located as to be most effective.


<R05>
Sec. 76.30-15  Operation and installation.

    (a) The system shall be so arranged and installed that the presence 
of a fire in any of the protected spaces will automatically be 
registered visibly and audibly in the pilothouse or fire control 
station. The visible notice shall automatically indicate the zone in 
which the alarm originated. On vessels over 150 feet in length, there 
shall also be an audible alarm in the engine room.
    (b) The tubing or detecting devices, pneumatic-electric converting 
units, detecting cabinets, and alarms shall be of an approved type.
    (c) In general, the system shall be adjusted to operate at a 
temperature rise of approximately 40 degrees F. per minute at the center 
of the circuit.
    (d) The fire detecting system shall be used for no other purpose 
except that it may be incorporated with the manual alarm system.
    (e) All wiring and electrical circuits and equipment shall meet the 
applicable requirements of subchapter J (Electrical Engineering) of this 
chapter.
    (f) A framed chart or diagram shall be installed in the wheelhouse 
or control station adjacent to the detecting cabinet indicating the 
location of the various detecting zones and giving instructions for the 
operation, maintenance, and testing of the system. This chart, or a 
separate card or booklet to be kept near the chart, shall have tabulated 
spaces for the date and signature of the licensed officer of the vessel 
who shall witness or conduct the periodic tests.
    (g) The audible alarms shall be identified as required by Sec. 
78.47-13 of this subchapter.


<R05>
Sec. 76.30-90  Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

    (a) Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall 
meet the following requirements:
    (1) Existing arrangements, materials, and equipment previously 
approved shall be considered satisfactory so long as they meet the 
minimum requirements of this paragraph and they are maintained in good 
condition to the satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspection. Minor repairs and alterations may be made to the same 
standards as the original installation.
    (2) The details of the systems shall be in general agreement with 
Sec. Sec. 76.30-5 through 76.30-15 insofar as is reasonable and 
practicable.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
              Subpart 76.33_Smoke Detecting System, Details


<R05>
Sec. 76.33-1  Application.

    (a) Where a smoke detecting system is installed, the provisions of 
this subpart, with the exception of Sec. 76.33-90, shall apply to all 
installations contracted for on or after November 19, 1952. 
Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall meet the 
requirements of Sec. 76.33-90.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 76.33-5  Zoning.

    (a) The smoke detecting system shall be divided into separate zones 
to restrict the area covered by any particular alarm signal.
    (b) The smoke detecting zone shall not include spaces on more than 
one deck, except the small adjacent spaces mentioned in paragraph (c) of 
this section.
    (c) Each separate space shall be considered as a zone, except that 
two or three small adjacent spaces having a combined volume not 
exceeding 5,000 cubic feet may be connected on the same zone.

[[Page 85]]

    (d) Where a space is of such size that one accumulator is not 
sufficient, not more than two accumulators may be combined in one zone.


<R05>
Sec. 76.33-10  Location and spacing of accumulators.

    (a) Smoke accumulators shall be located overhead in each 
compartment. Where liable to physical damage, the accumulators and 
piping shall be suitably protected.
    (b) No spot on the overhead of a protected space shall be more than 
40 feet from an accumulator.
    (c) Accumulators shall not be located closer to the opening of a 
ventilator than three times the diameter or equivalent diameter of the 
opening.


<R05>
Sec. 76.33-15  Piping.

    (a) Individual pipes shall be not less than \3/4\-inch standard pipe 
size.
    (b) All piping, valves, and fittings of ferrous materials shall be 
protected inside and outside against corrosion unless specifically 
approved otherwise by the Commandant.
    (c) Where a smoke detecting system serves a space used alternately 
for liquid and dry cargo, a valve shall be installed between the tank 
and the detecting cabinet so that the line may be shut off when liquids 
are carried. When the smoke detecting system is combined with a fire 
extinguishing system, the operation of the valve shall not affect the 
operation of the fire extinguishing system.
    (d) All piping, valves, and fittings shall be securely supported, 
and where necessary, protected against injury. The piping shall be 
installed with as easy bends as practicable, and shall be installed to 
grade to low points for drainage.
    (e) Drains and dirt tapes shall be fitted where necessary to prevent 
the accumulation of dirt or moisutre.


<R05>
Sec. 76.33-20  Operation and installation.

    (a) The system shall be so arranged and installed that the presence 
of smoke in any of the protected spaces will automatically be indicated 
visually to an observer directly in front of the detecting cabinet. The 
visible notice shall automatically indicate the zone in which the smoke 
originated. The detecting cabinet shall normally be located in the 
pilothouse or fire control station. On vessels over 5,000 gross tons, 
there shall also be an automatic audible alarm in the wheelhouse 
together with an auxiliary audible alarm in the engine room.
    (b) If the detecting cabinet is not located in the pilothouse or 
fire control station, it shall be located in convenient proximity to the 
valve control station of the extinguishing system. In this case, there 
shall be in the pilothouse or fire control station automatic visual 
alarms, one for each zone in which an alarm may originate, as well as an 
automatic audible alarm. There shall also be an auxiliary audible alarm 
in the engine room. For installations contracted for on or after January 
1, 1962, where detecting cabinets are not located in the pilothouse or 
an adjacent fire control station having direct access to the pilothouse, 
an efficient means of direct communication shall be provided between the 
pilothouse and the stations where the detecting cabinets are located.
    (c) A sufficient quantity of exhaust from the detecting cabinet 
shall be discharged in the vicinity of the cabinet to permit the 
detection of fire by odor. A valve shall be installed in such space to 
direct the exhaust, if obnoxious, to the outside.
    (d) The smoke detecting system shall be used for no other purpose 
except that it may be incorporated with the fire extinguishing system to 
the spaces covered by the smoke detecting system.
    (e) The accumulators, detecting cabinet, interconnecting valves with 
the fire extinguishing system, alarms, and indicating devices shall be 
of an approved type.
    (f) All wiring and electrical circuits and equipment shall meet the 
applicable requirements of subchapter J (Electrical Engineering) of this 
chapter.
    (g) A framed chart or diagram shall be installed adjacent to the 
detecting cabinet and auxiliary panel indicating the location of the 
various zones and giving instructions for the operation, maintenance, 
and testing of the system. The chart at the cabinet location or a 
separate card or booklet to be kept near the chart, shall have tabulated

[[Page 86]]

spaces for the date and signature of the licensed officer of the vessel 
who shall witness or conduct the periodic tests.
    (h) The audible smoke detecting alarms shall be identified as 
required by Sec. 78.47-13 of this subchapter.


<R05>
Sec. 76.33-90  Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

    (a) Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall 
meet the following requirements:
    (1) Existing arrangements, material, and equipment previously 
approved shall be considered satisfactory so long as they meet the 
minimum requirements of this paragraph and they are maintained in good 
condition to the satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspection. Minor repairs and alterations may be made to the same 
standards as the original installation.
    (2) The details of the systems shall be in general agreement with 
Sec. Sec. 76.33-5 through 76.33-15 insofar as is reasonable and 
practicable.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
               Subpart 76.35_Manual Alarm System, Details


<R05>
Sec. 76.35-1  Application.

    (a) Where a manual alarm system is installed, the provisions of this 
subpart, with the exception of Sec. 76.35-90, shall apply to all 
installations contracted for on or after November 19, 1952. 
Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall meet the 
requirements of Sec. 76.35-90.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 76.35-5  Zoning.

    (a) The zoning of the manual alarm system shall meet the same 
requirements as for the electric fire detecting system, Sec. 76.27-5.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 76.35-10  Location and spacing of manual alarm boxes.

    (a) There shall be at least one manual alarm box in each zone.
    (b) Manual alarms shall be located in main passageways, stairway 
enclosures, public spaces, or similar locations where they will be 
readily available and easily seen in case of need.
    (c) In general, a sufficient number of manual alarm boxes shall be 
employed that a person escaping from any space would find a manual alarm 
box convenient on his normal route of escape.


<R05>
Sec. 76.35-15  Operation and installation.

    (a) The system shall be so arranged and installed that the presence 
of a fire may be reported from any of the protected spaces and be 
automatically registered visibly and audibly in the pilothouse or fire 
control station. The visible notice shall indicate the zone in which the 
alarm originated. There shall also be an audible alarm in the engine 
room.
    (b) The manual alarm boxes, cabinet, and alarms shall be of an 
approved type.
    (c) The manual alarm system shall be used for no other purpose, 
except that it may be incorporated with the fire detecting system.
    (d) All wiring and electrical circuits and equipment shall meet the 
applicable requirements of subchapter J (Electrical Engineering) of this 
chapter.
    (e) A framed chart or diagram shall be installed in the wheelhouse 
or control station adjacent to the detecting cabinet indicating the 
location of the various detecting zones and giving instructions for the 
operation, maintenance, and testing of the system. This chart, or a 
separate booklet to be kept near the chart, shall have tabulated spaces 
for the date and signature of the licensed officer of the vessel who 
shall witness or conduct the periodic tests.
    (f) The manual alarm boxes and bells shall be identified as required 
by Sec. 78.47-10 of this subchapter.


<R05>
Sec. 76.35-90  Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

    (a) Installations contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall 
meet the following requirements:
    (1) Existing arrangements, materials, and equipment previously 
approved shall be considered satisfactory so long as they meet the 
minimum requirements of this paragraph, and they are maintained in good 
condition to the satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspection. Minor repairs and alterations may be made to the same 
standards as the original installation.

[[Page 87]]

    (2) The details of the systems shall be in general agreement with 
Sec. Sec. 76.35-5 through 76.35-15 insofar as is reasonable and 
practicable.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
  Subpart 76.50_Hand Portable Fire Extinguishers and Semiportable Fire 
             Extinguishing Systems, Arrangements and Details


<R05>
Sec. 76.50-1  Application.

    (a) The provisions of this subpart, with the exception of Sec. 
76.50-90, shall apply to all vessels contracted for on or after November 
19, 1952. Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall meet 
the requirements of Sec. 76.50-90.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 76.50-5  Classification.

    (a) Hand portable fire extinguishers and semiportable fire 
extinguishing systems shall be classified by a combination letter and 
number symbol, the letter indicating the type of fire which the unit 
could be expected to extinguish, and the number indicating the relative 
size of the unit.
    (b) The types of fire will be designated as follows:
    (1) ``A'' for fires in ordinary combustible materials where the 
quenching and cooling effects of quantities of water, or solutions 
containing large percentages of water, are of first importance.
    (2) ``B'' for fires in flammable liquids, greases, etc., where a 
blanketing effect is essential.
    (3) ``C'' for fires in electrical equipment where the use of 
nonconducting extinguishing agent is of first importance.
    (c) The number designations for size will start with ``I'' for the 
smallest to ``V'' for the largest. Sizes I and II are considered hand 
portable fire extinguishers and sizes III, IV and V are considered 
semiportable fire extinguishing systems which shall be fitted with 
suitable hose and nozzle or other practicable means so that all portions 
of the space concerned may be covered. Examples of size graduations for 
some of the typical hand portable and semiportable fire extinguishing 
systems are set forth in table 76.50-5(c).

                                                Table 76.50-5(c)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Classification                                                       Carbon
-------------------------------------------------  Soda acid and   Foam, liters      dioxide,      Dry chemical,
                                                   water, liters     (gallons)       kilograms       kilograms
              Type                     Size          (gallons)                       (pounds)        (pounds)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A...............................              II       9.5 (2.5)       9.5 (2.5)  ..............  ..............
B...............................               I  ..............     4.75 (1.25)         1.8 (4)  ..............
B...............................              II  ..............       9.5 (2.5)        6.8 (15)        4.5 (10)
B...............................             III  ..............       45.5 (12)       15.9 (35)        9.0 (20)
B...............................              IV  ..............         76 (20)       22.7 (50)       13.6 (30)
B...............................               V  ..............        151 (40)      45.3 (100)       22.7 (50)
C...............................               I  ..............  ..............         1.8 (4)           1 (2)
C...............................              II  ..............  ..............        6.8 (15)        4.5 (10)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (d) All hand portable fire extinguishers and semiportable fire 
extinguishing systems shall have permanently attached thereto a metallic 
name plate giving the name of the item, the rated capacity in gallons, 
quarts, or pounds, the name and address of the person or firm for whom 
approved, and the identifying mark of the actual manufacturer.
    (e) Vaporizing-liquid type fire extinguishers, containing carbon 
tetrachloride or chlorobromomethane or other toxic vaporizing liquids 
shall be removed from all vessels.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16940, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by USCG-2003-16630, 
73 FR 65192, Oct. 29, 2008]


<R05>
Sec. 76.50-10  Location.

    (a) Approved hand portable fire extinguishers and semiportable fire 
extinguishing systems shall be installed in accordance with table 76.50-
10(a).

[[Page 88]]



                                                Table 76.50-10(a)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                            Hand portable fire extinguisher and semiportable fire extinguishing
                                                                          systems
                  Space                   ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             Classification (see Sec.
                                                     76.50-5)                     Quantity and location
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
             Safety area \1\
 
Wheelhouse or fire control room..........  A-II, B-II, C-II...........  1 of each classification on vessels over
                                                                         1,000 gross tons. (Not required in both
                                                                         spaces.) (Multiple classification may
                                                                         be recognized.)
Stairway and elevator enclosures.........  ...........................  None required.
Communicating corridors..................  A-II.......................  1 in each main corridor in each main
                                                                         vertical zone. (May be located in
                                                                         stairway enclosures.)
Lifeboat embarkation and lowering          ...........................  None required.
 stations.
Radio room...............................  C-I \3\....................  2 in vicinity of exit.\2\
 
            Accommodations \1\
 
Staterooms, toilet spaces, isolated        ...........................  None required.
 pantries, etc..
Offices, lockers, and isolated storerooms  ...........................   Do.
Public spaces............................  A-II.......................  1 for each 2,500 square feet or fraction
                                                                         thereof located in vicinity of exits,
                                                                         except that none required for spaces
                                                                         under 500 square feet.
Open decks or enclosed promenades........  ...........................  None required.
 
              Service spaces
 
Galleys..................................  B-II or C-II...............  1 for each 2,500 square feet or fraction
                                                                         thereof suitable for hazards involved.
Main pantries............................  A-II.......................  1 for each 2,500 square feet or fraction
                                                                         thereof located in vicinity of exits.
Motion picture booths and film lockers...  C-I \3\....................  1 outside in vicinity of exit.
Paint and lamp rooms.....................  B-II.......................  1 outside space in vicinity of exit.
Inaccessible baggage, mail, and specie     ...........................  None required.
 rooms, and storerooms.
Accessible baggage, mail, and specie       A-II.......................  1 for each 2,500 square feet or fraction
 rooms, and storerooms.                                                  thereof located in vicinity of exits,
                                                                         either inside or outside the spaces.
Refrigerated storerooms..................  A-II.......................  1 for each 2,500 square feet or fraction
                                                                         thereof located in vicinity of exits,
                                                                         outside the spaces.
Carpenter, valet, photographic, printing   A-II.......................  1 outside the space in vicinity of exit.
 shops sales rooms, etc.
 
             Machinery spaces
 
Coal Fired Boilers: Bunker and             ...........................  None required.
 boilerspace.
Oil Fired Boilers: Spaces, containing oil  B-II, B-V..................  2 required.\3\1 required.\4\
 fired boilers, either main or auxiliary,
 or their fuel oil units.
Internal combustion or gas turbine         B-II.......................  1 for each 1,000 B. H. P., but not less
 propelling machinery spaces.                                            than 2 or more than 6.
                                           B-III......................  1 required.\5\
Electric propulsive motors or generators   C-II.......................  1 for each propulsion motor or generator
 of open type.                                                           unit.
Enclosed ventilating systems for motors    ...........................  None required.
 and generators of electric propelling
 machinery.
Auxiliary spaces, internal combustion or   B-II.......................  1 outside the space in vicinity of
 gas turbine.                                                            exit.\6\
Auxiliary spaces, electric emergency       C-II.......................   Do.
 motors or generators.
Auxiliary spaces, steam..................  ...........................  None required.
Trunks to machinery spaces...............  ...........................   Do.
Fuel tanks...............................  ...........................   Do.
 
               Cargo spaces
 
Inaccessible during voyage, including      ...........................   Do.
 trunks (excluding tanks).
Accessible during voyage.................  A-II.......................  1 for each 1,200 square feet or fraction
                                                                         thereof.
Vehicular spaces (covered by sprinkler     B-II.......................  1, plus 1 for each 6,000 square feet or
 system).                                                                fraction thereof:
Vehicular spaces (not covered by           B-II.......................  1, plus 1 for each 1,500 square feet or
 sprinkler system).                                                      fraction thereof.\7\
Cargo oil tanks..........................  ...........................  None required.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ In any case, on vessels of 150 feet in length, and over, there shall be at least 2 A-II units on each
  passenger deck.
\2\ For vessels on an international voyage, substitute 1 C-II in vicinity of exit.
\3\ Vessels of less than 1,000 gross tons and not on an international voyage, require 1.
\4\ Vessels of less than 1,000 gross tons and not on an international voyage may substitute 1 B-IV.

[[Page 89]]

 
\5\ If oil burning donkey boiler fitted in space, the B-V previously required for the protection of the
  boilerroom may be substituted. Not required on vessels of less than 300 gross tons if fuel has flashpoint of
  110 [deg]F. or lower except those on an international voyage.
\6\ Not required on vessels of less than 300 gross tons if fuel has flashpoint higher than 110 [deg]F.
\7\ B-I units may be substituted for 1 B-II unit.


The location of the equipment shall be to the satisfaction of the 
Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection. Nothing in this paragraph shall be 
construed as limiting the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, from 
requiring such additional equipment as he deems necessary for the proper 
protection of the vessel.
    (b) Semiportable fire extinguishing systems shall be located in the 
open so as to be readily seen.
    (c) If hand portable fire extinguishers are not located in the open 
or behind glass so that they may be readily seen, they may be placed in 
enclosures together with the fire hose, provided such enclosures are 
marked as required by Sec. 78.47-20 of this subchapter.
    (d) Hand portable fire extinguishers and their stations shall be 
numbered in accordance with Sec. 78.47-30 of this subchapter.
    (e) Hand portable or semiportable extinguishers, which are required 
on their nameplates to be protected from freezing, shall not be located 
where freezing temperatures may be expected.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 10940, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGFR 66-33, 31 FR 
15283, Dec. 6, 1966]


<R05>
Sec. 76.50-15  Spare charges.

    (a) Spare charges shall be carried on all vessels for at least 50 
percent of each size and each variety, i.e., foam, soda-acid, carbon 
dioxide, etc., of hand portable fire extinguisher required by Sec. 
76.50-10(a). However, if the unit is of such variety that it cannot be 
readily recharged by the vessel's personnel, one spare unit of the same 
classification shall be carried in lieu of spare charges for all such 
units of the same size and variety.
    (b) Spare charges shall be so packaged as to minimize the hazards to 
personnel while recharging the units. Acid shall be contained in a Crown 
stopper type of bottle.


<R05>
Sec. 76.50-20  Semiportable fire extinguishers.

    (a) The frame or support of each size III, IV, and V fire 
extinguisher required by table 76.50-10(a) must be welded or otherwise 
permanently attached to a bulkhead or deck.
    (b) If an approved size III, IV, or V fire extinguisher has wheels 
and is not required by table 76.50-10(a), it must be securely stowed 
when not in use to prevent it from rolling out of control under heavy 
sea conditions.

[CGD 77-039, 44 FR 34132, June 14, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 76.50-90  Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

    (a) Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall meet 
the following requirements:
    (1) The provisions of Sec. Sec. 76.50-5 through 76.50-15 shall be 
met with the exception that existing installations in safety areas, 
accommodations, service spaces, and cargo spaces may be maintained if in 
the opinion of the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, they are in 
general agreement with the standard of safety prescribed by table 76.50-
10(a). In such cases, minor modifications may be made to the same 
standards as the original installation, provided that in no case will a 
greater departure from the standards of table 76.50-10(a) be permitted 
than presently exists.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
                         Subpart 76.60_Fire Axes


<R05>
Sec. 76.60-1  Application.

    (a) The provisions of this subpart shall apply to all vessels.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 76.60-5  Number required.

    (a) All vessels except barges shall carry at least the minimum 
number of fire axes as set forth in table 76.60-5(a). Nothing in this 
paragraph shall be construed as limiting the Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspection, from requiring such additional fire axes as he

[[Page 90]]

deems necessary for the proper protection of the vessel.

                            Table 76.60-5(a)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Gross tons
------------------------------------------------------------  Number of
                     Over                         Not over       axes
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         50            1
50............................................          200            2
200...........................................          500            4
500...........................................        1,000            6
1,000.........................................  ...........            8
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Covered barges shall carry at least three fire axes and 
uncovered barges shall carry at least two fire axes.


<R05>
Sec. 76.60-10  Location.

    (a) Fire axes shall be distributed throughout the spaces available 
to passengers and crew so as to be most readily available in the event 
of emergency.
    (b) If fire axes are not located in the open or behind glass so that 
they may be readily seen, they may be placed in enclosures together with 
the fire hose, provided such enclosures are marked as required by Sec. 
78.47-20 of this subchapter.


<R03>
PART 77_VESSEL CONTROL AND MISCELLANEOUS SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT--
Table of Contents



                        Subpart 77.01_Application

Sec.
77.01-1 General.
77.01-3 Incorporation by reference.

                Subpart 77.03_Marine Engineering Systems

77.03-1 Installation and details.

 Subpart 77.05_Electrical Engineering and Interior Communication Systems

77.05-1 Installation and details.

          Subpart 77.06_Lifesaving Appliances and Arrangements

77.06-1 Installation.

               Subpart 77.07_Anchors, Chains, and Hawsers

77.07-1 Application.
77.07-5 Ocean, coastwise, or Great Lakes service.
77.07-10 Lakes, bays, and sounds, or river service.
77.07-90 Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

                           Subpart 77.09_Radar

77.09-1 When required.

             Subpart 77.11_Magnetic Compass and Gyrocompass

77.11-1 When required.

                    Subpart 77.27_Sounding Equipment

77.27-1 When required.

                    Subpart 77.30_Emergency Equipment

77.30-1 Application.
77.30-5 General.
77.30-10 Stowage.
77.30-15 Spare charges.
77.30-90 Vessels contracted for before November 23, 1992.

                     Subpart 77.35_Fireman's Outfit

77.35-1 Application.
77.35-5 General.
77.35-10 Fireman's outfit.
77.35-15 Stowage.
77.35-20 Spare charges.
77.35-90 Vessels contracted for before November 23, 1992.

                 Subpart 77.40_Pilot Boarding Equipment

77.40-1 Pilot boarding equipment.

    Authority: 46 U.S.C. 3306; E.O. 12234, 45 FR 58801, 3 CFR, 1980 
Comp., p. 277; Department of Homeland Security Delegation No. 0170.1.

    Source: CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16953, Dec. 30, 1965, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R04>
                        Subpart 77.01_Application


<R05>
Sec. 77.01-1  General.

    (a) The provisions of this part shall apply to all vessels except as 
specifically noted.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 77.01-3  Incorporation by reference.

    (a) Certain materials are incorporated by reference into this part 
with the approval of the Director of the Federal Register in accordance 
with 5 U.S.C. 552(a). To enforce any edition other than the one listed 
in paragraph (b) of this section, notice of the change must be published 
in the Federal Register and the material made available

[[Page 91]]

to the public. All approved material is on file at the Office of the 
Federal Register, Washington, DC 20408, and at the U.S. Coast Guard, 
Office of Design and Engineering Standards (CG-521), 2100 2nd St. SW., 
Stop 7126, Washington, DC 20593-7126, and is available from the address 
indicated in paragraph (b).
    (b) The material approved for incorporation by reference in this 
part, and the sections affected is:

            American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)

100 Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959.
ASTM F 1014-92, Standard Specification for Flashlights on Vessels--
77.35-5

[CGD 82-042, 53 FR 17704, May 18, 1988, as amended by CGD 95-072, 60 FR 
50463, Sept. 29, 1995; CGD 96-041, 61 FR 50729, Sept. 27, 1996; CGD 97-
057, 62 FR 51045, Sept. 30, 1997; USCG-1999-5151, 64 FR 67181, Dec. 1, 
1999; USCG-2009-0702, 74 FR 49231, Sept 25, 2009]


<R04>
                Subpart 77.03_Marine Engineering Systems


<R05>
Sec. 77.03-1  Installation and details.

    (a) The installation of all systems of a marine engineering nature, 
together with the details of design, construction, and installation, 
shall be in accordance with the requirements of subchapter F (Marine 
Engineering) of this chapter. Systems of this type include the 
following:

Steering systems.
Power for going astern.
Bilge and ballast systems.
Tank vent and sounding systems.
Overboard discharges and shell connections.
Pipe and pressure systems.

    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
 Subpart 77.05_Electrical Engineering and Interior Communication Systems


<R05>
Sec. 77.05-1  Installation and details.

    (a) The installation of all systems of an electrical engineering or 
interior communications nature, together with the details of design, 
construction, and installation, shall be in accordance with the 
requirements of subchapter J (Electrical Engineering) of this chapter. 
Systems of this type include the following:

Ship's service generating systems.
Ship's service power distribution systems.
Ship's lighting systems.
Electric propulsion and propulsion control systems.
Emergency lighting and power systems.
Electric lifeboat winch systems.
Electric steering gear and steering control systems.
Fire detecting and alarm systems
Sound powered telephone and voice tube systems.
Engine order telegraph systems.
Rudder angle indicator systems.
Refrigerated spaces alarm systems.
Navigation lights systems.
Daylight signaling lights.
Miscellaneous machinery alarms and controls.
General alarm systems.

    (b) Electrical equipment installed in spaces ``specially suitable 
for vehicles'' shall be in accordance with subchapter J (Electrical 
Engineering) of this chapter.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16953, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGFR 66-33, 31 FR 
15283, Dec. 6, 1966; CGFR 68-32, 33 FR 5716, Apr. 12, 1968; CGD 74-125A, 
47 FR 15231, Apr. 8, 1982]


<R04>
          Subpart 77.06_Lifesaving Appliances and Arrangements


<R05>
Sec. 77.06-1  Installation.

    The installation of all lifesaving appliances and arrangements must 
be in accordance with the requirements of subchapter W (Lifesaving 
Appliances and Arrangements) of this chapter.

[CGD 84-069, 61 FR 25288, May 20, 1996]


<R04>
               Subpart 77.07_Anchors, Chains, and Hawsers


<R05>
Sec. 77.07-1  Application.

    (a) The provisions of this subpart, with the exception of Sec. 
77.07-90, shall apply to all vessels contracted for on or after November 
19, 1952. Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall meet 
the requirements of Sec. 77.07-90.
    (b) [Reserved]

[[Page 92]]


<R05>
Sec. 77.07-5  Ocean, coastwise, or Great Lakes service.

    (a) Vessels in ocean, coastwise, or Great Lakes service shall be 
fitted with anchors, chains, and hawsers in general agreement with the 
standards established by the American Bureau of Shipping, see subpart 
70.35 of this subchapter.
    (b) In addition to the provisions of paragraph (a) of this section, 
the following requirements and alternatives also apply:
    (1) The American Bureau of Shipping rules relating to anchor 
equipment are mandatory, not a guide.
    (2) Vessels under 200 feet (61 meters) in length and with an 
American Bureau of Shipping equipment number of less than 150 may be 
equipped with either--
    (i) One anchor of the tabular weight and one-half the tabulated 
length of anchor chain listed in the applicable standard, or
    (ii) Two anchors of one-half the tabular weight with the total 
length of anchor chain listed in the applicable standard provided both 
anchors are in a position that allows for ready use at all times and the 
windlass is capable of heaving in either anchor.
    (c) Standards of other recognized classification societies may be 
used, in lieu of those established by the American Bureau of Shipping, 
upon approval by the Commandant.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16953, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 87-013, 53 FR 
20624, June 6, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 77.07-10  Lakes, bays, and sounds, or river service.

    (a) Vessels in lakes, bays, and sounds, or river service shall be 
fitted with such ground tackle and hawsers as deemed necessary by the 
Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, depending upon the size of the 
vessel and the waters on which it operates.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 77.07-90  Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

    (a) Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall meet 
the following requirements:
    (1) Installations previously accepted or approved shall be 
considered satisfactory for the same service so long as they are 
maintained in good condition to the satisfaction of the Officer in 
Charge, Marine Inspection. If the service of the vessel is changed, the 
suitability of the equipment will be established by the Officer in 
Charge, Marine Inspection.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
                           Subpart 77.09_Radar


<R05>
Sec. 77.09-1  When required.

    All mechanically propelled vessels of 1,600 gross tons and over in 
ocean or coastwise service must be fitted with a marine radar system for 
surface navigation. Facilities for plotting radar readings must be 
provided on the bridge.

[CGD 75-074, 42 FR 5963, Jan. 31, 1977]


<R04>
             Subpart 77.11_Magnetic Compass and Gyrocompass


<R05>
Sec. 77.11-1  When required.

    (a) All mechanically propelled vessels in ocean, coastwise or Great 
Lakes service must be fitted with a magnetic compass.
    (b) All mechanically propelled vessels 1,600 gross tons and over in 
ocean or coastwise service must be fitted with a gyrocompass in addition 
to the magnetic compass.
    (c) Each vessel must have an illuminated repeater for the 
gyrocompass required under paragraph (b) of this section, that is at the 
main steering stand unless the gyrocompass is illuminated and is at the 
main steering stand.

[CGD 75-074, 42 FR 5963, Jan. 31 1977]


<R04>
                    Subpart 77.27_Sounding Equipment


<R05>
Sec. 77.27-1  When required.

    All mechanically propelled vessels of 500 gross tons and over to 
ocean or coastwise service, and all mechanically propelled vessels of 
500 gross tons and over in Great Lakes service and certificated for 
service on the River St. Lawrence eastward of the lower exit of the St. 
Lambert Lock at Montreal, Canada,

[[Page 93]]

must be fitted with an efficient electronic deep-sea sounding apparatus.

[CGD 95-027, 61 FR 26004, May 23, 1996]


<R04>
                    Subpart 77.30_Emergency Equipment


<R05>
Sec. 77.30-1  Application.

    This subpart, except Sec. 77.30-90, applies to each vessel that is 
not on an international voyage and is contracted for on or after 
November 23, 1992. Each vessel that is not on an international voyage 
and is contracted for before November 23, 1992, must satisfy Sec. 
77.30-90.

[CGD 86-036, 57 FR 48324, Oct. 23, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 77.30-5  General.

    (a) Each self-contained breathing apparatus must be of the pressure-
demand, open-circuit type, approved by the Mine Safety and Health 
Administration (MSHA) and the National Institute for Occupational Safety 
and Health (NIOSH), and have at a minimum a 30-minute air supply and a 
full facepiece.
    (b) The self-contained breathing apparatus required as part of the 
emergency outfit may be used as protection against gas leaking from a 
refrigeration unit.
    (c) All flame safety lamps shall be of an approved type, constructed 
in accordance with subpart 160.016 of subchapter Q (Specifications) of 
this chapter.
    (d) All emergency equipment shall be maintained in an operative 
condition, and it shall be the responsibility of the master and chief 
engineer to ascertain that a sufficient number of the crew are familiar 
with the operation of the equipment.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16953, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 86-036, 57 FR 
48324, Oct. 23, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 77.30-10  Stowage.

    (a) The equipment set forth in table 77.30-10(a), together with such 
other items as the master may deem necessary, shall be stowed in 
convenient, accessible locations for use in case of emergency.

                                                Table 77.30-10(a)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                          Self-
                                                                            Self-       contained
                                                Number of passenger       contained     breathing       Flame
                 Service                            staterooms            breathing   apparatus for     safety
                                                                          apparatus   refrigeration     lamps
                                                                                           \1\
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ocean and coastwise, not on an             0 to 49                       ...........             1   ...........
 international voyage.
                                           50 to 100                               4             1   ...........
                                           Over 100                                6             1             1
Great Lakes, and lakes, bays, and sounds.  0 to 49                       ...........             1   ...........
                                           50 to 100                               2             1   ...........
                                           Over 100                                4             1             1
Rivers...................................  0 to 49                       ...........             1   ...........
                                           50 to 100                               1             1   ...........
                                           Over 100                                2             1             1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Required only on vessels equipped with any refrigeration unit using ammonia to refrigerate any space with a
  volume of more than 20 cubic feet or with any refrigeration unit using fluorocarbons to refrigerate any space
  with a volume of more than 1000 cubic feet.

    (b) If a separate self-contained breathing apparatus is maintained 
for protection against gas leaking from a refrigeration unit, it must be 
stowed convenient to, but outside of, the spaces containing the 
refrigeration equipment.
    (c) Half of the remaining equipment set forth in table 77.30-10(a) 
shall be stowed in or near the pilothouse together with a fire axe and 
the hand portable fire extinguishers required by table 76.50-10(a) for 
that location. The other half of the equipment shall be stowed in a 
convenient accessible location, remote from the pilothouse, and 
preferably adjacent to the main entrance to the machinery space. Where 
only one of an item is required, it shall be stowed in the pilothouse.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16953, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 86-036, 57 FR 
48324, Oct. 23, 1992]

[[Page 94]]


<R05>
Sec. 77.30-15  Spare charges.

    (a) A complete recharge shall be carried for each gas mask and self-
contained breathing apparatus. The spare charge shall be stowed in the 
same location as the equipment it is to reactivate.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 77.30-90  Vessels contracted for before November 23, 1992.

    Vessels contracted for before November 23, 1992, must meet the 
following requirements:
    (a) Each vessel must satisfy Sec. Sec. 77.30-5 through 77.30-15 
concerning the number of items and the method of stowage of equipment.
    (b) Items of equipment previously approved, but not meeting the 
applicable specifications set forth in Sec. 77.30-5, may continue in 
service as long as they are maintained in good condition to the 
satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection; but each item 
in an installation or a replacement must meet all applicable 
specifications.
    (c) After November 23, 1994, each respirator must either satisfy 
Sec. 77.30-5(a) or be a self-contained compressed-air breathing 
apparatus previously approved by MSHA and NIOSH under part 160, subpart 
160.011, of this chapter.

[CGD 86-036, 57 FR 48324, Oct. 23, 1992]


<R04>
                     Subpart 77.35_Fireman's Outfit


<R05>
Sec. 77.35-1  Application.

    This subpart, except Sec. 77.35-90, applies to each vessel that is 
on an international voyage and is contracted for on or after November 
23, 1992. Each vessel that is on an international voyage and is 
contracted for before November 23, 1992, must satisfy Sec. 77.35-90.

[CGD 86-036, 57 FR 48325, Oct. 23, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 77.35-5  General.

    (a) All flame safety lamps shall be of an approved type, constructed 
in accordance with subpart 160.016 of subchapter Q (Specifications) of 
this chapter.
    (b) Each self-contained breathing apparatus must be of the pressure-
demand, open-circuit type, approved by the Mine Safety and Health 
Administration (MSHA) and the National Institute for Occupational Safety 
and Health (NIOSH), and have at a minimum a 30-minute air supply and a 
full facepiece.
    (c) Flashlights shall be Type II or Type III, constructed and marked 
in accordance with ASTM F 1014 (incorporated by reference, see Sec. 
77.01-3).
    (d) All lifelines shall be of steel or bronze wire rope. Steel wire 
ropes shall be either inherently corrosion resistent, or made so by 
galvanizing or tinning. Each end shall be fitted with a hook with keeper 
having throat opening which can be readily slipped over a \5/8\-inch 
bolt. The total length of the lifeline shall be dependent upon the size 
and arrangement of the vessel, and more than one line may be hooked 
together to achieve the necessary length. No individual length of 
lifeline may be less than 50 feet in length. The assembled lifeline 
shall have a minimum breaking strength of 1,500 pounds.
    (e) All equipment shall be maintained in an operative condition, and 
it shall be the responsibility of the master and chief engineer to 
ascertain that a sufficient number of the crew are familiar with the 
operation of the equipment.
    (f) Boots and gloves shall be of rubber or other electrically 
nonconducting material.
    (g) The helmet shall provided effective protection against impact.
    (h) Protective clothing shall be of material that will protect the 
skin from the heat of fire and burns from scalding steam. The outer 
surface shall be water resistant.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16953, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGFR 67-87, 32 FR 
19181, Dec. 20, 1967; CGD 82-042, 53 FR 17704, May 18, 1988; CGD 86-036, 
57 FR 48325, Oct. 23, 1992; USCG-1999-5151, 64 FR 67181, Dec. 1, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 77.35-10  Fireman's outfit.

    (a) Each fireman's outfit must consist of one self-contained 
breathing apparatus, one lifeline with a belt or a suitable harness, one 
flashlight, one flame safety lamp, one rigid helmet, boots and gloves, 
protective clothing, and one fire ax. In lieu of the flame safety lamp, 
vessels may carry an oxygen depletion meter which is listed by

[[Page 95]]

a Coast Guard recognized independent laboratory as intrinsically safe.
    (b) The number of fireman's outfits required are as set forth in 
table 77.35-10(b).

                            Table 77.35-10(b)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Gross tonnage                           Minimum
-------------------------------------------------------------- number of
                                                    Not over-- fireman's
                      Over--                                    outfits
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       10,000          2
10,000............................................     20,000          3
20,000............................................  .........          4
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16953, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGFR 67-87, 32 FR 
19181, Dec. 20, 1967; CGD 86-036, 57 FR 48325, Oct. 23, 1992; CGD 95-
028, 62 FR 51204, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 77.35-15  Stowage.

    (a) The fireman's outfit, together with such other items of 
equipment as the master may deem necessary, shall be stowed in 
convenient, accessible locations for use in case of emergency. One 
outfit shall be stowed in or near the pilothouse. Where additional 
outfits are required by table 77.35-10(b), one of the additional outfits 
shall be stowed preferably adjacent to the main entrance to the 
machinery space. Other additional outfits shall be stowed in convenient 
accessible locations remote from the pilothouse.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 77.35-20  Spare charges.

    (a) A complete recharge shall be carried for each self-contained 
breathing apparatus, and a complete set of spare batteries shall be 
carried for each flashlight. The spares shall be stowed in the same 
location as the equipment it is to reactivate.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 77.35-90  Vessels contracted for before November 23, 1992.

    Vessels contracted for before November 23, 1992, must meet the 
following requirements:
    (a) Each vessel must satisfy Sec. Sec. 77.35-5 through 77.35-20 
concerning the number of items and the method of stowage of equipment.
    (b) Items of equipment previously approved, but not meeting the 
applicable specifications set forth in Sec. 77.35-5, may continue in 
service as long as they are maintained in good condition to the 
satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection; but each item 
in an installation or a replacement must meet all applicable 
specifications.
    (c) After November 23, 1994, each respirator must either satisfy 
Sec. 77.35-5(b) or be a self-contained compressed-air breathing 
apparatus previously approved by MSHA and NIOSH under part 160, subpart 
160.011, of this chapter.

[CGD 86-036, 57 FR 48325, Oct. 23, 1992]


<R04>
                 Subpart 77.40_Pilot Boarding Equipment


<R05>
Sec. 77.40-1  Pilot boarding equipment.

    (a) This section applies to each vessel that normally embarks or 
disembarks a pilot from a pilot boat or other vessel.
    (b) Each vessel must have suitable pilot boarding equipment 
available for use on each side of the vessel. If a vessel has only one 
set of equipment, the equipment must be capable of being easily 
transferred to and rigged for use on either side of the vessel.
    (c) Pilot boarding equipment must be capable of resting firmly 
against the vessel's side and be secured so that it is clear from 
overboard discharges.
    (d) Each vessel must have lighting positioned to provide adequate 
illumination for the pilot boarding equipment and each point of access.
    (e) Each vessel must have a point of access that has--
    (1) A gateway in the rails or bulwark with adequate handholds; or
    (2) Two handhold stanchions and a bulwark ladder that is securely 
attached to the bulwark rail and deck.
    (f) The pilot boarding equipment required by paragraph (b) of this 
section must include at least one pilot ladder approved under subpart 
163.003 of this chapter. Each pilot ladder must be of a single length 
and capable of extending from the point of access to the water's edge 
during each condition of loading and trim, with an adverse list of 
15[deg].
    (g) Whenever the distance from the water's edge to the point of 
access is more than 30 feet, access from a pilot ladder to the vessel 
must be by way of

[[Page 96]]

an accommodation ladder or equally safe and convenient means.
    (h) Pilot hoists, if used, must be approved under subpart 163.002 of 
this chapter.

[CGD 79-032, 49 FR 25455, June 21, 1984]


<R03>
PART 78_OPERATIONS--Table of Contents



                        Subpart 78.01_Application

Sec.
78.01-1 General.
78.01-2 Incorporation by reference.

         Subpart 78.05_Notice to Mariners and Aids to Navigation

78.05-1 Duty of officers.
78.05-5 Charts and nautical publications.

    Subpart 78.07_Notice and Reporting of Casualty and Voyage Records

78.07-1 Notice and reporting of casualty and voyage records.

  Subpart 78.10_Persons Allowed in Pilothouse and on Navigation Bridge

78.10-1 Persons excluded.

                   Subpart 78.12	Stability Information

78.12-1 Posting of stability letter.

                       Subpart 78.13_Station Bills

78.13-1 Muster lists, emergency signals, and manning.

                    Subpart 78.15_Doors Closed at Sea

78.15-1 Subdivision bulkheads.

                        Subpart 78.16_Port Lights

78.16-1 General.

              Subpart 78.17_Tests, Drills, and Inspections

78.17-1 Application.
78.17-3 Watertight doors.
78.17-5 Valves and closing appliances.
78.17-10 Loudspeaker system.
78.17-15 Steering gear, whistle, and means of communication.
78.17-20 Drafts and load line markings.
78.17-22 Verfication of vessel compliance with applicable stability 
          requirements.
78.17-25 Sanitation.
78.17-30 Examination of boilers and machinery.
78.17-33 Loading doors.
78.17-35 Hatches and other openings.
78.17-45 Emergency lighting and power systems.
78.17-50 Emergency training, musters, and drills.
78.17-65 Smoke detecting system.
78.17-75 Requirements for fuel oil.
78.17-80 Firefighting equipment, general.

                        Subpart 78.19_Auto Pilot

78.19-1 Use of auto pilot.

                Subpart 78.21_Maneuvering Characteristics

78.21-1 Data required.

                         Subpart 78.23_Whistling

78.23-1 Unnecessary whistling prohibited.

                       Subpart 78.27_Searchlights

78.27-1 Improper use prohibited.

    Subpart 78.30_Lookouts, Pilothouse Watch, Patrolmen, and Watchmen

78.30-5 Pilothouse watch.
78.30-10 Supervised patrol.
78.30-15 Watchmen.
78.30-20 Master's and officer's responsibility.

    Subpart 78.33_Reports of Accidents, Repairs, and Unsafe Equipment

78.33-1 Repairs of boiler and pressure vessels.
78.33-5 Accidents to machinery.
78.33-10 Notice required before repairs.

             Subpart 78.35_Communication Between Deckhouses

78.35-1 When required.

                        Subpart 78.36_Work Vests

78.36-1 Application.
78.36-5 Approved types of work vests.
78.36-10 Use.
78.36-15 Shipboard stowage.
78.36-20 Shipboard inspections.
78.36-25 Additional requirements for hybrid work vests.

                      Subpart 78.37_Logbook Entries

78.37-1 Application.
78.37-3 Logbooks and records.
78.37-5 Actions required to be logged.
78.37-10 Official log entries.

                     Subpart 78.40_Vehicular Ferries

78.40-1 Stowage of vehicles.
78.40-5 Securing of vehicles.
78.40-10 No smoking permitted.

[[Page 97]]

                     Subpart 78.45_Display of Plans

78.45-1 When required.

      Subpart 78.47_Markings for Fire and Emergency Equipment, Etc.

78.47-1 Application.
78.47-3 General.
78.47-5 General alarm contact makers.
78.47-7 General alarm bells.
78.47-9 Carbon dioxide alarm.
78.47-10 Manual alarm boxes.
78.47-13 Fire detecting and manual alarm, automatic sprinkler, and smoke 
          detecting alarm bells.
78.47-15 Fire extinguishing system branch lines.
78.47-17 Fire extinguishing system controls.
78.47-20 Fire hose stations.
78.47-23 Supervised patrol stations.
78.47-25 Emergency squad equipment.
78.47-27 Self-contained breathing apparatus.
78.47-30 Hand portable fire extinguishers.
78.47-33 Emergency lights.
78.47-35 Fire doors.
78.47-37 Watertight doors.
78.47-38 Valves and closing appliances.
78.47-40 Exit signs.
78.47-45 Markings for lifesaving appliances, instructions to passengers, 
          and stowage locations.
78.47-53 Automatic ventilation dampers.
78.47-55 Instructions for changing steering gear.
78.47-57 Rudder orders.
78.47-70 Portable magazine chests.
78.47-75 Ventilation alarm failure.
78.47-90 Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

                    Subpart 78.50_Markings on Vessels

78.50-1 Application.
78.50-5 Hull markings.
78.50-10 Draft marks and draft indicating systems.
78.50-15 Load line marks.

                 Subpart 78.55_Carrying of Excess Steam

78.55-1 Master and chief engineer responsible.

                   Subpart 78.57_Routing Instructions

78.57-1 All personnel must comply.

  Subpart 78.60_Compliance With Provisions of Certificate of Inspection

78.60-1 Master or person in charge responsible.

         Subpart 78.65_Exhibition of Merchant Mariner Credential

78.65-1 Licensed officers.

 Subpart 78.70_De-Energizing of Cargo Hold Lighting Circuits When Grain 
               or Other Combustible Bulk Cargo Is Carried

78.70-1 Master's responsibility.
78.70-5 Warning notice posted.

        Subpart 78.83_Operation of Vehicles in Enclosed Locations

78.83-1 Special operating conditions.

                 Subpart 78.90_Pilot Boarding Operations

78.90-1 Pilot boarding operation.

   Subpart 78.95_Person in Charge of Transfer of Liquid Cargo in Bulk

78.95-1 General.

    Authority: 33 U.S.C. 1321(j); 46 U.S.C. 2103, 3306, 6101; 49 U.S.C. 
5103, 5106; E.O. 12234, 45 FR 58801, 3 CFR, 1980 Comp., p. 277; E.O. 
12777, 56 FR 54757, 3 CFR, 1991 Comp., p. 351; Department of Homeland 
Security Delegation No. 0170.1.

    Source: CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16955, Dec. 30, 1965, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R04>
                        Subpart 78.01_Application


<R05>
Sec. 78.01-1  General.

    (a) The provisions of this part shall apply to all vessels except as 
specifically noted.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.01-2  Incorporation by reference.

    (a) Certain material is incorporated by reference into this part 
with the approval of the Director of the Federal Register under 5 U.S.C. 
552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. To enforce any edition other than that 
specified in paragraph (b) of this section, the Coast Guard must publish 
notice of change in the Federal Register; and the material must be 
available to the public. All approved material is available for 
inspection or at the National Archives and Records Administration 
(NARA), and at the U.S. Coast Guard, Lifesaving and Fire Safety Division 
(CG-5214), 2100 2nd St., SW., Stop 7126, Washington, DC 20593-7126, and 
is available from the sources indicated in paragraph (b) of this 
section. For information on the

[[Page 98]]

availability of this material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: 
http://www.archives.gov/federal--register/code--of--federal--
regulations/ibr--locations.html.
    (b) The material approved for incorporation by reference in this 
part and the sections affected are as follows:

            American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)

100 Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959.
ASTM D 93-97, Standard Test Methods for Flash Point by Pensky-Martens 
Closed Cup Tester--78.17-75

                International Maritime Organization (IMO)

Publications Section, 4 Albert Embankment, London, SE1 7SR United 
Kingdom. Resolution A.654(16), Graphical Symbols for Fire Control 
Plans--78.45-1

[CGD 95-028, 62 FR 51204, Sept. 30, 1997, as amended by USCG-1998-4442, 
63 FR 52191, Sept. 30, 1998; USCG-1999-5151, 64 FR 67181, Dec. 1, 1999; 
69 FR 18803, Apr. 9, 2004; USCG-2009-0702, 74 FR 49231, Sept 25, 2009]


<R04>
         Subpart 78.05_Notice to Mariners and Aids to Navigation


<R05>
Sec. 78.05-1  Duty of officers.

    (a) Licensed deck officers are required to acquaint themselves with 
the latest information published by the Coast Guard and the National 
Imagery and Mapping Agency regarding aids to navigation. Neglect to do 
so is evidence of neglect of duty. It is desirable that all vessels have 
available in the pilothouse for convenient reference at all times a file 
of the applicable Notice to Mariners.
    (b) Weekly Notices to Mariners (Great Lakes Edition), published by 
the Commander, 9th Coast Guard District, contain announcements and 
information on changes in aids to navigation and other marine 
information affecting the safety of navigation on the Great Lakes. These 
notices may be obtained free of charge, by making application to 
Commander, 9th Coast Guard District.
    (c) Weekly Notices to Mariners (Worldwide coverage) are prepared 
jointly by the National Imagery and Mapping Agency, National Ocean 
Service, and the U.S. Coast Guard. They include changes in aids to 
navigation in assembled form for the 1st, 5th, 7th, Greater Antilles 
Section, 8th, 11th, 13th, 14th, and 17th Coast Guard Districts. Foreign 
marine information is also included in these notices. These notices are 
available without charge from the National Imagery and Mapping Agency, 
U.S. Collector of Customs of the major seaports in the United States and 
are also on file in the U.S. Consulates where they may be inspected.

[CGFR 66-33, 31 FR 15283, Dec. 6, 1966, as amended by CGFR 68-32, 33 FR 
5717, Apr. 12, 1968; CGD 95-072, 60 FR 50463, Sept. 29, 1995; USCG-2001-
10224, 66 FR 48620, Sept. 21, 2001]


<R05>
Sec. 78.05-5  Charts and nautical publications.

    As appropriate for the intended voyage, all vessels except barges, 
ferryboats and vessels operating exclusively on rivers, must carry 
adequate and up-to-date--
    (a) Charts;
    (b) Sailing directions;
    (c) Coast pilots;
    (d) Light lists;
    (e) Notices to mariners;
    (f) Tide tables;
    (g) Current tables; and
    (h) All other nautical publications necessary. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ For United States vessels in or on the navigable waters of the 
United States, see 33 CFR 164.33.

[CGD 75-074, 42 FR 5963, Jan. 31, 1977]


<R04>
    Subpart 78.07_Notice and Reporting of Casualty and Voyage Records


<R05>
Sec. 78.07-1  Notice and reporting of casualty and voyage records.

    The requirements for providing notice and reporting of marine 
casualties and for retaining voyage records are contained in part 4 of 
this chapter.

[CGD 84-099, 52 FR 47535, Dec. 14, 1987]

[[Page 99]]


<R04>
  Subpart 78.10_Persons Allowed in Pilothouse and on Navigation Bridge


<R05>
Sec. 78.10-1  Persons excluded.

    Masters and pilots shall exclude from the pilothouse and navigation 
bridge while underway, all persons not connected with the navigation of 
the vessel. However, licensed officers of vessels, persons regularly 
engaged in training, regulating, evaluating or learning the profession 
of pilot, officials of the United States Coast Guard, United States 
Navy, National Imagery and Mapping Agency, National Ocean Service, 
United States Army Corps of Engineers, Maritime Administration, and 
National Transportation Safety Board may be allowed in the pilothouse or 
upon the navigation bridge upon the responsibility of the master or 
pilot.

[CGD 91-023, 59 FR 16779, Apr. 8, 1994, as amended by USCG-2001-10224, 
66 FR 48620, Sept. 21, 2001]


<R04>
                   Subpart 78.12_Stability Information


<R05>
Sec. 78.12-1  Posting of stability letter.

    If a stability letter is issued under Sec. 170.120 of this chapter, 
it must be posted under glass or other suitable transparent material in 
the pilothouse of the vessel.

[CGD 79-023, 48 FR 51007, Nov. 4, 1983]


<R04>
                       Subpart 78.13_Station Bills


<R05>
Sec. 78.13-1  Muster lists, emergency signals, and manning.

    The requirements for muster lists, emergency signals, and manning 
must be in accordance with subchapter W (Lifesaving Appliances and 
Arrangements) of this chapter.

[CGD 84-069, 61 FR 25288, May 20, 1996]


<R04>
                    Subpart 78.15_Doors Closed at Sea


<R05>
Sec. 78.15-1  Subdivision bulkheads.

    (a) All watertight doors in subdivision bulkheads shall be kept 
closed during navigation except when necessarily opened for working of 
the vessel, and in such cases they shall always be ready to be 
immediately closed.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
                        Subpart 78.16_Port Lights


<R05>
Sec. 78.16-1  General.

    If port lights are fitted in spaces used alternatively for the 
carriage of cargo or passengers as permitted by Sec. 171.116(d) of this 
chapter, dead covers must be fitted on the port lights when cargo is 
carried.

[CGD 79-023, 48 FR 51007, Nov. 4, 1983]


<R04>
              Subpart 78.17_Tests, Drills, and Inspections


<R05>
Sec. 78.17-1  Application.

    (a) Except as specifically noted, the provisions of this subpart 
shall apply to all vessels.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.17-3  Watertight doors.

    (a) It shall be the duty of the master to see that all watertight 
doors in subdivision bulkheads that may be opened at sea, and all 
mechanisms, remote controls, and indicators connected therewith, shall 
be periodically inspected at least once in each week that the vessel is 
navigated to be assured that they are in proper operating condition. On 
vessels in which the voyage exceeds one week in duration, these doors 
shall be operated before the vessel leaves port. All such doors shall be 
operated daily.
    (b) The date of the test and the condition of the equipment shall be 
noted in the official logbook.


<R05>
Sec. 78.17-5  Valves and closing appliances.

    (a) It shall be the duty of the master to see that all valves, 
including cross connecting valves where fitted, and other appliances 
such as port lights, closing mechanism of scuppers, ash chutes, and 
rubbish chutes, the closing of which is necessary to make a compartment 
watertight, are operated at least once in every week that the vessel is 
navigated to be assured that they are in proper operating condition. Any 
remote controls or indicating mechanisms shall be inspected at this time 
to

[[Page 100]]

test their efficiency. Where such valves are accessible, they shall be 
inspected at this time, otherwise, they shall be inspected at the first 
opportunity when they are accessible. On vessels in which the voyage 
exceeds one week in duration, these appliances shall be operated before 
the vessel leaves port.
    (b) The date of the test and the condition of the equipment shall be 
noted in the official logbook.


<R05>
Sec. 78.17-10  Loudspeaker system.

    (a) Where fitted, the complete loudspeaker system shall be tested at 
least once every week. This test shall be made by an officer of the 
vessel.
    (b) The date of the test and the condition of the equipment shall be 
noted in the official logbook.

    Cross Reference: See subchapter J (Electrical Engineering) of this 
chapter for details.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16955, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 74-125A, 47 
FR 15231, Apr. 8, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 78.17-15  Steering gear, whistle, and means of communication.

    (a) On all vessels making a voyage of more than 48 hours' duration, 
the entire steering gear, the whistle, and the means of communication 
between the bridge or pilothouse and the engine room shall be examined 
and tested by an officer of the vessel within a period of not more than 
12 hours prior to departure. On all other vessels similar examinations 
and tests shall be made at least once every week.
    (b) The date of the test and the condition of the equipment shall be 
noted in the official logbook.


<R05>
Sec. 78.17-20  Drafts and load line markings.

    (a) The master of every vessel on an ocean, coastwise, or Great 
Lakes voyage shall enter the drafts of the vessel, forward and aft, in 
the official logbook when leaving port.
    (b) On vessels subject to the requirements of subchapter E (Load 
Lines) of this chapter, at the time of departure from port on an ocean, 
coastwise, or Great Lakes voyage, the master shall insert in the 
official logbook a statement of the position of the subdivision load 
line mark, port and starboard, in relation to the surface of the water 
in which the vessel is then floating.
    (1) When the draft of the vessel is limited by a seasonal load line 
located below the subdivision load line, the position of the applicable 
seasonal load line shall be entered in relation to the surface of the 
water in which the vessel is floating.
    (2) When an allowance for draft is made for density of the water in 
which the vessel is floating, this density is to be noted in the 
official logbook.


<R05>
Sec. 78.17-22  Verification of vessel compliance with applicable 
stability requirements.

    (a) After loading and prior to departure and at all other times 
necessary to assure the safety of the vessel, the master shall determine 
that the vessel complies with all applicable stability requirements in 
the vessel's trim and stability book, stability letter, Certificate of 
Inspection, and Load Line Certificate, as the case may be, and then 
enter an attestation statement of the verification in the log book. The 
vessel may not depart until it is in compliance with these requirements.
    (b) When determining compliance with applicable stability 
requirements the vessel's draft, trim, and stability must be determined 
as necessary and any stability calculations made in support of the 
determination must be retained on board the vessel for the duration of 
the voyage.

[CGD 89-037, 57 FR 41822, Sept. 11, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 78.17-25  Sanitation.

    (a) It shall be the duty of the master and chief engineer to see 
that the vessel and, in particular, the passenger and crew quarters are 
in a clean and sanitary condition. The chief engineer shall be 
responsible only for the sanitary condition of the engineering 
department.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.17-30  Examination of boilers and machinery.

    It shall be the duty of the chief engineer when assuming charge of 
the boilers and machinery of a vessel to examine them thoroughly. If any 
parts thereof are in bad condition, the fact shall immediately be 
reported to the

[[Page 101]]

master, owner or agent, and the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection.

[CGD 95-028, 62 FR 51205, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 78.17-33  Loading doors.

    (a) The master of a vessel fitted with loading doors shall assure 
that all loading doors are closed watertight and secured during the 
entire voyage except that--
    (1) If a door cannot be opened or closed while the vessel is at a 
dock, it may be open while the vessel approaches and draws away from the 
dock, but only as far as necessary to enable the door to be immediately 
operated.
    (2) If needed to operate the vessel, or embark and disembark 
passengers when the vessel is at anchor in protected waters, loading 
doors may be open provided that the master determines that the safety of 
the vessel is not impaired.
    (b) For the purposes of this section, ``loading doors'' include all 
weathertight ramps, bow visors, and openings used to load personnel, 
equipment, and stores, located in the collision bulkhead, the side 
shell, or the boundaries of enclosed superstructures that are continuous 
with the shell of the vessel.
    (c) The master shall enter into the log book the time and door 
location of every closing of the loading doors.
    (d) The master shall enter into the log book any opening of the 
doors in accordance with paragraph (a)(2) of this section setting forth 
the time of the opening of the doors and the circumstances warranting 
this action.

[CGD 89-037, 57 FR 41822, Sept. 11, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 78.17-35  Hatches and other openings.

    (a) It shall be the responsibility of the master to assure himself 
before leaving protected waters that all exposed cargo hatches of his 
vessel are closed and made properly tight.
    (b) The following doors, portable plates, ports, and other openings 
shall be kept closed while the vessel is being navigated, and shall be 
closed before the vessel commences a voyage:
    (1) Watertight doors between cargo spaces prescribed in Sec. 
170.275 of this chapter.
    (2) Portable plates in watertight bulkheads prescribed in Sec. 
171.111(b) of this chapter.
    (3) Gangway, cargo, and coaling ports fitted below the margin line 
that is determined in accordance with Sec. 171.015 of this chapter.
    (4) On ocean, coastwise, or Great Lakes vessels of 150 gross tons 
and over, all opening type port lights in a 'tween deck, if the sill of 
any port light in that 'tween deck, is below a line drawn parallel to 
the bulkhead deck at side and having its lowest point 4\1/2\ feet plus 
2\1/2\ percent of the breadth of the vessel above the water when the 
vessel departs from port. The Commandant may indicate the limiting mean 
draft which would allow such port lights to be opened at sea.
    (5) Port lights that are not accessible during navigation. Dead 
covers on such port lights shall also be secured.
    (6) Port lights in spaces appropriated alternately to the carriage 
of cargo and passengers, when cargo is carried. Dead covers on such port 
lights shall also be secured.
    (c) The time of opening and closing of hatches and other openings 
noted in this section shall be entered in the official logbook. In the 
event that the master at his discretion does not secure the hatches, a 
notation of this fact shall be made in the official logbook. If it 
becomes essential for the safety of the vessel to open any of the 
fittings noted in this section while at sea, the circumstances and the 
time of opening and closing shall be entered in the official logbook.
    (d) The time of opening, closing, and securing, at sea, of 
watertight doors fitted between bunkers for the purpose of trimming 
coal, shall be entered in the official logbook.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16955, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 79-023, 48 FR 
51007, Nov. 4, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 78.17-45  Emergency lighting and power systems.

    (a) It shall be the duty of the master to see that the emergency 
lighting and power systems are operated and inspected at least once in 
each week that the vessel is navigated to be assured that the system is 
in proper operating condition.

[[Page 102]]

    (b) Internal combustion engine driven emergency generators shall be 
operated under load for at least 2 hours, at least once in each month 
that the vessel is navigated.
    (c) Storage batteries for emergency lighting and power systems shall 
be tested at least once each 6-month period that the vessel is navigated 
to demonstrate the ability of the storage battery to supply the 
emergency loads for the period of time specified in table 112.05-5(a) of 
this chapter.
    (d) The date of the tests and the condition and performance of the 
apparatus shall be noted in the official logbook.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16959, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGFR 70-143, 35 
FR 19906, Dec. 30, 1970]


<R05>
Sec. 78.17-50  Emergency training, musters, and drills.

    Onboard training, musters, and drills must be in accordance with 
subchapter W (Lifesaving Appliances and Arrangements) of this chapter.

[CGD 84-069, 61 FR 25288, May 20, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 78.17-65  Smoke detecting system.

    (a) It shall be the duty of the master to see that the smoke inlets 
in cargo holds are examined at least once in each 3 months by the ship's 
personnel to determine if the inlets are obstructed by corrosion, paint, 
dust, or other extraneous matter. Smoke tests shall be made in all holds 
and the system found or made operable. The date of the test and 
condition of the system shall be entered in the log.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.17-75  Requirements for fuel oil.

    (a) It shall be the duty of the chief engineer to cause an entry in 
the log be made of each supply of fuel oil received on board, stating 
the quantity received, the name of the vendor, the name of the oil 
producer, and the flashpoint (Pensky-Martens Closed Cup Method, ASTM D 
93 (incorporated by reference, see Sec. 78.01-2)) for which it is 
certified by the producer.
    (b) It shall be the further duty of the chief engineer to cause to 
be drawn and sealed and suitably labeled at the time the supply is 
received on board, a half-pint sample of each lot of fuel oil. These 
samples shall be preserved until the particular supply of oil is 
exhausted.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16955, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGFR 68-82, 33 FR 
18899, Dec. 18, 1968; USCG-2000-7790, 65 FR 58461, Sept. 29, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 78.17-80  Firefighting equipment, general.

    (a) It shall be the duty of the owner, master, or person in charge 
to see that the vessel's firefighting equipment is at all times ready 
for use and that all such equipment required by the regulations in this 
subchapter is provided, maintained, and replaced as indicated.
    (b) It shall be the duty of the owner, master, or person in charge 
to require and have performed at least once in every twelve months the 
tests and inspections of all hand portable fire extinguishers, 
semiportable fire extinguishing systems, and fixed fire extinguishing 
systems on board, as described in tables 71.25-20(a) (1) and 71.25-20(a) 
(2) in Sec. 71.25-20 of this subchapter. The owner, master, or person 
in charge shall keep records of such tests and inspections showing the 
dates when performed, the number and/or other identification of each 
unit tested and inspected, and the name(s) of the person(s) and/or 
company conducting the tests and inspections. Such records shall be made 
available to the inspector upon request and shall be kept for the period 
of validity of the vessel's current certificate of inspection. Where 
practicable these records should be kept in or with the vessel's log 
book. The conduct of these tests and inspections does not relieve the 
owner, master, or person in charge of his responsibility to maintain 
this firefighting equipment in proper condition at all times.


<R04>
                        Subpart 78.19_Auto Pilot


<R05>
Sec. 78.19-1  Use of auto pilot.

    Except as provided in 33 CFR 164.15, when the automatic pilot is 
used in--
    (a) Areas of high traffic density;
    (b) Conditions of restricted visibility; and

[[Page 103]]

    (c) All other hazardous navigational situations, the master shall 
ensure that--
    (1) It is possible to immediately establish manual control of the 
ship's steering;
    (2) A competent person is ready at all times to take over steering 
control; and
    (3) The changeover from automatic to manual steering and vice versa 
is made by, or under, the supervision of the officer of the watch.

[CGD 75-074, 42 FR 5963, Jan. 31, 1977]


<R04>
                Subpart 78.21_Maneuvering Characteristics


<R05>
Sec. 78.21-1  Data required.

    For each ocean and coastwise vessel of 1,600 gross tons and over, 
the following apply:
    (a) The following maneuvering information must be prominently 
displayed in the pilothouse on a fact sheet:
    (1) For full and half speed, a turning circle diagram to port and 
starboard that shows the time and the distance of advance and transfer 
required to alter the course 90 degrees with maximum rudder angle and 
constant power settings.
    (2) The time and distance to stop the vessel from full and half 
speed while maintaining approximately the initial heading with minimum 
application of rudder.
    (3) For each vessel with a fixed propeller, a table of shaft 
revolutions per minute for a representative range of speeds.
    (4) For each vessel with a controllable pitch propeller a table of 
control settings for a representative range of speeds.
    (5) For each vessel that is fitted with an auxiliary device to 
assist in maneuvering, such as a bow thruster, a table of vessel speeds 
at which the auxiliary device is effective in maneuvering the vessel.
    (b) The maneuvering information must be provided in the normal load 
and normal light condition with normal trim for a particular condition 
of loading assuming the following--
    (1) Calm weather--wind 10 knots or less, calm sea;
    (2) No current;
    (3) Deep water conditions--water depth twice the vessel's draft or 
greater; and
    (4) Clean hull.
    (c) At the bottom of the fact sheet, the following statement must 
appear:

                                 Warning

The response of the (name of the vessel) may be different from those 
listed above if any of the following conditions, upon which the 
maneuvering information is based, are varied:
    (1) Calm weather--wind 10 knots or less, calm sea;
    (2) No current;
    (3) Water depth twice the vessel's draft or greater;
    (4) Clean hull; and
    (5) Intermediate drafts or unusual trim.

    (d) The information on the fact sheet must be:
    (1) Verified six months after the vessel is placed in service; or
    (2) Modified six months after the vessel is placed into service and 
verified within three months thereafter.
    (e) The information that appears on the fact sheet may be obtained 
from:
    (1) Trial trip observations;
    (2) Model tests;
    (3) Analytical calculations;
    (4) Simulations;
    (5) Information established from another vessel of similar hull 
form, power, rudder and propeller; or
    (6) Any combination of the above.
    The accuracy of the information in the fact sheet required is that 
attainable by ordinary shipboard navigation equipment.
    (f) The requirements for information for fact sheets for specialized 
craft such as semi-submersibles, hydrofoils, hovercraft and other 
vessels of unusual design will be specified on a case by case basis.

[CGD 73-78, 40 FR 2689, Jan. 15, 1975, as amended by CGD 79-165a, 45 FR 
64189, Sept. 29, 1980]


<R04>
                         Subpart 78.23_Whistling


<R05>
Sec. 78.23-1  Unnecessary whistling prohibited.

    (a) The unnecessary sounding of the vessel's whistle is prohibited 
within any harbor limits of the United States.
    (b) [Reserved]

[[Page 104]]


<R04>
                       Subpart 78.27_Searchlights


<R05>
Sec. 78.27-1  Improper use prohibited.

    (a) No person shall flash or cause to be flashed the rays of a 
search light or other blinding light onto the bridge or into the 
pilothouse of any vessel under way.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
    Subpart 78.30_Lookouts, Pilothouse Watch, Patrolmen, and Watchmen


<R05>
Sec. 78.30-5  Pilothouse watch.

    (a) In addition to the licensed deck officer or pilot, there shall 
be at least one member of the crew also on watch in or near the 
pilothouse at all times when the vessel is being navigated.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.30-10  Supervised patrol.

    (a) The provisions of this section shall apply to all vessels on an 
international voyage, and to all other vessels having berthed or 
stateroom accommodations for passengers. This section shall be 
applicable at all times when passengers are on board.
    (b) Between the hours of 10 p.m. and 6 a.m., a supervised patrol 
shall be maintained so as to completely cover all parts of the vessel 
accessible to passengers or crew, excepting occupied sleeping 
accommodations and machinery spaces and similar spaces where a regular 
watch is maintained.
    (c) Clocks, keys, and recording apparatus shall be of an approved 
type. The station boxes shall have seals placed over the securing screws 
in order to leave evidence of removal or tampering.
    (d) Clocks or key stations shall be so arranged throughout the 
vessel so as to assure complete coverage of all accessible spaces 
required by paragraph (b) of this section. The number and location of 
recording stations, the order in which they are visited, and the number 
undertaken by one patrolman shall be specifically approved. The stations 
shall be numbered as required by Sec. 78.47-23. Sufficient watchmen 
shall be available so that each space will be covered at least once in 
every hour except as follows:
    (1) On existing vessels not constructed in general agreement with 
Sec. Sec. 72.05-5 through 72.05-60, of this subchapter, the supervised 
patrol shall cover all spaces required by paragraph (b) of this section 
at least once in every 20 minutes.
    (2) Public spaces constructed in general agreement with Sec. Sec. 
72.05-5 through 72.05-60, of this subchapter, shall have either an 
approved fire detecting system installed in such spaces or the 
supervised patrol shall cover these spaces at least once in every 20 
minutes.
    (e) The patrolman shall report to the bridge at least once an hour 
on vessels where the supervised patrol system is not equipped with a 
recording apparatus in the control station. In vessels requiring more 
than one patrol route, one patrolman may contact others and make a joint 
report to the bridge. Failure of a patrolman to follow a prescribed 
route, or to record each station within the specified time, shall be 
entered on the record along with the reason for the irregularity.
    (f) The patrolman while on duty shall wear a distinctive uniform or 
badge, and shall have in his possession at all times an efficient 
flashlight.
    (g) A patrolman on duty shall have no other tasks assigned to him.


<R05>
Sec. 78.30-15  Watchmen.

    (a) The provisions of this section shall apply to all vessels not 
required to have a supervised patrol under the provisions of Sec. 
78.30-10. This section shall be applicable at all times when passengers 
are on board.
    (b) During the nighttime, a suitable number of watchmen shall be 
stationed in the passenger accommodation areas on each deck.
    (c) Watchmen shall be under the direct charge of the master or 
officer in command of the vessel, and shall report to such officer at 
the pilothouse at fixed intervals not exceeding one hour. Watchmen shall 
not be required to perform any other duties while on watch.
    (d) The uniform of the night watchman shall be conspicuously 
different from other persons so as to be readily distinguished. A rating 
badge marked ``Watchman'' shall be worn on the left sleeve and the front 
of the cap shall also be marked ``Watchman''.

[[Page 105]]

    (e) The watchman shall have in his possession at all time while on 
duty an efficient flashlight.


<R05>
Sec. 78.30-20  Master's and officer's responsibility.

    (a) Nothing in this part shall exonerate any master or officer in 
command from the consequences of any neglect to keep a proper lookout or 
to maintain a proper fire watch or from any neglect of any precaution 
which may be required by the ordinary practice of seamen or by the 
special circumstances of the case. When circumstances require it, 
additional watches shall be maintained to guard against fire or other 
danger and to give an alarm in case of accident or disaster.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
    Subpart 78.33_Reports of Accidents, Repairs, and Unsafe Equipment


<R05>
Sec. 78.33-1  Repairs of boiler and pressure vessels.

    (a) Before making any repairs to boilers or unfired pressure 
vessels, the chief engineer shall submit a report covering the nature of 
the repairs to the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, at or nearest 
the port where the repairs are to be made.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.33-5  Accidents to machinery.

    (a) In the event of an accident to a boiler, unfired pressure 
vessel, or machinery tending to render the further use of the item 
unsafe until repairs are made, or if by ordinary wear such items become 
unsafe, a report shall be made by the chief engineer immediately to the 
Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, or if at sea, immediately upon 
arrival at port.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.33-10  Notice required before repairs.

    (a) No repairs or alterations, except in an emergency, shall be made 
to any lifesaving or fire detecting or extinguishing equipment without 
advance notice to the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection. When 
emergency repairs or alterations have been made, notice shall be given 
to the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, as soon as practicable.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
             Subpart 78.35_Communication Between Deckhouses


<R05>
Sec. 78.35-1  When required.

    On all vessels navigating in other than protected waters, where the 
distance between deckhouses is more than 46 meters (150 feet) a fixed 
means of facilitating communication between both ends of the vessel, 
such as a raised fore and aft bridge or side tunnels, must be provided. 
Previously approved arrangements may be retained so long as they are 
maintained in good condition to the satisfaction of the Officer in 
Charge, Marine Inspection.

[CGD 95-027, 61 FR 26004, May 23, 1996]


<R04>
                        Subpart 78.36_Work Vests


<R05>
Sec. 78.36-1  Application.

    (a) Provisions of this subpart shall apply to all vessels inspected 
and certificated in accordance with this subchapter.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.36-5  Approved types of work vests.

    (a) Each buoyant work vest carried under the permissive authority of 
this section must be approved under--
    (1) Subpart 160.053 of this chapter; or
    (2) Subpart 160.077 of this chapter as a commercial hybrid PFD.
    (b) [Reserved]

[CGD 78-174A, 51 FR 4350, Feb. 4, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 78.36-10  Use.

    (a) Approved buoyant work vests are considered to be items of safety 
apparel and may be carried aboard vessels to be worn by crew members 
when working near or over the water under favorable working conditions. 
They shall be used under the supervision and control of designated 
ship's officers. When carried, such vests shall not be accepted in lieu 
of any portion of the required number of approved life preservers and 
shall not be substituted for

[[Page 106]]

the approved life preservers required to be worn during drills and 
emergencies.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.36-15  Shipboard stowage.

    (a) The approved buoyant work vests shall be stowed separately from 
the regular stowage of approved life preservers.
    (b) The locations for the stowage of work vests shall be such as not 
to be easily confused with that for approved life preservers.


<R05>
Sec. 78.36-20  Shipboard inspections.

    (a) Each work vest shall be subject to examination by a marine 
inspector to determine its serviceability. If found to be satisfactory, 
it may be continued in service, but shall not be stamped by a marine 
inspector with a Coast Guard stamp. If a work vest is found not to be in 
a serviceable condition, then such work vest shall be removed from the 
vessel. If a work vest is beyond repair, it shall be destroyed or 
multilated in the presence of a marine inspector so as to prevent its 
continued use as a work vest.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.36-25  Additional requirements for hybrid work vests.

    (a) In addition to the other requirements in this subpart, 
commercial hybrid PFD's must be--
    (1) Used, stowed, and maintained in accordance with the procedures 
set out in the manual required for these devices by Sec. 160.077-29 of 
this chapter and any limitation(s) marked on them; and
    (2) Of the same or similar design and have the same method of 
operation as each other hybrid PFD carried on board.
    (b) [Reserved]

[CGD 78-174A, 51 FR 4350, Feb. 4, 1986]


<R04>
                      Subpart 78.37_Logbook Entries


<R05>
Sec. 78.37-1  Application.

    (a) Except as specifically noted, the provisions of this subpart 
shall apply to all vessels.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.37-3  Logbooks and records.

    (a) The master or person in charge of a vessel that is required by 
46 U.S.C. 11301 to have an official logbook shall maintain the logbook 
on form CG-706. When the voyage is completed, the master or person in 
charge shall file the logbook with the Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspection.
    (b) The master or person in charge of a vessel that is not required 
by 46 U.S.C. 11301 to have an official logbook, shall maintain, on 
board, an unofficial logbook or record in any form desired for the 
purposes of making entries therein as required by law or regulations in 
this subchapter. Such logs or records are not filed with the Officer in 
Charge, Marine Inspection, but must be kept available for review by a 
marine inspector for a period of 1 year after the date to which the 
records refer. Separate records of tests and inspections of fire 
fighting equipment must be maintained with the vessel's logs for the 
period of validity of the vessel's certificate of inspection.

[CGD 95-027, 61 FR 26004, May 23, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 78.37-5  Actions required to be logged.

    The actions and observations noted in this section shall be entered 
in the official log book. This section contains no requirements which 
are not made in other portions of this subchapter, the items being 
merely grouped together for convenience.
    (a) Onboard training, musters, and drills: held in accordance with 
subchapter W (Lifesaving Appliances and Arrangements) of this chapter.
    (b) Watertight door operation: Daily and Weekly. See Sec. 78.17-3.
    (c) Valve and closing appliance operation: Weekly. See Sec. 78.17-
5.
    (d) Loudspeaker system: Weekly. See Sec. 78.17-10.
    (e) Steering gear, whistle, and means of communication: Prior to 
departure. See Sec. 78.17-15.
    (f) Drafts and load line markings: Prior to leaving port, ocean, 
coastwise, and Great Lakes services only. See Sec. 78.17-20.
    (g) Verification of vessel compliance with applicable stability 
requirements. After loading and prior to departure

[[Page 107]]

and at all other time necessary to assure the safety of the vessel. See 
Sec. 78.17-22.
    (h) Loading doors. Where appliicable, every closing and any opening 
when not docked. See Sec. 78.17-33.
    (i) Hatches and other openings: All openings and closings, or 
leaving port without closing, except vessels on protected waters. See 
Sec. 78.17-35.
    (j) Emergency lighting and power systems: Weekly and semiannually. 
See Sec. 78.17-45.
    (k) Smoke Detecting System: Once every three months. See Sec. 
78.17-65.
    (l) Fuel oil data: Upon receipt of fuel oil on board. See Sec. 
78.17-75.
    (m) Cargo gear inspections: At least once a month. See Sec. 71.47-
70 of this subchapter.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16955, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 89-037, 57 FR 
41822, Sept. 11, 1992; CGD 84-069, 61 FR 25288, May 20, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 78.37-10  Official log entires.

    (a) In addition to other items required to be entered in the 
official logbook on every vessel where an official logbook is required, 
all items relative to the crew and passengers, including the count of 
passengers carried, and to casualties shall also be entered.
    (b) Except as noted in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, on any 
vessel where an official logbook is not required, the master shall keep 
a record of the correct count of all the passengers received and 
delivered from day to day. This record shall be open to inspection by 
the Coast Guard at all times. The aggregate number of the passengers 
carried shall be furnished to the Coast Guard whenever requested. The 
information shall be available for a period of one year after the date 
to which the records refer.
    (1) The provisions of the paragraph shall not apply to ferry 
vessels.
    (2) [Reserved]

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16959, Dec 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 95-028, 62 FR 
51205, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R04>
                     Subpart 78.40_Vehicular Ferries


<R05>
Sec. 78.40-1  Stowage of vehicles.

    (a) Automobiles or other vehicles shall be stowed in such a manner 
as to permit both passengers and operators to get out and away from them 
freely in the event of fire or other disaster. Where there is 
insufficient clearance to provide for easy egress at all times, both 
passengers and operators shall be directed to leave their vehicles and 
to occupy other spaces reserved for them during the crossing. The decks, 
where necessary, shall be definitely marked with painted lines to 
indicate the vehicle runways and the aisle spaces.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.40-5  Securing of vehicles.

    (a) The master shall take all necessary precautions to see that 
automobiles or other vehicles have their motors turned off when the 
ferry is under way, and the motors shall not be started until the ferry 
is secured to the landing. In addition, the vehicles at each end shall 
have their wheels securely blocked, while the vessel is being navigated.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.40-10  No smoking permitted.

    (a) The master shall have appropriate ``No Smoking'' signs posted 
and shall take all necessary precautions to prevent smoking or carrying 
of lighted or smoldering cigars, cigarettes, etc., in the deck area 
assigned to automobiles or other vehicles.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
                     Subpart 78.45_Display of Plans


<R05>
Sec. 78.45-1  When required.

    (a) Vessels of 1,000 gross tons and over, and vessels of any tonnage 
on an international voyage shall have permanently exhibited for the 
guidance of the officer in charge of the vessel the following plans:
    (1) General arrangement plans showing for each deck the fire control 
stations, the various sections enclosed by fire-resisting bulkheads, 
together with particulars of the fire alarms, detecting systems, the 
sprinkler installation (if any), the fire extinguishing appliances, 
means of access to different compartments, decks, etc., and the 
ventilating systems including particulars of the master fan controls, 
the positions of dampers, the location of the remote means of stopping 
fans, and

[[Page 108]]

identification numbers of the ventilating fans serving each section. If 
cargo compartments are ``specially suitable for vehicles,'' they shall 
be so indicated on the plan. Alternatively, at the discretion of the 
Commandant, the listed details may be set out in a different medium, 
such as a booklet or on computer software, provided that the details are 
available to each officer and a written copy is retained on board at all 
times and is accessible during emergencies.
    (2) For vessels constructed on or after September 30, 1997, and for 
existing vessels which have their plans redrawn, the symbols used to 
identify the aforementioned details shall be in accordance with IMO 
Assembly resolution A.654(16). The identical symbols can be found in 
ASTM Adjunct F 1626.
    (3) Plans showing clearly for each deck and hold the boundaries of 
the watertight compartments, the openings therein with the means of 
closure and position of any controls thereof, and the arrangements for 
the correction of any list due to flooding.
    (4) The aforementioned information required for this section shall 
be kept up-to-date, any alteration being recorded in the applicable 
medium as soon as practicable.

[CGD 95-028, 62 FR 51205, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R04>
      Subpart 78.47_Markings for Fire and Emergency Equipment, Etc.


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-1  Application.

    (a) The provisions of this subpart with the exception of Sec. 
78.47-90, shall apply to all vessels contracted for on or after November 
19, 1952. Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall meet 
the requirements of Sec. 78.47-90.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-3  General.

    (a) It is the intent of this subpart to provide such markings as are 
necessary for the guidance of the persons on board in case of emergency. 
In any specific case, and particularly on small vessels, where it can be 
shown to the satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, 
that the prescribed markings are unnecessary for the guidance of the 
persons on board in case of emergency, such markings may be modified or 
omitted.
    (b) In addition to English, all stateroom notices, directional 
signs, etc., shall be printed in languages appropriate to the service of 
the vessel or other action be taken to achieve the same purpose.
    (c) Where in this subpart red letters are specified, letters of a 
contrasting color on a red background will be accepted.


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-5  General alarm contact makers.

    Each general alarm contact maker must be marked in accordance with 
the requirements in subchapter J (Electrical Engineering Regulations) of 
this chapter.

[CGD 74-125A, 47 FR 15232, Apr. 4, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-7  General alarm bells.

    (a) All general alarm bells shall be identified by red lettering at 
least \1/2\ inch high: ``GENERAL ALARM--WHEN BELL RINGS GO TO YOUR 
STATION.''
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-9  Carbon dioxide alarm.

    (a) All carbon dioxide alarms shall be conspicuously identified: 
``WHEN ALARM SOUNDS--VACATE AT ONCE. CARBON DIOXIDE BEING RELEASED.''
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-10  Manual alarm boxes.

    (a) In all new installations, manual alarm boxes shall be clearly 
and permanently marked ``IN CASE OF FIRE BREAK GLASS.'' Existing boxes 
not so marked with the same or equivalent wording, shall be identified 
either on the box or adjacent bulkhead in at least \1/2\ inch letters 
``IN CASE OF FIRE BREAK GLASS.'' All manual alarm boxes shall be 
numbered in red on the adjacent bulkhead with at least \1/2\ inch 
figures. The number shall agree with the number of the zone.
    (b) [Reserved]

[[Page 109]]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-13  Fire detecting and manual alarm, automatic sprinkler,
and smoke detecting alarm bells.

    (a) The fire detecting and manual alarm automatic sprinklers, and 
smoke detecting alarm bells in the engine room shall be identified by at 
least 1 inch red lettering ``FIRE ALARM'', ``SPRINKLER ALARM'' or 
``SMOKE DETECTING ALARM'' as appropriate. Where such alarms on the 
bridge or in the fire control station do not form a part of an easily 
identifiable alarm cabinet, the bells shall be suitably identified as 
above.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-15  Fire extinguishing system branch lines.

    (a) The branch line valves of all fire extinguishing systems shall 
be plainly and permanently marked indicating the spaces served.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-17  Fire extinguishing system controls.

    (a) The control cabinets or spaces containing valves or manifolds 
for the various fire extinguishing systems shall be distinctly marked in 
conspicuous red letters at least 2 inches high--``STEAM FIRE 
APPARATUS'', ``CARBON DIOXIDE FIRE APPARATUS'', ``FOAM FIRE APPARATUS'', 
``WATER SPRAY FIRE APPARATUS'', ``MANUAL SPRINKLING SYSTEM'', or 
``AUTOMATIC SPRINKLING SYSTEM'', as the case may be.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-20  Fire hose stations.

    (a) Each fire hydrant shall be identified in red letters and figures 
at least 2 inches high ``FIRE STATION NO 1,'' ``2,'' ``3,'' etc. Where 
the hose is not stowed in the open or behind glass so as to be readily 
seen, this identification shall be so placed as to be readily seen from 
a distance.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-23  Supervised patrol stations.

    (a) Each supervised patrol clock or key station shall be numbered.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-25  Emergency squad equipment.

    (a) Lockers or spaces containing equipment for the use of the 
emergency squad shall be marked ``EMERGENCY SQUAD EQUIPMENT.''
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-27  Self-contained breathing apparatus.

    Lockers or spaces containing self-contained breathing apparatus 
shall be marked ``SELF-CONTAINED BREATHING APPARATUS.''

[CGD 95-028, 62 FR 51205, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-30  Hand portable fire extinguishers.

    (a) Each hand portable fire extinguisher shall be marked with a 
number and the location where stowed shall be marked with a 
corresponding number at least \1/2\ inch high. Where only one type and 
size of hand portable fire extinguisher is carried, the numbering may be 
omitted.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-33  Emergency lights.

    (a) All emergency lights shall be marked with a letter ``E'' at 
least \1/2\ inch high.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-35  Fire doors.

    (a) All doors in main vertical zone bulkheads or stairway 
enclosures, except from individual rooms such as staterooms, fan rooms, 
lockers, etc., shall be numbered conspicuously on an etched plate or 
equivalent in not less than \3/8\ inch letters and figures ``F. S. D. 
1,'' ``2,'' ``3,'' etc. If stenciled or similar notice is used, the 
letters and figures shall be at least 1 inch high. The number shall be 
conspicuous with the door in the open position.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-37  Watertight doors.

    (a) All watertight doors in subdivision bulkheads shall be numbered 
conspicuously on both sides on an etched plate or equivalent in not less 
than \3/8\ inch letters and figures ``W. T. D. 1,'' ``2,'' ``3,'' etc. 
If a stencilled or similar notice is used, the letters and figures

[[Page 110]]

shall be at least 1 inch high. If the construction is such that the 
number cannot be seen with the door in the open position, a similar 
number shall be placed on the frame or other location immediately 
adjacent to the door. All watertight door remote control stations shall 
be marked in the same manner, and in addition, the direction of 
operation of the lever or wheel to open and close the door shall be 
conspicuously marked.
    (b) Class 1 doors fitted in accordance with the requirements in 
Sec. 170.255 of this chapter must additionally be marked ``RECLOSE 
AFTER USE.''

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16955, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 79-023, 48 FR 
51008, Nov. 4, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-38  Valves and closing appliances.

    (a) All valves and closing appliances, or other mechanisms which may 
be required to be operated for damage control purposes in case of 
emergency shall be conspicuously marked with letters at least 1 inch 
high identifying the control and the direction of operation. In all 
cases indication shall be provided to show whether the control is open 
or closed.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-40  Exit signs.

    (a) Illuminated exit signs are required and must be installed in 
accordance with subchapter J (Electrical Engineering Regulations) of 
this chapter.
    (b) Small rooms or spaces having a secondary means of escape which 
is not obviously apparent shall have a suitable sign in red letters 
``EMERGENCY EXIT'' directing attention to such escape.

    Cross Reference: See subchapter J (Electrical Engineering) of this 
chapter for minimum size.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16955, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 74-125A, 47 
FR 15232, Apr. 8, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-45  Markings for lifesaving appliances, instructions to 
passengers, and stowage locations.

    Lifesaving appliances, instructions to passengers, and stowage 
locations must be marked in accordance with subchapter W (Lifesaving 
Appliances and Arrangements) of this chapter.

[CGD 84-069, 61 FR 25288, May 20, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-53  Automatic ventilation dampers.

    (a) The manual operating positions for automatic fire dampers in 
ventilation ducts passing through main vertical zone bulkheads shall be 
identified by red day light-reflecting letters at least \1/2\ inch high 
``VENTILATION FIRE DAMPER.'' In addition, the open and closed positions 
shall be similarly marked.
    (b) [Reserved]

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16955, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by 67-87, 32 FR 
19181, Dec. 20, 1967]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-55  Instructions for changing steering gear.

    (a) Instructions in at least \1/2\ inch letters and figures shall be 
posted in the steering engine room, relating in order, the different 
steps to be taken in changing to the emergency steering gear. Each 
clutch, gear, wheel, lever, valve or switch which is used during the 
changeover shall be numbered or lettered on a metal plate or painted so 
that the markings can be recognized at a reasonable distance. The 
instructions shall indicate each clutch or pin to be ``in'' or ``out'' 
and each valve or switch which is to be ``opened'' or ``closed'' in 
shifting to any means of steering for which the vessel is equipped. 
Instructions shall be included to line up all steering wheels and rudder 
amidship before changing gears.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-57  Rudder orders.

    (a) At all steering stations, there shall be installed a suitable 
notice on the wheel or device of in such other position as to be 
directly in the helmsman's line of vision, to indicate the direction in 
which the wheel or device must be turned for ``right rudder'' and for 
``left rudder.''
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-70  Portable magazine chests.

    (a) Portable magazine chest shall be marked in letters of at least 3 
inches high ``PORTABLE MAGAZINE

[[Page 111]]

CHEST--FLAMMABLE--KEEP LIGHTS AND FIRE AWAY''.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-75  Ventilation alarm failure.

    (a) The alarm required by Sec. 72.15-15 (c)(4) of this subchapter, 
which indicates the loss of required ventilation in spaces specially 
suitable for vehicles, shall be marked with a conspicuous sign in at 
least \1/4\-inch letters ``VENTILATION FAILURE IN VEHICULAR SPACE.''
    (b) [Reserved]

[CGFR 66-33, 31 FR 15284, Dec. 6, 1966]


<R05>
Sec. 78.47-90  Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952.

    (a) Vessels contracted for prior to November 19, 1952, shall meet 
the requirements of this paragraph.
    (1) The requirements of Sec. Sec. 78.47-5 through 78.47-75 shall be 
met with the exception that existing signs and markings containing the 
same general intent, but not necessarily identical wording or exact 
letter type, size, or color, may be retained so long as they are in good 
condition to the satisfaction of the Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspection.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (b) [Reserved]

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16955, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGFR 66-33, 31 FR 
15284, Dec. 6, 1966]


<R04>
                    Subpart 78.50_Markings on Vessels


<R05>
Sec. 78.50-1  Application.

    (a) The provisions of this subpart shall apply to all vessels except 
as specifically noted in this subpart.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.50-5  Hull markings.

    Vessels shall be marked as required by parts 67 and 69 of this 
chapter.

[CGD 72-104R, 37 FR 14233, July 18, 1972]


<R05>
Sec. 78.50-10  Draft marks and draft indicating systems.

    (a) All vessels must have draft marks plainly and legibly visible 
upon the stem and upon the sternpost or rudderpost or any place at the 
stern of the vessel as may be necessary for easy observance. The bottom 
of each mark must indicate the draft.
    (b) The draft must be taken from the bottom of the keel to the 
surface of the water at the location of the marks.
    (c) In cases where the keel does not extend forward or aft to the 
locations of the draft marks, due to raked stem or cut--away skeg, the 
datum line from which the draft shal be taken shall be obtained by 
projecting the line of the bottom of keel forward or aft, as the case 
may be, to the location of the draft marks.
    (d) In cases where a vessel may have a skeg or other appendage 
extending locally below the line of the keel, the draft at the end of 
the vessel adjacent to such appendage shall be measured to a line 
tangent to the lowest part of such appendage and parallel to the line of 
the bottom of the keel.
    (e) Draft marks must be separated so that the projections of the 
marks onto a vertical plane are of uniform height equal to the vertical 
spacing between consecutive marks.
    (f) Draft marks must be painted in contrasting color to the hull.
    (g) In cases where draft marks are obscured due to operational 
constraints or by protrusions, the vessel must be fitted with a reliable 
draft indicating system from which the bow and stern drafts can be 
determined.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16955, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by CGD 72-104R, 37 
FR 14233, July 18, 1972; CGD 89-037, 57 FR 41822, Sept. 11, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 78.50-15  Load line marks.

    (a) Vessels assigned a load line shall have the deck line and the 
load line marks permanently scribed or embossed as required by 
subchapter E (Load Lines) of this chapter.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
                 Subpart 78.55_Carrying of Excess Steam


<R05>
Sec. 78.55-1  Master and chief engineer responsible.

    It shall be the duty of the master and the engineer in charge of the 
boilers of any vessel to require that a steam pressure is not carried in 
excess of that allowed by the certificate of inspection, and to require 
that the safety valves,

[[Page 112]]

once set by the inspector, are in no way tampered with or made 
inoperative.

[CGD 95-028, 62 FR 51205, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R04>
                   Subpart 78.57_Routing Instructions


<R05>
Sec. 78.57-1  All personnel must comply.

    All licensed masters, officers, and certificated seamen on United 
States vessels shall strictly comply with routing instructions issued by 
competent naval authority.

[CGD 95-027, 61 FR 26005, May 23, 1996]


<R04>
  Subpart 78.60_Compliance With Provisions of Certificate of Inspection


<R05>
Sec. 78.60-1  Master or person in charge responsible.

    (a) It shall be the duty of the master or other person in charge of 
the vessel to see that all of the provisions of the certificate of 
inspection are strictly adhered to. Nothing in this subpart shall be 
construed as limiting the master or other person in charge of the 
vessel, at his own responsibility, from diverting from the route 
prescribed in the certificate of inspection or taking such other steps 
as he deems necessary and prudent to assist vessels in distress or for 
other similar emergencies.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
         Subpart 78.65_Exhibition of Merchant Mariner Credential


<R05>
Sec. 78.65-1  Officers.

    All officers on a vessel must have their licenses or officer 
endorsements conspicuously displayed.

[CGFR 65-50, 30 FR 16955, Dec. 30, 1965, as amended by USCG-2006-24371, 
74 FR 11265, Mar. 16, 2009]


<R04>
Supart 78.70_De-Energizing of Cargo Hold Lighting Circuits When Grain or 
                 Other Combustible Bulk Cargo is Carried


<R05>
Sec. 78.70-1  Master's responsibility.

    (a) Before loading bulk grain, or similar combustible bulk cargo, 
the master shall have the lighting circuits to cargo compartments in 
which the bulk cargo is to be loaded de-energized at the distribution 
panel or panel board. He shall thereafter have periodic inspections made 
of the panel or panel board as frequently as necessary to ascertain that 
the affected circuits remain de-energized while this bulk cargo remains 
within the vessel.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 78.70-5  Warning notice posted.

    (a) As a precaution against any subsequent unintentional re-
energizing of the circuits specified above, an appropriate notice shall 
be posted at the location where the control is effected warning against 
re-energizing these circuits. Such notice shall remain posted while this 
bulk cargo remains within the vessel.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
        Subpart 78.83_Operation of Vehicles in Enclosed Locations


<R05>
Sec. 78.83-1  Special operating conditions.

    (a) The operation of self-propelled vehicles in enclosed locations 
shall be permitted only when the other conditions in this section have 
been met.
    (b) Spaces exposed to carbon monoxide or other hazardous vapors from 
exhausts of power-operated industrial trucks shall have adequate 
ventilation. The senior deck officer shall see that tests of the carbon 
monoxide content of the atmosphere are made as frequently as conditions 
require to insure that dangerous concentrations do not develop. Such 
tests shall be made in the area in which persons are working, by persons 
acquainted with the test equipment and procedure. The carbon monoxide 
concentration in the holds and intermediate decks where persons are 
working shall be maintained at not more than 50 parts per million 
(0.005%)

[[Page 113]]

as a time-weighted average, and persons shall be removed from the area 
if the concentration exceeds 75 parts per million (0.0075%). When 
necessary, portable blowers of adequate size and location shall be 
utilized.

[CGFR 66-33, 31 FR 15284, Dec. 6, 1966, as amended by CGFR 69-72, 34 FR 
17484, Oct. 29, 1969; CGD 95-027, 61 FR 26005, May 23, 1996]


<R04>
                 Subpart 78.90_Pilot Boarding Operations


<R05>
Sec. 78.90-1  Pilot boarding operation.

    (a) The master shall ensure that pilot boarding equipment is 
maintained as follows:
    (1) The equipment must be kept clean and in good working order.
    (2) Each damaged step or spreader step on a pilot ladder must be 
replaced in kind with an approved replacement step or spreader step, 
prior to further use of the ladder. The replacement step or spreader 
step must be secured by the method used in the original construction of 
the ladder, and in accordance with manufacturer instructions.
    (b) The master shall ensure compliance with the following during 
pilot boarding operations:
    (1) Only approved pilot boarding equipment may be used.
    (2) The pilot boarding equipment must rest firmly against the hull 
of the vessel and be clear of overboard discharges.
    (3) Two man ropes, a safety line and an approved lifebuoy with an 
approved water light must be at the point of access and be immediately 
available for use during boarding operations.
    (4) Rigging of the equipment and embarkation/debarkation of a pilot 
must be supervised in person by a deck officer.
    (5) Both the equipment over the side and the point of access must be 
adequately lit during night operations.
    (6) If a pilot hoist is used, a pilot ladder must be kept on deck 
adjacent to the hoist and available for immediate use.

[CGD 79-032, 49 FR 25455, June 21, 1984]


<R04>
   Subpart 78.95_Person in Charge of Transfer of Liquid Cargo in Bulk


<R05>
Sec. 78.95-1  General.

    A qualified person in charge of a transfer of liquid cargo in bulk 
shall be designated in accordance with subpart C of 33 CFR part 155.

[CGD 79-116, 60 FR 17157, Apr. 4, 1995]


<R03>
PART 80_DISCLOSURE OF SAFETY STANDARDS AND COUNTRY OF REGISTRY--
Table of Contents



Sec.
80.01 Purpose.
80.10 Applicability.
80.15 Ocean voyage.
80.20 Exception to requirements.
80.25 Notification of safety standards.
80.30 Promotional literature or advertising.
80.40 Civil penalty.

    Authority: 46 U.S.C. 3306; Department of Homeland Security 
Delegation No. 0170.1.

    Source: CGD 72-187R, 38 FR 9081, Apr. 10, 1973, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R05>
Sec. 80.01  Purpose.

    The purpose of the regulations in this part is to implement 46 
U.S.C. 3504.

[CGD 95-028, 62 FR 51205, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 80.10  Applicability.

    Except as exempted in Sec. 80.20, this part applies to--
    (a) Owners, operators, agents, or any persons selling passage on a 
foreign or domestic vessel of one hundred gross tons or over having 
berth or stateroom accommodations for fifty or more passengers and 
embarking passengers at a United States port for a coastwise or an 
international voyage; and (b) owners, operators, agents, and other 
persons involved in the publishing and distribution of promotional 
material in or over any medium of communication within the United States 
offering passage or soliciting passengers for an ocean voyage anywhere 
in the world, by a vessel of one hundred gross tons or over having berth 
or stateroom accommodations for fifty or more passengers, regardless of 
whether passengers are embarked at United States ports for said voyage.

[[Page 114]]

    (b) [Reserved]

[CGD 79-180, 48 FR 7456, Feb. 22, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 80.15  Ocean voyage.

    An ocean voyage for the purposes of this part means:
    A voyage on any body of water seaward of the low water mark such as 
an ocean or arm thereof, other major bodies of water such as seas, 
gulfs, and straits, except voyages exclusively within harbors and small 
coastal indentations.

[CGD 79-180, 48 FR 7456, Feb. 22, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 80.20  Exception to requirements.

    (a) This part does not apply to vessels that comply with the safety 
standards set forth in the International Convention for Safety of Life 
at Sea, 1974.
    (b) If the exception in paragraph (a) of this section applies, the 
country of registry must appear in printed advertising or promotional 
literature as described in Sec. 80.30(a), in a type no smaller than six 
points, American point system.

[CGD 72-187R, 38 FR 9081, Apr. 10, 1973, as amended by CGD 79-180, 48 FR 
7456, Feb. 22, 1983; CGD 90-008, 55 FR 30661, July 26, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 80.25  Notification of safety standards.

    (a) Each owner, operator, agent, or other person, selling passage 
for a coastwise or an international voyage embarking passengers at a 
United States port shall give to a prospective passenger, in writing, at 
the time of or before passage is booked, separately from any promotional 
literature or advertising used, a document containing the following 
information for each vessel concerned--
    (1) The name of the vessel;
    (2) The country of registry;
    (3) One of the following statements as appropriate:
    (i) This vessel complies with international safety standards, except 
the 1966 fire safety standards.
    (ii) This vessel complies with international safety standards 
developed prior to 1960. There is (or, is not) an automatic sprinkler 
system fitted in the passenger living and public spaces. The hull, 
decks, deckhouses, structural bulkheads, and internal partitions are 
(or, are not) composed of combustible materials.
    (iii) This vessel does not comply with any international safety 
standard. There is (or, is not) an automatic sprinkler system fitted in 
the passenger living and public spaces. The hull, decks, deckhouses, 
structural bulkheads, and internal partitions are (or, are not) composed 
of combustible materials.
    (b) The information required in paragraph (a) of this section must 
be printed in a type no smaller than six points, American point system.
    (c) The information required in paragraph (a) of this section must 
be headed--
    (1) ``SAFETY INFORMATION'';
    (2) With each letter in the heading capitalized; and
    (3) In boldfaced type of a size equal to the size of the text 
required in paragraph (a) of this section.

[CGD 72-187R, 38 FR 9081, Apr. 10, 1973, as amended by CGD 79-180, 48 FR 
7456, Feb. 22, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 80.30  Promotional literature or advertising.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (f) of this section, all 
promotional literature or advertising in or over any medium of 
communication within the United States that offers passage or solicits 
passengers for ocean voyages anywhere in the world must contain the 
safety information statement prescribed in paragraph (b) of this section 
if--
    (1) A vessel is named; or
    (2) A voyage is described by--
    (i) A stated port or area of departure;
    (ii) A stated port or area of destination; or
    (iii) A schedule of days of departure or arrival.
    (b) The safety information statement required in paragraph (a) of 
this section must include--
    (1) The name of the vessel;
    (2) The country of registry; and
    (3) One of the following statements, as appropriate:
    (i) This vessel complies with international safety standards, except 
the 1966 fire safety standards.
    (ii) This vessel complies with international safety standards 
developed prior to 1960. There is (or, is not) an

[[Page 115]]

automatic sprinkler fitted in the passenger living and public spaces. 
The hull, decks, deckhouses, structural bulkheads, and internal 
partitions are (or, are not) composed of combustible materials.
    (iii) This vessel does not comply with any international safety 
standard. There is (or, is not) an automatic sprinkler fitted in the 
passenger living and public spaces. The hull, decks, deckhouses, 
structural bulkheads, and internal partitions are (or, are not) composed 
of combustible materials.
    (c) The safety information statement prescribed in paragraph (b) of 
this section must be--
    (1) Printed in a type no smaller than 6 points, American point 
system, that is the same size as any other textual matter of the 
promotional literature or advertising, including any headings;
    (2) Headed ``SAFETY INFORMATION'' in the same size type that is used 
in the safety information statement; and
    (3) Separated from other portions of the text by double spacing or 
box ruling.
    (d) If the promotional literature or advertising lists two or more 
passenger vessels, the owner or operator shall clearly indicate the 
safety information prescribed in paragraph (b) of this section for each 
vessel, but unnecessary repetition is not required.
    (e) Each brochure, pamphlet, schedule, and similar publication 
required in paragraph (a) of this section to contain safety information 
must--
    (1) State the safety information prescribed in paragraph (b) of this 
section at least once for each vessel named; and
    (2) Include a reference in the index of contents or the cover 
regarding the page number where the safety information for each vessel 
is located.
    (f) The section does not apply to--
    (1) An advertising sign that is towed, displayed, or written by 
aircraft;
    (2) An advertisement in a trade publication that is directed to the 
professional counselors in the travel industry and not intended or used 
for general distribution to the public for solicitation of passage on a 
vessel; or
    (3) An advertisement within a magazine, newspaper, periodical, or 
similar publication that is--
    (i) Produced outside of the United States;
    (ii) Not an American edition; and
    (iii) Primarily distributed in the country in which it is produced.


<R05>
Sec. 80.40  Civil penalty.

    For each violation of the regulations in this part, the owner, 
operator, agent, or other person involved is subject to the penalties 
prescribed in 46 U.S.C. 3504.

[CGFR 72-187R, 38 FR 9081, Apr. 10, 1973, as amended by CGD 95-028, 62 
FR 51205, Sept. 30, 1997]

                         PARTS 81	89 [RESERVED]

[[Page 117]]


<R02>
                              FINDING AIDS


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts and 
an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in 
the CFR Index and Finding Aids volume to the Code of Federal Regulations 
which is published separately and revised annually.

  Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
  Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
  List of CFR Sections Affected

[[Page 119]]


<R03>
                    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters


<R04>

                     (Revised as of October 1, 2010)

                      Title 1--General Provisions

         I  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register 
                (Parts 1--49)
        II  Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50--299)
        IV  Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400--500)

                    Title 2--Grants and Agreements

            Subtitle A--Office of Management and Budget Guidance 
                for Grants and Agreements
         I  Office of Management and Budget Governmentwide 
                Guidance for Grants and Agreements (Parts 100--
                199)
        II  Office of Management and Budget Circulars and Guidance 
                (200--299)
            Subtitle B--Federal Agency Regulations for Grants and 
                Agreements
       III  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300-- 
                399)
        IV  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
      VIII  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Department of Defense (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
     XVIII  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1880--1899)
        XX  United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 
                2000--2099)
      XXII  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2200--2299)
     XXIII  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
      XXIV  Housing and Urban Development (Parts 2400--2499)
       XXV  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
      XXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                2600--2699)
     XXVII  Small Business Administration (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
       XXX  Department of Homeland Security (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Institute of Museum and Library Services (Parts 3100--
                3199)

[[Page 120]]

     XXXII  National Endowment for the Arts (Parts 3200--3299)
    XXXIII  National Endowment for the Humanities (Parts 3300--
                3399)
      XXXV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 3500--
                3599)
    XXXVII  Peace Corps (Parts 3700--3799)
     LVIII  Election Assistance Commission (Parts 5800--5899)

                        Title 3--The President

         I  Executive Office of the President (Parts 100--199)

                           Title 4--Accounts

         I  Government Accountability Office (Parts 1--99)
        II  Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board (Parts 
                200--299)

                   Title 5--Administrative Personnel

         I  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1--1199)
        II  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300--1399)
         V  The International Organizations Employees Loyalty 
                Board (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      VIII  Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800--1899)
        IX  Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900--1999)
        XI  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Parts 2100--2199)
       XIV  Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of 
                the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal 
                Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400--2499)
        XV  Office of Administration, Executive Office of the 
                President (Parts 2500--2599)
       XVI  Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600--2699)
       XXI  Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100--3199)
      XXII  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 3200--
                3299)
     XXIII  Department of Energy (Parts 3300--3399)
      XXIV  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Parts 3400--
                3499)
       XXV  Department of the Interior (Parts 3500--3599)
      XXVI  Department of Defense (Parts 3600-- 3699)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Parts 3800--3899)
      XXIX  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900--3999)
       XXX  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4099)
      XXXI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100--4199)
    XXXIII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Parts 4300--
                4399)
     XXXIV  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 4400--4499)
      XXXV  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 4500--4599)

[[Page 121]]

        XL  Interstate Commerce Commission (Parts 5000--5099)
       XLI  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 5100--
                5199)
      XLII  Department of Labor (Parts 5200--5299)
     XLIII  National Science Foundation (Parts 5300--5399)
       XLV  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 5500--
                5599)
      XLVI  Postal Rate Commission (Parts 5600--5699)
     XLVII  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 5700--5799)
    XLVIII  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 5800--5899)
         L  Department of Transportation (Parts 6000--6099)
       LII  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 6200--
                6299)
      LIII  Department of Education (Parts 6300--6399)
       LIV  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 6400--6499)
        LV  National Endowment for the Arts (Parts 6500--6599)
       LVI  National Endowment for the Humanities (Parts 6600--
                6699)
      LVII  General Services Administration (Parts 6700--6799)
     LVIII  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
                (Parts 6800--6899)
       LIX  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                6900--6999)
        LX  United States Postal Service (Parts 7000--7099)
       LXI  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 7100--7199)
      LXII  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 7200--
                7299)
     LXIII  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 7300--7399)
      LXIV  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 7400--7499)
       LXV  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                7500--7599)
      LXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                7600--7699)
     LXVII  Institute of Museum and Library Services (Parts 7700--
                7799)
    LXVIII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 7800--7899)
      LXIX  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 7900--7999)
      LXXI  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 8100--8199)
     LXXII  Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction 
                (Parts 8200--8299)
    LXXIII  Department of Agriculture (Parts 8300--8399)
     LXXIV  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 8400--8499)
     LXXVI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                8600--8699)
    LXXVII  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 8700--8799)
      LXXX  Federal Housing Finance Agency (Parts 8700--8799)
    LXXXII  Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction 
                (Parts 9200--9299)
     XCVII  Department of Homeland Security Human Resources 
                Management System (Department of Homeland 
                Security--Office of Personnel Management) (Parts 
                9700--9799)
      XCIX  Department of Defense Human Resources Management and 
                Labor Relations Systems (Department of Defense--
                Office of Personnel Management) (Parts 9900--9999)

[[Page 122]]

                      Title 6--Domestic Security

         I  Department of Homeland Security, Office of the 
                Secretary (Parts 0--99)

                         Title 7--Agriculture

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Agriculture 
                (Parts 0--26)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of 
                Agriculture
         I  Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, 
                Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 27--209)
        II  Food and Nutrition Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 210--299)
       III  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         V  Agricultural Research Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                700--799)
      VIII  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Federal Grain Inspection Service), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 900--999)
         X  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1000--1199)
        XI  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1200--1299)
       XIV  Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative 
                Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service 
                Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800--
                2099)
        XX  Local Television Loan Guarantee Board (Parts 2200--
                2299)
      XXVI  Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 2600--2699)
     XXVII  Office of Information Resources Management, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 2700--2799)

[[Page 123]]

    XXVIII  Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2800--2899)
      XXIX  Office of Energy Policy and New Uses, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 2900--2999)
       XXX  Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Office of Environmental Quality, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3100--3199)
     XXXII  Office of Procurement and Property Management, 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 3200--3299)
    XXXIII  Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3300--3399)
     XXXIV  National Institute of Food and Agriculture (Parts 
                3400--3499)
      XXXV  Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3500--3599)
     XXXVI  National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 3600--3699)
    XXXVII  Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3700--3799)
   XXXVIII  World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3800--3899)
       XLI  [Reserved]
      XLII  Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200--
                4299)
         L  Rural Business-Cooperative Service, Rurual Housing 
                Service, and Rural Utilities Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 5000--5099)

                    Title 8--Aliens and Nationality

         I  Department of Homeland Security (Immigration and 
                Naturalization) (Parts 1--499)
         V  Executive Office for Immigration Review, Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1000--1399)

                 Title 9--Animals and Animal Products

         I  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1--199)
        II  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Packers and Stockyards Programs), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--299)
       III  Food Safety and Inspection Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 300--599)

                           Title 10--Energy

         I  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Department of Energy (Parts 200--699)
       III  Department of Energy (Parts 700--999)

[[Page 124]]

         X  Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 
                1000--1099)
      XIII  Nuclear Waste Technical Review Board (Parts 1303--
                1399)
      XVII  Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700--
                1799)
     XVIII  Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste 
                Commission (Parts 1800--1899)

                      Title 11--Federal Elections

         I  Federal Election Commission (Parts 1--9099)
        II  Election Assistance Commission (Parts 9400--9499)

                      Title 12--Banks and Banking

         I  Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  Federal Reserve System (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  Office of Thrift Supervision, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  Federal Housing Finance Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XIV  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400--
                1499)
        XV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1500--1599)
      XVII  Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                1700--1799)
     XVIII  Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, 
                Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800--1899)

               Title 13--Business Credit and Assistance

         I  Small Business Administration (Parts 1--199)
       III  Economic Development Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board (Parts 400--499)
         V  Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board (Parts 
                500--599)

                    Title 14--Aeronautics and Space

         I  Federal Aviation Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--199)
        II  Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation 
                (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200--399)

[[Page 125]]

       III  Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 400--499)
         V  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
        VI  Air Transportation System Stabilization (Parts 1300--
                1399)

                 Title 15--Commerce and Foreign Trade

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 
                0--29)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Commerce and 
                Foreign Trade
         I  Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                30--199)
        II  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 400--499)
       VII  Bureau of Industry and Security, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Technology Administration, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
      XIII  East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400--
                1499)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade 
                Agreements
        XX  Office of the United States Trade Representative 
                (Parts 2000--2099)
            Subtitle D--Regulations Relating to Telecommunications 
                and Information
     XXIII  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                2300--2399)

                    Title 16--Commercial Practices

         I  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0--999)
        II  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000--1799)

             Title 17--Commodity and Securities Exchanges

         I  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1--199)
        II  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 400--499)

[[Page 126]]

          Title 18--Conservation of Power and Water Resources

         I  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of 
                Energy (Parts 1--399)
       III  Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Water Resources Council (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800--899)
      XIII  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300--1399)

                       Title 19--Customs Duties

         I  U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Department of 
                Homeland Security; Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--199)
        II  United States International Trade Commission (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Department 
                of Homeland Security (Parts 400--599)

                     Title 20--Employees' Benefits

         I  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200--399)
       III  Social Security Administration (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Employees Compensation Appeals Board, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 500--599)
         V  Employment and Training Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 600--699)
        VI  Employment Standards Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 
                800--899)
      VIII  Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 
                900--999)
        IX  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training Service, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1000--1099)

                       Title 21--Food and Drugs

         I  Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1--1299)
        II  Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 1300--1399)
       III  Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400--
                1499)

                      Title 22--Foreign Relations

         I  Department of State (Parts 1--199)
        II  Agency for International Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Peace Corps (Parts 300--399)

[[Page 127]]

        IV  International Joint Commission, United States and 
                Canada (Parts 400--499)
         V  Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Parts 700--
                799)
        IX  Foreign Service Grievance Board (Parts 900--999)
         X  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  International Boundary and Water Commission, United 
                States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 
                1100--1199)
       XII  United States International Development Cooperation 
                Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Millenium Challenge Corporation (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor 
                Relations Authority; General Counsel of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign 
                Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  African Development Foundation (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700--1799)

                          Title 23--Highways

         I  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--999)
        II  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and 
                Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 1300--1399)

                Title 24--Housing and Urban Development

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban 
                Development
         I  Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                100--199)
        II  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal 
                HousingCommissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Government National Mortgage Association, Department 
                of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Housing and Office of Multifamily Housing 
                Assistance Restructuring, Department of Housing 
                and Urban Development (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 500--599)

[[Page 128]]

        VI  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 600--699) [Reserved]
       VII  Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and 
                Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700--
                799)
      VIII  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance 
                Programs, Section 202 Direct Loan Program, Section 
                202 Supportive Housing for the Elderly Program and 
                Section 811 Supportive Housing for Persons With 
                Disabilities Program) (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian 
                Housing, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 900--1699)
         X  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Interstate Land Sales 
                Registration Program) (Parts 1700--1799)
       XII  Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 2000--2099)
        XX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 3200--3899)
      XXIV  Board of Directors of the HOPE for Homeowners Program 
                (Parts 4000--4099)
       XXV  Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100--
                4199)

                           Title 25--Indians

         I  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--299)
        II  Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 300--399)
       III  National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500--599)
        IV  Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 
                700--799)
         V  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, 
                and Indian Health Service, Department of Health 
                and Human Services (Part 900)
        VI  Office of the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 1000--1199)
       VII  Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 1200--1299)

                      Title 26--Internal Revenue

         I  Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 1--899)

[[Page 129]]

           Title 27--Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms

         I  Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau, Department 
                of the Treasury (Parts 1--399)
        II  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, 
                Department of Justice (Parts 400--699)

                   Title 28--Judicial Administration

         I  Department of Justice (Parts 0--299)
       III  Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice 
                (Parts 300--399)
         V  Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500--
                599)
        VI  Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the 
                District of Columbia (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact Council 
                (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Department of Justice and Department of State (Parts 
                1100--1199)

                            Title 29--Labor

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 
                0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor
         I  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 400--499)
         V  Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 
                500--899)
        IX  Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission 
                (Parts 900--999)
         X  National Mediation Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       XII  Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 
                1400--1499)
       XIV  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600--
                1699)
      XVII  Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2499)
       XXV  Employee Benefits Security Administration, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 2500--2599)
     XXVII  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2700--2799)
        XL  Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4999)

[[Page 130]]

                      Title 30--Mineral Resources

         I  Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Minerals Management Service, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 200--299)
       III  Board of Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                400--499)
       VII  Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 700--999)

                 Title 31--Money and Finance: Treasury

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--50)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
         I  Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                51--199)
        II  Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of International Investment, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Claims Collection Standards (Department of the 
                Treasury--Department of Justice) (Parts 900--999)

                      Title 32--National Defense

            Subtitle A--Department of Defense
         I  Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1--399)
         V  Department of the Army (Parts 400--699)
        VI  Department of the Navy (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Department of the Air Force (Parts 800--1099)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to National 
                Defense
       XII  Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XVI  Selective Service System (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  Office of the Director of National Intelligence (Parts 
                1700--1799)
     XVIII  National Counterintelligence Center (Parts 1800--1899)
       XIX  Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Information Security Oversight Office, National 
                Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000--
                2099)
       XXI  National Security Council (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXIV  Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400--
                2499)
     XXVII  Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 
                2700--2799)

[[Page 131]]

    XXVIII  Office of the Vice President of the United States 
                (Parts 2800--2899)

               Title 33--Navigation and Navigable Waters

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                1--199)
        II  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                          Title 34--Education

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Education (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Offices of the 
                Department of Education
         I  Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, 
                Department of Education (Parts 200--299)
       III  Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
                Services, Department of Education (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Vocational and Adult Education, Department 
                of Education (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages 
                Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of 
                Education (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Educational Research and Improvmeent, 
                Department of Education [Reserved]
        XI  National Institute for Literacy (Parts 1100--1199)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Education
       XII  National Council on Disability (Parts 1200--1299)

                          Title 35 [Reserved]

             Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property

         I  National Park Service, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--
                299)
       III  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400--499)
         V  Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500--599)
        VI  [Reserved]
       VII  Library of Congress (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800--
                899)
        IX  Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Presidio Trust (Parts 1000--1099)

[[Page 132]]

        XI  Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance 
                Board (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
        XV  Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust (Parts 1500--
                1599)
       XVI  Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National 
                Environmental Policy Foundation (Parts 1600--1699)

             Title 37--Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights

         I  United States Patent and Trademark Office, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 1--199)
        II  Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200--299)
       III  Copyright Royalty Board, Library of Congress (Parts 
                301--399)
        IV  Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Under Secretary for Technology, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 500--599)

           Title 38--Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief

         I  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0--99)
        II  Armed Forces Retirement Home

                       Title 39--Postal Service

         I  United States Postal Service (Parts 1--999)
       III  Postal Regulatory Commission (Parts 3000--3099)

                  Title 40--Protection of Environment

         I  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1--1099)
        IV  Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1400--1499)
         V  Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
       VII  Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
                Defense; Uniform National Discharge Standards for 
                Vessels of the Armed Forces (Parts 1700--1799)

          Title 41--Public Contracts and Property Management

            Subtitle B--Other Provisions Relating to Public 
                Contracts
        50  Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1--50-
                999)
        51  Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or 
                Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1--51-99)
        60  Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal 
                Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 
                60-1--60-999)

[[Page 133]]

        61  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training Service, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 61-1--61-999)
 Chapters 
   62--100  [Reserved]
            Subtitle C--Federal Property Management Regulations 
                System
       101  Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1--
                101-99)
       102  Federal Management Regulation (Parts 102-1--102-299)
 Chapters 
  103--104  [Reserved]
       105  General Services Administration (Parts 105-1--105-999)
       109  Department of Energy Property Management Regulations 
                (Parts 109-1--109-99)
       114  Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1--114-99)
       115  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1--115-99)
       128  Department of Justice (Parts 128-1--128-99)
 Chapters 
  129--200  [Reserved]
            Subtitle D--Other Provisions Relating to Property 
                Management [Reserved]
            Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management 
                Regulations System [Reserved]
            Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System
       300  General (Parts 300-1--300-99)
       301  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1--
                301-99)
       302  Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1--302-99)
       303  Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of 
                Certain Employees (Part 303-1--303-99)
       304  Payment of Travel Expenses from a Non-Federal Source 
                (Parts 304-1--304-99)

                        Title 42--Public Health

         I  Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 1--199)
        IV  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Department 
                of Health and Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1000--1999)

                   Title 43--Public Lands: Interior

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Lands
         I  Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 200--499)
        II  Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1000--9999)

[[Page 134]]

       III  Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation 
                Commission (Parts 10000--10010)

             Title 44--Emergency Management and Assistance

         I  Federal Emergency Management Agency, Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 0--399)
        IV  Department of Commerce and Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                       Title 45--Public Welfare

            Subtitle A--Department of Health and Human Services 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Welfare
        II  Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), 
                Administration for Children and Families, 
                Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support 
                Enforcement Program), Administration for Children 
                and Families, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United 
                States, Department of Justice (Parts 500--599)
        VI  National Science Foundation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800--899) 
                [Reserved]
         X  Office of Community Services, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                1200--1299)
      XIII  Office of Human Development Services, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1300--1399)
       XVI  Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  National Commission on Libraries and Information 
                Science (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800--
                1899)
       XXI  Commission on Fine Arts (Parts 2100--2199)
     XXIII  Arctic Research Commission (Part 2301)
      XXIV  James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 
                2400--2499)
       XXV  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2500--2599)

[[Page 135]]

                          Title 46--Shipping

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                1--199)
        II  Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 200--399)
       III  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage), Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500--599)

                      Title 47--Telecommunication

         I  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Office of Science and Technology Policy and National 
                Security Council (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce, and 
                National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

           Title 48--Federal Acquisition Regulations System

         1  Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1--99)
         2  Defense Acquisition Regulations System, Department of 
                Defense (Parts 200--299)
         3  Health and Human Services (Parts 300--399)
         4  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         5  General Services Administration (Parts 500--599)
         6  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
         7  Agency for International Development (Parts 700--799)
         8  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
         9  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        10  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)
        12  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
        13  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
        14  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        15  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
        16  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                1600--1699)
        17  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700--1799)
        18  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1800--1899)
        19  Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 1900--1999)
        20  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000--2099)
        21  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation (Parts 2100--2199)
        23  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
        24  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2400--2499)

[[Page 136]]

        25  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
        28  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
        29  Department of Labor (Parts 2900--2999)
        30  Department of Homeland Security, Homeland Security 
                Acquisition Regulation (HSAR) (Parts 3000--3099)
        34  Department of Education Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                3400--3499)
        51  Department of the Army Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5100--5199)
        52  Department of the Navy Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5200--5299)
        53  Department of the Air Force Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation Supplement [Reserved]
        54  Defense Logistics Agency, Department of Defense (Parts 
                5400--5499)
        57  African Development Foundation (Parts 5700--5799)
        61  Civilian Board of Contract Appeals, General Services 
                Administration (Parts 6100--6199)
        63  Department of Transportation Board of Contract Appeals 
                (Parts 6300--6399)
        99  Cost Accounting Standards Board, Office of Federal 
                Procurement Policy, Office of Management and 
                Budget (Parts 9900--9999)

                       Title 49--Transportation

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Transportation 
                (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to 
                Transportation
         I  Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Federal Railroad Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Federal Transit Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) 
                (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  National Transportation Safety Board (Parts 800--999)
         X  Surface Transportation Board, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1000--1399)
        XI  Research and Innovative Technology Administration, 
                Department of Transportation [Reserved]
       XII  Transportation Security Administration, Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 1500--1699)

[[Page 137]]

                   Title 50--Wildlife and Fisheries

         I  United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of 
                the Interior (Parts 1--199)
        II  National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Fishing and Related Activities (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife 
                Service, Department of the Interior and National 
                Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and 
                Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce); Endangered Species Committee 
                Regulations (Parts 400--499)
         V  Marine Mammal Commission (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 600--699)

                      CFR Index and Finding Aids

            Subject/Agency Index
            List of Agency Prepared Indexes
            Parallel Tables of Statutory Authorities and Rules
            List of CFR Titles, Chapters, Subchapters, and Parts
            Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR

[[Page 139]]




<R03>
           Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR


<R04>

                     (Revised as of October 1, 2010)

                                                  CFR Title, Subtitle or 
                     Agency                               Chapter

Administrative Committee of the Federal Register  1, I
Advanced Research Projects Agency                 32, I
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation         36, VIII
African Development Foundation                    22, XV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 57
Agency for International Development              22, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
Agricultural Marketing Service                    7, I, IX, X, XI
Agricultural Research Service                     7, V
Agriculture Department                            2, IV; 5, LXXIII
  Agricultural Marketing Service                  7, I, IX, X, XI
  Agricultural Research Service                   7, V
  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service      7, III; 9, I
  Chief Financial Officer, Office of              7, XXX
  Commodity Credit Corporation                    7, XIV
  Economic Research Service                       7, XXXVII
  Energy Policy and New Uses, Office of           2, IX; 7, XXIX
  Environmental Quality, Office of                7, XXXI
  Farm Service Agency                             7, VII, XVIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 4
  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation              7, IV
  Food and Nutrition Service                      7, II
  Food Safety and Inspection Service              9, III
  Foreign Agricultural Service                    7, XV
  Forest Service                                  36, II
  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards        7, VIII; 9, II
       Administration
  Information Resources Management, Office of     7, XXVII
  Inspector General, Office of                    7, XXVI
  National Agricultural Library                   7, XLI
  National Agricultural Statistics Service        7, XXXVI
  National Institute of Food and Agriculture.     7, XXXIV
  Natural Resources Conservation Service          7, VI
  Operations, Office of                           7, XXVIII
  Procurement and Property Management, Office of  7, XXXII
  Rural Business-Cooperative Service              7, XVIII, XLII, L
  Rural Development Administration                7, XLII
  Rural Housing Service                           7, XVIII, XXXV, L
  Rural Telephone Bank                            7, XVI
  Rural Utilities Service                         7, XVII, XVIII, XLII, L
  Secretary of Agriculture, Office of             7, Subtitle A
  Transportation, Office of                       7, XXXIII
  World Agricultural Outlook Board                7, XXXVIII
Air Force Department                              32, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement       48, 53
Air Transportation Stabilization Board            14, VI
Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau          27, I
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives,       27, II
     Bureau of
AMTRAK                                            49, VII
American Battle Monuments Commission              36, IV
American Indians, Office of the Special Trustee   25, VII
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service        7, III; 9, I
Appalachian Regional Commission                   5, IX
Architectural and Transportation Barriers         36, XI
   Compliance Board
[[Page 140]]

Arctic Research Commission                        45, XXIII
Armed Forces Retirement Home                      5, XI
Army Department                                   32, V
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 51
Benefits Review Board                             20, VII
Bilingual Education and Minority Languages        34, V
     Affairs, Office of
Blind or Severely Disabled, Committee for         41, 51
     Purchase From People Who Are
Broadcasting Board of Governors                   22, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 19
Census Bureau                                     15, I
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services          42, IV
Central Intelligence Agency                       32, XIX
Chief Financial Officer, Office of                7, XXX
Child Support Enforcement, Office of              45, III
Children and Families, Administration for         45, II, III, IV, X
Civil Rights, Commission on                       5, LXVIII; 45, VII
Civil Rights, Office for                          34, I
Coast Guard                                       33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)                46, III
Commerce Department                               44, IV
  Census Bureau                                   15, I
  Economic Affairs, Under Secretary               37, V
  Economic Analysis, Bureau of                    15, VIII
  Economic Development Administration             13, III
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 13
  Fishery Conservation and Management             50, VI
  Foreign-Trade Zones Board                       15, IV
  Industry and Security, Bureau of                15, VII
  International Trade Administration              15, III; 19, III
  National Institute of Standards and Technology  15, II
  National Marine Fisheries Service               50, II, IV, VI
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric                15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
       Administration                             VI
  National Telecommunications and Information     15, XXIII; 47, III, IV
       Administration
  National Weather Service                        15, IX
  Patent and Trademark Office, United States      37, I
  Productivity, Technology and Innovation,        37, IV
       Assistant Secretary for
  Secretary of Commerce, Office of                15, Subtitle A
  Technology, Under Secretary for                 37, V
  Technology Administration                       15, XI
  Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for      37, IV
Commercial Space Transportation                   14, III
Commodity Credit Corporation                      7, XIV
Commodity Futures Trading Commission              5, XLI; 17, I
Community Planning and Development, Office of     24, V, VI
     Assistant Secretary for
Community Services, Office of                     45, X
Comptroller of the Currency                       12, I
Construction Industry Collective Bargaining       29, IX
     Commission
Consumer Product Safety Commission                5, LXXI; 16, II
Copyright Office                                  37, II
Copyright Royalty Board                           37, III
Corporation for National and Community Service    2, XXII; 45, XII, XXV
Cost Accounting Standards Board                   48, 99
Council on Environmental Quality                  40, V
Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency    28, VIII
     for the District of Columbia
Customs and Border Protection Bureau              19, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Department                                5, XXVI; 32, Subtitle A; 
                                                  40, VII
  Advanced Research Projects Agency               32, I
  Air Force Department                            32, VII

[[Page 141]]

  Army Department                                 32, V; 33, II; 36, III, 
                                                  48, 51
  Defense Acquisition Regulations System          48, 2
  Defense Intelligence Agency                     32, I
  Defense Logistics Agency                        32, I, XII; 48, 54
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Human Resources Management and Labor Relations  5, XCIX
       Systems
  National Imagery and Mapping Agency             32, I
  Navy Department                                 32, VI; 48, 52
  Secretary of Defense, Office of                 2, XI; 32, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Intelligence Agency                       32, I
Defense Logistics Agency                          32, XII; 48, 54
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board           10, XVII
Delaware River Basin Commission                   18, III
District of Columbia, Court Services and          28, VIII
     Offender Supervision Agency for the
Drug Enforcement Administration                   21, II
East-West Foreign Trade Board                     15, XIII
Economic Affairs, Under Secretary                 37, V
Economic Analysis, Bureau of                      15, VIII
Economic Development Administration               13, III
Economic Research Service                         7, XXXVII
Education, Department of                          5, LIII
  Bilingual Education and Minority Languages      34, V
       Affairs, Office of
  Civil Rights, Office for                        34, I
  Educational Research and Improvement, Office    34, VII
       of
  Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of   34, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 34
  Postsecondary Education, Office of              34, VI
  Secretary of Education, Office of               34, Subtitle A
  Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,  34, III
       Office of
  Vocational and Adult Education, Office of       34, IV
Educational Research and Improvement, Office of   34, VII
Election Assistance Commission                    2, LVIII; 11, II
Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of     34, II
Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board       13, V
Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board              13, IV
Employee Benefits Security Administration         29, XXV
Employees' Compensation Appeals Board             20, IV
Employees Loyalty Board                           5, V
Employment and Training Administration            20, V
Employment Standards Administration               20, VI
Endangered Species Committee                      50, IV
Energy, Department of                             5, XXIII; 10, II, III, X
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 9
  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission            5, XXIV; 18, I
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 109
Energy, Office of                                 7, XXIX
Engineers, Corps of                               33, II; 36, III
Engraving and Printing, Bureau of                 31, VI
Environmental Protection Agency                   2, XV; 5, LIV; 40, I, IV, 
                                                  VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 15
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 115
Environmental Quality, Office of                  7, XXXI
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission           5, LXII; 29, XIV
Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary  24, I
     for
Executive Office of the President                 3, I
  Administration, Office of                       5, XV
  Environmental Quality, Council on               40, V
  Management and Budget, Office of                5, III, LXXVII; 14, VI; 
                                                  48, 99
  National Drug Control Policy, Office of         21, III
  National Security Council                       32, XXI; 47, 2

[[Page 142]]

  Presidential Documents                          3
  Science and Technology Policy, Office of        32, XXIV; 47, II
  Trade Representative, Office of the United      15, XX
       States
Export-Import Bank of the United States           2, XXXV; 5, LII; 12, IV
Family Assistance, Office of                      45, II
Farm Credit Administration                        5, XXXI; 12, VI
Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation          5, XXX; 12, XIV
Farm Service Agency                               7, VII, XVIII
Federal Acquisition Regulation                    48, 1
Federal Aviation Administration                   14, I
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
Federal Claims Collection Standards               31, IX
Federal Communications Commission                 5, XXIX; 47, I
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of   41, 60
Federal Crop Insurance Corporation                7, IV
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation             5, XXII; 12, III
Federal Election Commission                       11, I
Federal Emergency Management Agency               44, I
Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal    48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition     48, 16
     Regulation
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission              5, XXIV; 18, I
Federal Financial Institutions Examination        12, XI
     Council
Federal Financing Bank                            12, VIII
Federal Highway Administration                    23, I, II
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation            1, IV
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office       12, XVII
Federal Housing Finance Agency                    5, LXXX; 12, XII
Federal Housing Finance Board                     12, IX
Federal Labor Relations Authority, and General    5, XIV; 22, XIV
     Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations 
     Authority
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center           31, VII
Federal Management Regulation                     41, 102
Federal Maritime Commission                       46, IV
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service        29, XII
Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission  5, LXXIV; 29, XXVII
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration       49, III
Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                   28, III
Federal Procurement Policy Office                 48, 99
Federal Property Management Regulations           41, 101
Federal Railroad Administration                   49, II
Federal Register, Administrative Committee of     1, I
Federal Register, Office of                       1, II
Federal Reserve System                            12, II
  Board of Governors                              5, LVIII
Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board        5, VI, LXXVI
Federal Service Impasses Panel                    5, XIV
Federal Trade Commission                          5, XLVII; 16, I
Federal Transit Administration                    49, VI
Federal Travel Regulation System                  41, Subtitle F
Fine Arts, Commission on                          45, XXI
Fiscal Service                                    31, II
Fish and Wildlife Service, United States          50, I, IV
Fishery Conservation and Management               50, VI
Food and Drug Administration                      21, I
Food and Nutrition Service                        7, II
Food Safety and Inspection Service                9, III
Foreign Agricultural Service                      7, XV
Foreign Assets Control, Office of                 31, V
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the       45, V
     United States
Foreign Service Grievance Board                   22, IX
Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel            22, XIV
Foreign Service Labor Relations Board             22, XIV
Foreign-Trade Zones Board                         15, IV
Forest Service                                    36, II
General Services Administration                   5, LVII; 41, 105
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 61

[[Page 143]]

  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 5
  Federal Management Regulation                   41, 102
  Federal Property Management Regulations         41, 101
  Federal Travel Regulation System                41, Subtitle F
  General                                         41, 300
  Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel    41, 304
       Expenses
  Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death    41, 303
       of Certain Employees
  Relocation Allowances                           41, 302
  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances          41, 301
Geological Survey                                 30, IV
Government Accountability Office                  4, I
Government Ethics, Office of                      5, XVI
Government National Mortgage Association          24, III
Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards          7, VIII; 9, II
     Administration
Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation            45, XVIII
Health and Human Services, Department of          2, III; 5, XLV; 45, 
                                                  Subtitle A,
  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services        42, IV
  Child Support Enforcement, Office of            45, III
  Children and Families, Administration for       45, II, III, IV, X
  Community Services, Office of                   45, X
  Family Assistance, Office of                    45, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 3
  Food and Drug Administration                    21, I
  Human Development Services, Office of           45, XIII
  Indian Health Service                           25, V
  Inspector General (Health Care), Office of      42, V
  Public Health Service                           42, I
  Refugee Resettlement, Office of                 45, IV
Homeland Security, Department of                  2, XXX; 6, I
  Coast Guard                                     33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)              46, III
  Customs and Border Protection Bureau            19, I
  Federal Emergency Management Agency             44, I
  Human Resources Management and Labor Relations  5, XCVII
       Systems
  Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau      19, IV
  Immigration and Naturalization                  8, I
  Transportation Security Administration          49, XII
HOPE for Homeowners Program, Board of Directors   24, XXIV
     of
Housing and Urban Development, Department of      2, XXIV; 5, LXV; 24, 
                                                  Subtitle B
  Community Planning and Development, Office of   24, V, VI
       Assistant Secretary for
  Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant          24, I
       Secretary for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 24
  Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office    12, XVII
       of
  Government National Mortgage Association        24, III
  Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office   24, II, VIII, X, XX
       of Assistant Secretary for
  Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing     24, IV
       Assistance Restructuring, Office of
  Inspector General, Office of                    24, XII
  Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant  24, IX
       Secretary for
  Secretary, Office of                            24, Subtitle A, VII
Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of  24, II, VIII, X, XX
     Assistant Secretary for
Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing       24, IV
     Assistance Restructuring, Office of
Human Development Services, Office of             45, XIII
Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau        19, IV
Immigration and Naturalization                    8, I
Immigration Review, Executive Office for          8, V
Independent Counsel, Office of                    28, VII
Indian Affairs, Bureau of                         25, I, V
Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant           25, VI
   Secretary
[[Page 144]]

Indian Arts and Crafts Board                      25, II
Indian Health Service                             25, V
Industry and Security, Bureau of                  15, VII
Information Resources Management, Office of       7, XXVII
Information Security Oversight Office, National   32, XX
     Archives and Records Administration
Inspector General
  Agriculture Department                          7, XXVI
  Health and Human Services Department            42, V
  Housing and Urban Development Department        24, XII
Institute of Peace, United States                 22, XVII
Inter-American Foundation                         5, LXIII; 22, X
Interior Department
  American Indians, Office of the Special         25, VII
       Trustee
  Endangered Species Committee                    50, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 14
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 114
  Fish and Wildlife Service, United States        50, I, IV
  Geological Survey                               30, IV
  Indian Affairs, Bureau of                       25, I, V
  Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant         25, VI
       Secretary
  Indian Arts and Crafts Board                    25, II
  Land Management, Bureau of                      43, II
  Minerals Management Service                     30, II
  National Indian Gaming Commission               25, III
  National Park Service                           36, I
  Reclamation, Bureau of                          43, I
  Secretary of the Interior, Office of            2, XIV; 43, Subtitle A
  Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board   30, III
       of
  Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,     30, VII
       Office of
Internal Revenue Service                          26, I
International Boundary and Water Commission,      22, XI
     United States and Mexico, United States 
     Section
International Development, United States Agency   22, II
     for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
International Development Cooperation Agency,     22, XII
     United States
International Fishing and Related Activities      50, III
International Joint Commission, United States     22, IV
     and Canada
International Organizations Employees Loyalty     5, V
     Board
International Trade Administration                15, III; 19, III
International Trade Commission, United States     19, II
Interstate Commerce Commission                    5, XL
Investment Security, Office of                    31, VIII
James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation      45, XXIV
Japan-United States Friendship Commission         22, XVI
Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries       20, VIII
Justice Department                                2, XXVII; 5, XXVIII; 28, 
                                                  I, XI; 40, IV
  Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives,     27, II
       Bureau of
  Drug Enforcement Administration                 21, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 28
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             31, IX
  Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                 28, III
  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the     45, V
       United States
  Immigration Review, Executive Office for        8, V
  Offices of Independent Counsel                  28, VI
  Prisons, Bureau of                              28, V
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 128
Labor Department                                  5, XLII
  Benefits Review Board                           20, VII
  Employee Benefits Security Administration       29, XXV
  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board           20, IV
  Employment and Training Administration          20, V
  Employment Standards Administration             20, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 29

[[Page 145]]

  Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office    41, 60
       of
  Federal Procurement Regulations System          41, 50
  Labor-Management Standards, Office of           29, II, IV
  Mine Safety and Health Administration           30, I
  Occupational Safety and Health Administration   29, XVII
  Public Contracts                                41, 50
  Secretary of Labor, Office of                   29, Subtitle A
  Veterans' Employment and Training Service,      41, 61; 20, IX
       Office of the Assistant Secretary for
  Wage and Hour Division                          29, V
  Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of       20, I
Labor-Management Standards, Office of             29, II, IV
Land Management, Bureau of                        43, II
Legal Services Corporation                        45, XVI
Library of Congress                               36, VII
  Copyright Office                                37, II
  Copyright Royalty Board                         37, III
Local Television Loan Guarantee Board             7, XX
Management and Budget, Office of                  5, III, LXXVII; 14, VI; 
                                                  48, 99
Marine Mammal Commission                          50, V
Maritime Administration                           46, II
Merit Systems Protection Board                    5, II, LXIV
Micronesian Status Negotiations, Office for       32, XXVII
Millenium Challenge Corporation                   22, XIII
Mine Safety and Health Administration             30, I
Minerals Management Service                       30, II
Minority Business Development Agency              15, XIV
Miscellaneous Agencies                            1, IV
Monetary Offices                                  31, I
Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in     36, XVI
     National Environmental Policy Foundation
Museum and Library Services, Institute of         2, XXXI
National Aeronautics and Space Administration     2, XVIII; 5, LIX; 14, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 18
National Agricultural Library                     7, XLI
National Agricultural Statistics Service          7, XXXVI
National and Community Service, Corporation for   45, XII, XXV
National Archives and Records Administration      2, XXVI; 5, LXVI; 36, XII
  Information Security Oversight Office           32, XX
National Capital Planning Commission              1, IV
National Commission for Employment Policy         1, IV
National Commission on Libraries and Information  45, XVII
     Science
National Council on Disability                    34, XII
National Counterintelligence Center               32, XVIII
National Credit Union Administration              12, VII
National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact     28, IX
     Council
National Drug Control Policy, Office of           21, III
National Endowment for the Arts                   2, XXXII
National Endowment for the Humanities             2, XXXIII
National Foundation on the Arts and the           45, XI
     Humanities
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration    23, II, III; 47, VI; 49, V
National Imagery and Mapping Agency               32, I
National Indian Gaming Commission                 25, III
National Institute for Literacy                   34, XI
National Institute of Food and Agriculture.       7, XXXIV
National Institute of Standards and Technology    15, II
National Intelligence, Office of Director of      32, XVII
National Labor Relations Board                    5, LXI; 29, I
National Marine Fisheries Service                 50, II, IV, VI
National Mediation Board                          29, X
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration   15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
                                                  VI
National Park Service                             36, I
National Railroad Adjustment Board                29, III
National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)  49, VII
National Science Foundation                       2, XXV; 5, XLIII; 45, VI

[[Page 146]]

  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 25
National Security Council                         32, XXI
National Security Council and Office of Science   47, II
     and Technology Policy
National Telecommunications and Information       15, XXIII; 47, III, IV
     Administration
National Transportation Safety Board              49, VIII
Natural Resources Conservation Service            7, VI
Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, Office of      25, IV
Navy Department                                   32, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 52
Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation             24, XXV
Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste  10, XVIII
     Commission
Nuclear Regulatory Commission                     2, XX; 5, XLVIII; 10, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 20
Occupational Safety and Health Administration     29, XVII
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission  29, XX
Offices of Independent Counsel                    28, VI
Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust             36, XV
Operations Office                                 7, XXVIII
Overseas Private Investment Corporation           5, XXXIII; 22, VII
Patent and Trademark Office, United States        37, I
Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel      41, 304
     Expenses
Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of   41, 303
     Certain Employees
Peace Corps                                       22, III
Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation       36, IX
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation              29, XL
Personnel Management, Office of                   5, I, XXXV; 45, VIII
  Human Resources Management and Labor Relations  5, XCIX
       Systems, Department of Defense
  Human Resources Management and Labor Relations  5, XCVII
       Systems, Department of Homeland Security
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 17
  Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal  48, 21
       Acquisition Regulation
  Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition   48, 16
       Regulation
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety           49, I
     Administration
Postal Regulatory Commission                      5, XLVI; 39, III
Postal Service, United States                     5, LX; 39, I
Postsecondary Education, Office of                34, VI
President's Commission on White House             1, IV
     Fellowships
Presidential Documents                            3
Presidio Trust                                    36, X
Prisons, Bureau of                                28, V
Procurement and Property Management, Office of    7, XXXII
Productivity, Technology and Innovation,          37, IV
     Assistant Secretary
Public Contracts, Department of Labor             41, 50
Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant    24, IX
     Secretary for
Public Health Service                             42, I
Railroad Retirement Board                         20, II
Reclamation, Bureau of                            43, I
Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board    4, II
Refugee Resettlement, Office of                   45, IV
Relocation Allowances                             41, 302
Research and Innovative Technology                49, XI
     Administration
Rural Business-Cooperative Service                7, XVIII, XLII, L
Rural Development Administration                  7, XLII
Rural Housing Service                             7, XVIII, XXXV, L
Rural Telephone Bank                              7, XVI
Rural Utilities Service                           7, XVII, XVIII, XLII, L
Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation     33, IV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of          32, XXIV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of, and     47, II
   National Security Council
[[Page 147]]

Secret Service                                    31, IV
Securities and Exchange Commission                5, XXXIV; 17, II
Selective Service System                          32, XVI
Small Business Administration                     2, XXVII; 13, I
Smithsonian Institution                           36, V
Social Security Administration                    2, XXIII; 20, III; 48, 23
Soldiers' and Airmen's Home, United States        5, XI
Special Counsel, Office of                        5, VIII
Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,    34, III
     Office of
Special Inspector General for Iraq                5, LXXXVII
     Reconstruction
State Department                                  2, VI; 22, I; 28, XI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 6
Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board of  30, III
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,       30, VII
     Office of
Surface Transportation Board                      49, X
Susquehanna River Basin Commission                18, VIII
Technology Administration                         15, XI
Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for        37, IV
Technology, Under Secretary for                   37, V
Tennessee Valley Authority                        5, LXIX; 18, XIII
Thrift Supervision Office, Department of the      12, V
     Treasury
Trade Representative, United States, Office of    15, XX
Transportation, Department of                     2, XII; 5, L
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 63
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 12
  Federal Aviation Administration                 14, I
  Federal Highway Administration                  23, I, II
  Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration     49, III
  Federal Railroad Administration                 49, II
  Federal Transit Administration                  49, VI
  Maritime Administration                         46, II
  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  23, II, III; 47, IV; 49, V
  Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety         49, I
       Administration
  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation   33, IV
  Secretary of Transportation, Office of          14, II; 49, Subtitle A
  Surface Transportation Board                    49, X
  Transportation Statistics Bureau                49, XI
Transportation, Office of                         7, XXXIII
Transportation Security Administration            49, XII
Transportation Statistics Bureau                  49, XI
Travel Allowances, Temporary Duty (TDY)           41, 301
Treasury Department                               5, XXI; 12, XV; 17, IV; 
                                                  31, IX
  Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau        27, I
  Community Development Financial Institutions    12, XVIII
       Fund
  Comptroller of the Currency                     12, I
  Customs and Border Protection Bureau            19, I
  Engraving and Printing, Bureau of               31, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 10
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             31, IX
  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center         31, VII
  Fiscal Service                                  31, II
  Foreign Assets Control, Office of               31, V
  Internal Revenue Service                        26, I
  Investment Security, Office of                  31, VIII
  Monetary Offices                                31, I
  Secret Service                                  31, IV
  Secretary of the Treasury, Office of            31, Subtitle A
  Thrift Supervision, Office of     
</pre></body></html>
