<html><body><pre>
[Title 46 CFR ]
[Code of Federal Regulations (annual edition) - October 1, 2003 Edition]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]



[[Page i]]


<R02>
                    46


          Parts 140 to 155

                         Revised as of October 1, 2003

Shipping

<R03>



          Containing a codification of documents of general 
          apllicability and future effect
          As of October 1, 2003
          With Ancillaries
          Published by
          Office of the Federal Register
          National Archives and Records
          Administration

A Special Edition of the Federal Register

[[Page ii]]






                     U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                            WASHINGTON : 2003



  For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing 
                                  Office
  Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC area 
                              (202) 512-1800
      Fax: (202) 512-2250 Mail: Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-0001

[[Page iii]]



<R02>
                            Table of Contents


<R03>
                                                                    Page
  Explanation.................................................       v

  Title 46:
          Chapter I--Coast Guard, Department of Homeland 
          Security (Continued)                                       3
  Finding Aids:
      Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference........     269
      Table of CFR Titles and Chapters........................     273
      Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR......     291
      List of CFR Sections Affected...........................     301

[[Page iv]]





                     ----------------------------

                     Cite this Code: CFR
                     To cite the regulations in 
                       this volume use title, 
                       part and section number. 
                       Thus, 46 CFR 147.1 refers 
                       to title 46, part 147, 
                       section 1.

                     ----------------------------

[[Page v]]



                               EXPLANATION

    The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and 
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided 
into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal 
regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the 
name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into 
parts covering specific regulatory areas.
    Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year 
and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:

Title 1 through Title 16.................................as of January 1
Title 17 through Title 27..................................as of April 1
Title 28 through Title 41...................................as of July 1
Title 42 through Title 50................................as of October 1

    The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each 
volume.

LEGAL STATUS

    The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially 
noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie 
evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).

HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

    The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual 
issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used 
together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
    To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its 
revision date (in this case, October 1, 2003), consult the ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected (LSA),'' which is issued monthly, and the ``Cumulative 
List of Parts Affected,'' which appears in the Reader Aids section of 
the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal 
Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.

EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES

    Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal 
Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source 
citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page 
number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication 
dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be 
exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In 
instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the 
Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In 
those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register 
states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be 
inserted following the text.

OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

    The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires 
Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information 
collection request.

[[Page vi]]

Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as 
amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are 
placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting 
requirements.

OBSOLETE PROVISIONS

    Provisions that become obsolete before the revision date stated on 
the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text 
of provisions in effect on a given date in the past by using the 
appropriate numerical list of sections affected. For the period before 
January 1, 2001, consult either the List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-
1963, 1964-1972, 1973-1985, or 1986-2000, published in 11 separate 
volumes. For the period beginning January 1, 2001, a ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected'' is published at the end of each CFR volume.

INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE

    What is incorporation by reference? Incorporation by reference was 
established by statute and allows Federal agencies to meet the 
requirement to publish regulations in the Federal Register by referring 
to materials already published elsewhere. For an incorporation to be 
valid, the Director of the Federal Register must approve it. The legal 
effect of incorporation by reference is that the material is treated as 
if it were published in full in the Federal Register (5 U.S.C. 552(a)). 
This material, like any other properly issued regulation, has the force 
of law.
    What is a proper incorporation by reference? The Director of the 
Federal Register will approve an incorporation by reference only when 
the requirements of 1 CFR part 51 are met. Some of the elements on which 
approval is based are:
    (a) The incorporation will substantially reduce the volume of 
material published in the Federal Register.
    (b) The matter incorporated is in fact available to the extent 
necessary to afford fairness and uniformity in the administrative 
process.
    (c) The incorporating document is drafted and submitted for 
publication in accordance with 1 CFR part 51.
    Properly approved incorporations by reference in this volume are 
listed in the Finding Aids at the end of this volume.
    What if the material incorporated by reference cannot be found? If 
you have any problem locating or obtaining a copy of material listed in 
the Finding Aids of this volume as an approved incorporation by 
reference, please contact the agency that issued the regulation 
containing that incorporation. If, after contacting the agency, you find 
the material is not available, please notify the Director of the Federal 
Register, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington DC 
20408, or call (202) 741-6010.

CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

    A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a 
separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index 
and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Statutory 
Authorities and Agency Rules (Table I). A list of CFR titles, chapters, 
and parts and an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are 
also included in this volume.
    An index to the text of ``Title 3--The President'' is carried within 
that volume.
    The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. 
This index is based on a consolidation of the ``Contents'' entries in 
the daily Federal Register.
    A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to 
the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.

[[Page vii]]


REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL

    There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing 
in the Code of Federal Regulations.

INQUIRIES

    For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this 
volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at 
the top of odd-numbered pages.
    For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-741-6000 
or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC 20408 or e-mail 
info@fedreg.nara.gov.

SALES

    The Government Printing Office (GPO) processes all sales and 
distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call toll free, 
866-512-1800 or DC area, 202-512-1800, M-F, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or 
fax your order to 202-512-2250, 24 hours a day. For payment by check, 
write to the Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders, P.O. Box 
371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. For GPO Customer Service call 202-
512-1803.

ELECTRONIC SERVICES

    The full text of the Code of Federal Regulations, The United States 
Government Manual, the Federal Register, Public Laws, Public Papers, 
Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents and the Privacy Act 
Compilation are available in electronic format at www.access.gpo.gov/
nara (``GPO Access''). For more information, contact Electronic 
Information Dissemination Services, U.S. Government Printing Office. 
Phone 202-512-1530, or 888-293-6498 (toll-free). E-mail, 
gpoaccess@gpo.gov.
    The Office of the Federal Register also offers a free service on the 
National Archives and Records Administration's (NARA) World Wide Web 
site for public law numbers, Federal Register finding aids, and related 
information. Connect to NARA's web site at www.archives.gov/federal_
register. The NARA site also contains links to GPO Access.

                              Raymond A. Mosley,
                                    Director,
                          Office of the Federal Register.

October 1, 2003.

[[Page ix]]



                               THIS TITLE

    Title 46--Shipping is composed of nine volumes. The parts in these 
volumes are arranged in the following order: Parts 1-40, 41-69, 70-89, 
90-139, 140-155, 156-165, 166-199, 200-499 and 500 to End. The first 
seven volumes containing parts 1-199 comprise chapter I--Coast Guard, 
DHS. The eighth volume, containing parts 200 to 499, includes chapter 
II--Maritime Administration, DOT and chapter III--Coast Guard (Great 
Lakes Pilotage), DHS. The ninth volume, containing part 500 to End, 
includes chapter IV--Federal Maritime Commission. The contents of these 
volumes represent all current regulations codified under this title of 
the CFR as of October 1, 2003.

    Subject indexes appear in Chapter I, subchapters A--I, I-A, J, K, L, 
and Q--W following the subchapters.

[[Page x]]

<GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>


[[Page 1]]


<R01>
                           TITLE 46--SHIPPING


<R02>

                  (This book contains parts 140 to 155)

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Part

chapter i--Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security 
  (Continued)...............................................         147

[[Page 3]]


<R02>
   CHAPTER I--COAST GUARD, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (CONTINUED)


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

                     SUBCHAPTER N--DANGEROUS CARGOES
Part                                                                Page
140-146         [Reserved]
147             Hazardous ships' stores.....................           5
147A            Interim regulations for shipboard fumigation          10
148             Carriage of solid hazardous materials in 
                    bulk....................................          14
149             [Reserved]

              SUBCHAPTER O--CERTAIN BULK DANGEROUS CARGOES
150             Compatibility of cargoes....................          23
151             Barges carrying bulk liquid hazardous 
                    material cargoes........................          58
152             [Reserved]
153             Ships carrying bulk liquid, liquefied gas, 
                    or compressed gas hazardous materials...         131
154             Safety standards for self-propelled vessels 
                    carrying bulk liquefied gases...........         204
155             [Reserved]

[[Page 5]]


<R03>
                     SUBCHAPTER N--DANGEROUS CARGOES

<R05>

                        PARTS 140-146 [RESERVED]


<R03>
PART 147--HAZARDOUS SHIPS' STORES--Table of Contents

<R05>


                      Subpart A--General Provisions

Sec.
147.1 Purpose and applicability.
147.3 Definitions.
147.5 Commandant (G-MSO); address.
147.7 Incorporation by reference.
147.8 OMB control numbers assigned pursuant to the Paperwork Reduction 
          Act.
147.9 Waivers.
147.15 Hazardous ships' stores permitted on board vessels.
147.30 Labeling.
147.33 Right of appeal.

    Subpart B--Stowage and Other Special Requirements for Particular 
                                Materials

147.35 Purpose of subpart.
147.40 Materials requiring Commandant (G-MSO) approval.
147.45 Flammable and combustible liquids.
147.50 Fuel for cooking, heating, and lighting.
147.60 Compressed gases.
147.65 Carbon dioxide and halon fire extinguishing systems.
147.70 Acetylene.
147.85 Oxygen.
147.90 Refrigerants.
147.95 Explosives.
147.100 Radioactive materials.
147.105 Anesthetics, drugs, and medicines.

    Authority: 46 U.S.C. 3306; E.O. 12234, 45 FR 58801, 3 CFR, 1980 
Comp., p. 277; 49 CFR 1.46.

    Source: CGD 84-044, 53 FR 7749, Mar. 10, 1988, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R04>
                      Subpart A--General Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 147.1  Purpose and applicability.

    (a) This part prescribes regulations designating what hazardous 
materials may be on board vessels as ships' stores and prescribes 
requirements for the labeling, stowage, and use of those materials.
    (b) This part applies to all vessels listed in 46 U.S.C. 3301 as 
subject to inspection under part B of 46 U.S.C. Subtitle II. On foreign 
vessels in the navigable waters of the United States, the Captain of the 
Port or District Commander may prohibit the unsafe use or stowage of 
hazardous ships' stores under 33 CFR 160.109.
    (c) All certifications previously issued by the Coast Guard under 
this part permitting the use of particular materials or products as 
ships' stores are null and void.


<R05>
Sec. 147.3  Definitions.

    As used in this part:
    Accommodation, control, or service spaces means living quarters, 
including walkways, dining rooms, galleys, pantries, lounges, 
lavatories, cabins, staterooms, offices, hospitals, cinemas, and game 
and hobby rooms; areas containing controls for equipment and navigation; 
workshops, other than those forming part of machinery spaces; and store 
rooms adjacent to these spaces.
    Combustible liquid means combustible liquid as the term is defined 
in 49 CFR 173.120(b).
    Compressed gas means compressed gas as the term is defined in 49 CFR 
173.115.
    Consumer commodity means a commodity, such as a polish, insecticide, 
cleaning compound, or distillate, that is packaged and distributed in a 
form and quantity intended for sale through retail sales establishments.
    Flammable liquid means flammable liquid as the term is defined in 49 
CFR 173.120(a).
    Hazardous material means hazardous material as the term is defined 
in 49 CFR 171.8.
    Hazardous ships' stores means ships' stores that are hazardous 
materials.
    Proper shipping name means the name of the hazardous ships' stores 
shown in Roman print (not in italics) in 49 CFR 172.101.
    Ships' stores means materials which are on board a vessel for the 
upkeep, maintenance, safety, operation, or navigation of the vessel 
(except for fumigants under part 147A of this chapter, for fuel and 
compressed air used for the vessel's primary propulsion machinery, or 
for fixed auxiliary equipment) or for the safety or comfort of the 
vessel's passengers or crew.

[[Page 6]]

    Technical name means the recognized chemical name used in scientific 
or technical publications.

[CGD 84-044, 53 FR 7749, Mar. 10, 1988, as amended by CGD 97-057, 62 FR 
51048, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 147.5  Commandant (G-MSO); address.

    Commandant (G-MSO) is the Office of Operating and Environmental 
Standards, Marine Safety and Environmental Protection. The address is 
Commandant (G-MSO), U.S. Coast Guard Headquarters, Washington, DC 20593-
0001, and the telephone number is (202) 267-0214.

[CGD 96-041, 61 FR 50731, Sept. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 147.7  Incorporation by reference.

    (a) In this part, portions or the entire text of certain standards 
and specifications are incorporated by reference as the governing 
requirements for materials, equipment, tests, or procedures to be 
followed. These standards and specification requirements specifically 
referred to in this part are the governing requirements for the subject 
matters covered, unless specifically limited, modified, or replaced by 
the regulations.
    (b) These materials are incorporated by reference into this part 
under 5 U.S.C. 552(a) with the approval of the Director of the Federal 
Register. The Office of the Federal Register publishes a table, 
``Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference,'' which appears in 
the Finding Aids section of this volume. To enforce any edition other 
than the one listed in paragraph (c) of this section, notice of the 
change must be published in the Federal Register and the material made 
available. All approved material is on file at the Office of the Federal 
Register Information Center, 800 North Capitol Street, NW., suite 700, 
Washington, DC and at U.S. Coast Guard Headquarters, 2100 Second Street, 
SW., Washington, DC 20593-0001. Copies may be obtained from the sources 
indicated in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (c) The materials approved for incorporation by reference in this 
part are:

American Boat and Yacht Council, Inc. (ABYC), 3069 Solomons Island Road, 
          Edgewater, MD 21037
    ABYC H-25-81--Portable Fuel Systems and Portable Containers for 
Flammable Liquids, May 12, 1981.
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-Conditioning 
          Engineers, Inc. (ASHRAE),
    Publication Sales Department, 1791 Tullie Circle, NE, Atlanta, GA 
30329
    ANSI/ASHRAE 34-78--Number Designation of Refrigerants, approved 
1978.
Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS),
    Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, D.C. 20402
    DHHS Publication No. (PHS) 84-2024--The Ship's Medicine Chest and 
Medical Aid at Sea, revised 1984.
Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL), 12 Laboratory Drive, Research 
          Triangle Park, NC 27709-3995
    UL 30--Standard for Metal Safety Cans, 7th Ed., March 11, 1985, 
revised March 12, 1985 and March 3, 1987.
    UL 1185--Standard for Portable Marine Fuel Tanks, Second Edition, 
March 13, 1978, revised July 6, 1984.
    UL 1313--Standard for Nonmetallic Safety Cans for Petroleum 
Products, 1st Ed., March 15, 1982, revised January 3, 1984 and March 22, 
1985.
    UL 1314--Standard for Special-Propose Containers, 1st Ed., July 7, 
1983, revised February 7, 1984 and September 23, 1986.

[CGD 84-044, 53 FR 7749, Mar. 10, 1988, as amended by CGD 97-057, 62 FR 
51048, Sept. 30, 1997; USCG-1999-6216, 64 FR 53227, Oct. 1, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 147.8  OMB control numbers assigned pursuant to the Paperwork Reduction Act.

    (a) Purpose. This section collects and displays the control numbers 
assigned to information collection and recordkeeping requirements in 
this subchapter by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) pursuant to 
the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.). The Coast 
Guard intends that this section comply with the requirements of 44 
U.S.C. 3507(f), which requires that agencies display a current control 
number assigned by the Director of the OMB for each approved agency 
information collection requirement.
    (b) Display.

[[Page 7]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Current OMB
    46 CFR part or section where identified or described     control no.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sec. 147.9.................................................    2115-0139
Sec. 147.30................................................    2115-0139
Sec. 147.40................................................    2115-0139
Sec. 147.60(c)(2)..........................................    2115-0139
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[CGD 88-072, 53 FR 34298, Sept. 6, 1988; 88-072, 53 FR 37570, Sept. 27, 
1988]


<R05>
Sec. 147.9  Waivers.

    (a) Any requirement in this part may be waived on a case by case 
basis if it is determined by Commandant (G-MSO) that the requirement is 
impracticable under the circumstances and that an acceptable level of 
safety can be maintained.
    (b) Requests for issuance of a waiver must be in writing and contain 
a detailed explanation of--
    (1) Why the requirement is impracticable; and
    (2) What measures will be taken to maintain an acceptable or 
equivalent level of safety.

[CGD 84-044, 53 FR 7749, Mar. 10, 1988, as amended by CGD 95-072, 60 FR 
50465, Sept. 29, 1995; CGD 96-041, 61 FR 50731, Sept. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 147.15  Hazardous ships' stores permitted on board vessels.

    Unless prohibited under subpart B of this part, any hazardous 
material may be on board a vessel as ships' stores if the material--
    (a) Is labeled according to Sec. 147.30; and
    (b) Meets the requirements, if any, in subpart B of this part 
applicable to the material.


<R05>
Sec. 147.30  Labeling.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, all 
immediate receptacles, containers, or packages containing hazardous 
ships' stores must be labeled in English with the following information 
concerning the contents:
    (1) Technical name or proper shipping name.
    (2) For hazardous ships' stores other than liquid fuels, 
manufacturer's or supplier's name and address.
    (3) Hazard classification under 49 CFR 172.101, 173.2, and 173.2(a).
    (4) For hazardous ships' stores other than liquid fuels, step by 
step procedures for proper use.
    (5) First aid instructions in the event of personnel contact, 
including antidotes in the event of ingestion.
    (6) Stowage and segregation requirements.
    (b) Hazardous ships' stores that are consumer commodities labeled in 
accordance with the Federal Hazardous Substances Act Regulations in 26 
CFR part 1500 need not be labeled as specified in paragraph (a) of this 
section.

[CGD 84-044, 53 FR 7749, Mar. 10, 1988, as amended by CGD 97-057, 62 FR 
51048, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 147.33  Right of appeal.

    Any person directly affected by a decision or action taken under 
this part, by or on behalf of the Coast Guard, may appeal therefrom in 
accordance with subpart 1.03 of this chapter.

[CGD 88-033, 54 FR 50381, Dec. 6, 1989; 55 FR 21386, May 24, 1990]


<R04>
    Subpart B--Stowage and Other Special Requirements for Particular 
                                Materials


<R05>
Sec. 147.35  Purpose of subpart.

    This subpart prescribes special requirements applicable to 
particular, named materials. These requirements are in addition to the 
general requirements in subpart A applicable to those materials.


<R05>
Sec. 147.40  Materials requiring Commandant (G-MSO) approval.

    (a) Commandant (G-MSO) approval is required before the following 
hazardous materials may be on board a vessel as ships' stores:
    (1) Poison gases of Class 2, Division 2.3 and toxic liquids of Class 
6, Division 6.1 which are poisonous by inhalation in Hazard Zone A.
    (2) Explosives of Divisions 1.1 or 1.2.
    (3) Flammable gases, other than those addressed specifically in this 
subpart.
    (4) Forbidden materials listed in 49 CFR 172.101.
    (b) Request for approval must be submitted to the Commandant (G-
MSO), identify the material, and explain the need for its use.
    (c) Upon approval, the material is added to the list of materials 
approved

[[Page 8]]

under this section. A copy of this list is available from the Commandant 
(G-MSO) at the address in Sec. 147.5.

[CGD 84-044, 53 FR 7749, Mar. 10, 1988, as amended by CGD 95-072, 60 FR 
50465, Sept. 29, 19955; CGD 96-041, 61 FR 50731, Sept. 27, 1996; CGD 97-
057, 62 FR 51048, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 147.45  Flammable and combustible liquids.

    (a) This section applies to the stowage and transfer of flammable 
and combustible liquids (including gasoline and diesel oil), other than 
liquids used as fuel for cooking, heating, and lighting under Sec. 
147.50.
    (b) No flammable or combustible liquids may be stowed in any 
accommodation, control, or service space (other than a paint locker).
    (c) No more than 19 liters (five gallons) of flammable liquids may 
be stowed in any machinery space. The flammable liquids must be in 
containers of 3.8 liters (one gallon) or less.
    (d) No more than 208 liters (55 gallons) of combustible liquids may 
be stowed in any machinery space.
    (e) An aggregate of more than 7.6 liters (two gallons) of flammable 
or combustible liquids stowed outside of an accommodation, control, or 
service, space (other than a paint locker) or outside of a machinery 
space must be stowed in a paint locker that is marked with a warning 
sign indicating flammable or combustible liquid storage.
    (f) Flammable and combustible liquids used as fuel for portable 
auxiliary equipment must be stored in--
    (1) Integral tanks that form part of the vessel's structure;
    (2) An independent tank meeting the requirements of subpart 58.50 of 
Part 58 of this chapter;
    (3) A non-bulk packaging authorized for Class 3 (flammable) liquids 
or combustible liquids under 49 CFR 173.201, 173.202, or 173.203, as 
referenced for the specific liquid in column 8B of the Hazardous 
Materials Table of 49 CFR 172.101.
    (4) A portable outboard fuel tank meeting the specifications of ABYC 
H-25-81 or one identified by Underwriters Laboratories as meeting the 
specifications of UL 1185;
    (5) A portable safety container identified by Underwriters 
Laboratories as meeting the specifications of UL 30 or UL 1313; or
    (6) A portable safety container identified by Underwriters 
Laboratories as meeting the requirements of UL 1314.
    (g) Each portable container of flammable or combustible liquid used 
for portable auxiliary equipment must be stowed in a paint locker or an 
open location designated by the master.
    (h) Fuel tanks for portable auxiliary equipment using flammable or 
combustible liquids may only be refilled on a vessel--
    (1) By using a container described in paragraph (f)(2), (f)(3), or 
(f)(5) of this section which has a capacity not exceeding 23 liters (6 
gallons); or
    (2) In the case of portable outboard fuel tanks described in 
paragraph (f)(4) of this section, in accordance with paragraph (i) of 
this section.
    (i) Portable containers or portable outboard fuel tanks may be 
refilled from a larger container of flammable or combustible liquid on 
the weather deck of a vessel, other than a small passenger vessel 
subject to Subchapter T of this chapter, provided that--
    (1) A drip pan of adequate size is used to collect any drippings; 
and
    (2) At least one Coast Guard approved Type B, Size I, fire 
extinguisher is within three meters (9.75 feet) of the refilling 
location.

[CGD 84-044, 53 FR 7749, Mar. 10, 1988, as amended by CGD 92-100, 59 FR 
17001, Apr. 11, 1994; CGD 97-057, 62 FR 51048, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 147.50  Fuel for cooking, heating, and lighting.

    (a) Flammable and combustible liquids and gases not listed in this 
section are prohibited for cooking, heating, or lighting on any vessel, 
with the exception of combustible liquids on cargo vessels.
    (b) Fluid alcohol is prohibited for cooking, heating, or lighting on 
ferry vessels. Fluid alcohol burners, where wet primed, must have a 
catch pan not less than \3/4\ of an inch deep secured inside of the 
frame of the stove or have the metal protection under the stove flanged 
up \3/4\ of an inch to form a pan.
    (c) Containers of solidified alcohol must be secured on a fixed 
base.
    (d) Liquefied or non-liquefied gas is prohibited for cooking, 
heating, and

[[Page 9]]

lighting on ferry vessels, but may be used on other inspected vessels if 
the system in which it is used meets the applicable requirements of 
subpart 58.16 or subpart 184.05 of this chapter, as appropriate, or is 
approved by the Commandant (G-MSE).
    (e) Kerosene and commercial standard fuel oil No. 1, No. 2, and No. 
3 are prohibited for cooking, heating, or lighting on ferry or passenger 
vessels, unless the following conditions are met:
    (1) Pressure or gravity feed must be used.
    (2) Where wet priming is used in a cooking device, the device must 
have a catch pan not less than three fourths of an inch deep secured 
inside the frame of the device or a metal protector under the device 
with a least a three fourths inch flange to form a pan.
    (3) Where wet priming is used, a non-flammable priming liquid must 
be used.
    (4) Fuel tanks for fixed stoves must be separated from the stove and 
mounted in a location open to the atmosphere or mounted inside a 
compartment with an outside fill and vent.
    (5) Fuel lines must have an easily accessible shut-off valve at the 
tank.
    (6) If the fuel tank is outside of a stove compartment, a shut-off 
valve must be fitted at the stove.

[CGD 84-044, 53 FR 7749, Mar. 10, 1988, as amended by CGD 83-013, 54 FR 
6402, Feb. 10, 1989; CGD 95-072, 60 FR 50465, Sept. 29, 1995; CGD 96-
041, 61 FR 50731, Sept. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 147.60  Compressed gases.

    (a) Cylinder requirements. Cylinders used for containing hazardous 
ships' stores that are compressed gases must be--
    (1) Authorized for the proper shipping name of the gas in accordance 
with 49 CFR 172.101 and 49 CFR part 173;
    (2) Constructed in accordance with subpart C of 49 CFR part 178 or 
exempted under 49 CFR part 107;
    (3) Filled, marked, and inspected in accordance with 49 CFR 173.301 
through 173.308; and
    (4) Except as provided in Sec. 147.65, maintained and retested in 
accordance with 49 CFR 173.34
    (b) Stowage and care of cylinders. (1) Cylinders must always be 
secured and, when not in use, they must be stowed in a rack in an 
upright position, with the valve protection cap in place.
    (2) Lockers or housings must be vented to the open air near the top 
and bottom for positive circulation of vapors.
    (3) Cylinders must be protected from all sources of heat which may 
cause the cylinders to be heated to a temperature higher than 130 
<deg>F.
    (c) Pressure vessels other than cylinders. Pressure vessels, other 
than cylinders subject to paragraph (a) of this section, used for 
containing ships' stores that are compressed gases must--
    (1) Be constructed and inspected in accordance with part 54 of this 
chapter; and
    (2) Carry only nitrogen or air, unless permission is granted by 
Commandant (G-MSO) to do otherwise.

[CGD 84-044, 53 FR 7749, Mar. 10, 1988, as amended by CGD 95-072, 60 FR 
50465, Sept. 29, 19955; CGD 96-041, 61 FR 50731, Sept. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 147.65  Carbon dioxide and halon fire extinguishing systems.

    (a) Carbon dioxide or halon cylinders forming part of a fixed fire 
extinguishing system must be retested, at least, every 12 years. If a 
cylinder is discharged and more than five years have elapsed since the 
last test, it must be retested before recharging.
    (b) Carbon dioxide or halon cylinders must be rejected for further 
service when they--
    (1) Leak;
    (2) Are dented, bulging, severely corroded, or otherwise in a 
weakened condition;
    (3) Have lost more than five percent of their tare weight; or
    (4) Have been involved in a fire.
    (c) Cylinders which have contained carbon dioxide or halon and have 
not been tested within five years must not be used to contain another 
compressed gas on board a vessel, unless the cylinder is retested and 
re-marked in accordance with Sec. 147.60 (a)(3) and (a)(4).
    (d) Flexible connections between cylinders and distribution piping 
of semi-portable or fixed carbon dioxide fire extinguishing systems and 
discharge hoses in semi-portable carbon dioxide fire extinguishing 
systems must be renewed or tested at a pressure of 6.9

[[Page 10]]

MPa (1000 psig). At test pressure, the pressure must not drop at a rate 
greater than 1.03 MPa (150 psi) per minute for a two minute period. The 
test must be performed when the cylinders are retested.
    (e) Flexible connections between cylinders and distribution piping 
of fixed halon fire extinguishing systems must be tested at a pressure 
of one and one-half times the cylinder service pressure as marked on the 
cylinder. At test pressure, the pressure must not drop at a rate greater 
than 1.03 MPa (150 psi) per minute for a two minute period. The test 
must be performed when the cylinders are retested.


<R05>
Sec. 147.70  Acetylene.

    (a) Seventeen cubic meters (600 standard cubic feet) or less of 
acetylene may be stowed on or below decks on any vessel.
    (b) More than 17 m\3\ (600 standard cubic feet) of acetylene may be 
on board a vessel engaged in industrial operations, if it is stowed on 
deck.


<R05>
Sec. 147.85  Oxygen.

    (a) Eighty five cubic meters (3000 standard cubic feet) or less of 
oxygen may be on board any vessel.
    (b) More than 85 m\3\ (3000 standard cubic feet) of oxygen may be on 
board a vessel engaged in industrial operations, if it is stowed on deck 
or in a well ventilated space.


<R05>
Sec. 147.90  Refrigerants.

    (a) Only refrigerants listed in ANSI/ASHRAE 34-78 may be carried as 
ships' stores.
    (b) Refrigerants contained in a vessel's operating system are not 
considered as being carried as ship's stores.


<R05>
Sec. 147.95  Explosives.

    (a) Explosives--general. Except as provided for elsewhere in this 
subchapter, explosives, as defined in 49 CFR 173.50, which are hazardous 
ships' stores must be stowed in a magazine which is constructed and 
located in accordance with 49 CFR 176.122 through 176.138.
    (b) Small arms ammunition. (1) No person shall bring, have in their 
possession, or use on board a vessel any small arms ammunition, except 
by express permission of the master of the vessel.
    (2) All small arms ammunition must be stowed in a locked metal 
magazine or locker. The key to the locker must be kept in the possession 
of the master or a person designated by the master.
    (c) Ships' signals and emergency equipment. (1) Explosive ships' 
signals and emergency equipment, including pyrotechnic distress signals 
and line throwing equipment, must be stowed in watertight containers or 
wood lined magazine chests.
    (2) All pyrotechnic distress signals, rockets, and line throwing 
guns must be stowed in accordance with the requirements of 49 CFR 
176.140 through 176.146.

[CGD 84-044, 53 FR 7749, Mar. 10, 1988, as amended by CGD 92-100, 59 FR 
17001, Apr. 11, 1994; CGD 97-057, 62 FR 51048, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 147.100  Radioactive materials.

    (a) Radioactive materials must not be brought on board, used in any 
manner, or stored on the vessel, unless the use of the materials is 
authorized by a current license issued by the Nuclear Regulatory 
Commission (NRC) under 10 CFR parts 30 and 34.
    (b) Stowage of radioactive materials must conform to the 
requirements of the NRC license.


<R05>
Sec. 147.105  Anesthetics, drugs, and medicines.

    Anesthetics, drugs, and medicines must be stowed and dispensed in 
accordance with the DHHS Publication No. (PHS) 84-2024.


<R03>
PART 147A--INTERIM REGULATIONS FOR SHIPBOARD FUMIGATION--Table of Contents

<R05>


                                 General

Sec.
147A.1 Purpose.
147A.3 Applicability.
147A.5 General requirement.
147A.6 Right of appeal
147A.7 Definitions.
147A.9 Persons in charge of fumigation and the vessel; designation.
147A.10 Notice to Captain of the Port.

                            Before Fumigation

147A.11 Person in charge of fumigation; before fumigation.
147A.13 Person in charge of the vessel; before fumigation.

[[Page 11]]

                            During Fumigation

147A.21 Person in charge of fumigation; during fumigation.
147A.23 Person in charge of vessel; during fumigation.
147A.25 Entry.

                            After Ventilation

147A.31 Removal of fumigation material and warning signs.

              Special Requirements for Flammable Fumigants

147A.41 Person in charge of fumigation; flammable fumigants.
147A.43 Other sources of ignition; flammable fumigants.

    Authority: 46 U.S.C. 5103; 49 CFR 1.46.

    Source: CGD 74-144, 39 FR 32998, Sept. 13, 1974, unless otherwise 
noted.

                                 General


<R05>
Sec. 147A.1  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to prescribe the requirements for 
shipboard fumigation that are critical for the health and safety of the 
crew and any other person who is on board a vessel during fumigation. 
These are interim rules pending further study and promulgation of 
comprehensive regulations on shipboard fumigation.


<R05>
Sec. 147A.3  Applicability.

    This part prescribes the rules for shipboard fumigation on vessels 
to which 49 CFR parts 171-179 apply under 49 CFR 176.5.

[CGD 86-033, 53 FR 36026, Sept. 16, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 147A.5  General requirement.

    No person may cause or authorize shipboard fumigation contrary to 
the rules in this part.


<R05>
Sec. 147A.6  Right of appeal.

    Any person directly affected by a decision or action taken under 
this part, by or on behalf of the Coast Guard, may appeal therefrom in 
accordance with subpart 1.03 of this chapter.

[CGD 88-033, 54 FR 50381, Dec. 6, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 147A.7  Definitions.

    As used in this part:
    (a) Qualified person means a person who has experience with the 
particular fumigant or knowledge of its properties and is familiar with 
fumigant detection equipment and procedures, or an applicator who is 
certified by the Environmental Protection Agency if his certification 
covers the fumigant that is used.
    (b) Fumigant means a substance or mixture of substances that is a 
gas or is rapidly or progressively transformed to the gaseous state 
though some nongaseous or particulate matter may remain in the space 
that is fumigated.
    (c) Fumigation means the application of a fumigant on board a vessel 
to a specific treatment space.


<R05>
Sec. 147A.9  Persons in charge of fumigation and the vessel; designation.

    (a) The person, including any individual, firm, association, 
partnership, or corporation, that is conducting a fumigation operation 
shall designate a person in charge of fumigation for each operation.
    (b) The operator of each vessel shall designate a person in charge 
of the vessel for each fumigation operation.


<R05>
Sec. 147A.10  Notice to Captain of the Port.

    Unless otherwise authorized by the Captain of the Port, at least 24 
hours before fumigation the operator of the vessel shall notify the 
Coast Guard Captain of the Port, for the area where the vessel is to be 
fumigated, of the time and place of the fumigation, and the name of the 
vessel that is to be fumigated.

                            Before Fumigation


<R05>
Sec. 147A.11  Person in charge of fumigation; before fumigation.

    (a) The person in charge of fumigation shall notify the person in 
charge of the vessel of:
    (1) The space that is to be fumigated;
    (2) The name, address, and emergency telephone number of the 
fumigation company;
    (3) The dates and times of fumigation;
    (4) The characteristics of the fumigant;
    (5) The spaces that are determined to be safe for occupancy 
paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section;
    (6) The maximum allowable concentration of fumigant in spaces, if

[[Page 12]]

any, that are determined to be safe for occupancy under paragraph 
(b)(1)(i) of this section;
    (7) The symptoms of exposure to the fumigant; and
    (8) Emergency first aid treatment for exposure to the fumigant.
    (b) The person in charge of fumigation shall ensure that:
    (1) A marine chemist or other qualified person who has knowledge of 
and experience in shipboard fumigation evaluates the vessel's 
construction and configuration and determines:
    (i) Which spaces, if any, are safe for occupancy during fumigation; 
and
    (ii) The intervals that inspections must be made under Sec. 
147A.21(a)(1);
    (2) No persons or domestic animals are in the space that is to be 
fumigated or the spaces that are designated as unsafe for occupancy 
under paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section;
    (3) There is proper and secure sealing to confine the fumigant to 
the space that is to be fumigated, including blanking off and sealing 
any ventilation ducts and smoke detectors;
    (4) The personal protection and fumigation detection equipment for 
the fumigant that is to be used is on board the vessel;
    (5) Warning signs are:
    (i) Posted upon all gangplanks, ladders, and other points of access 
to the vessel;
    (ii) Posted on all entrances to the spaces that are designated as 
unsafe for occupancy under paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section; and
    (iii) In accordance with 49 CFR 173.9(c) or section 8.10 of the 
General Introduction of the International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code. 
The word ``unit'' on the warning sign may be replaced with ``vessel,'' 
``barge,'' ``hold,'' or ``space,'' as appropriate.
    (6) Watchmen are stationed at all entrances to:
    (i) Spaces that are not determined to be safe for occupancy under 
paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section; or
    (ii) The vessel, if no spaces are determined to be safe for 
occupancy under paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section.

[CGD 74-144, 39 FR 32998, Sept. 13, 1974; 39 FR 37771, Oct. 24, 19745; 
CGD 96-041, 61 FR 50731, Sept. 27, 1996; CGD 97-057, 62 FR 51048, Sept. 
30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 147A.13  Person in charge of the vessel; before fumigation.

    (a) After notice under Sec. 147A.11 (a)(5), the person in charge of 
the vessel shall notify the crew and all other persons on board the 
vessel who are not participating in the fumigation of the spaces that 
are determined to be safe for occupancy under Sec. 147A.11(b)(1)(i).
    (b) If no spaces are determined to be safe for occupancy under Sec. 
147A.11 (b)(1)(i), the person in charge of the vessel shall ensure that 
the crew and all persons who are not participating in the fumigation 
leave the vessel and remain away during fumigation.

                            During Fumigation


<R05>
Sec. 147A.21  Person in charge of fumigation; during fumigation.

    (a) Until ventilation begins, or until the vessel leaves port, the 
person in charge of fumigation shall ensure that a qualified person 
inspects the vessel as follows:
    (1) He must use detection equipment for the fumigant that is used to 
ensure that the fumigant is confined to:
    (i) The space that is fumigated, if partial occupancy is allowed 
under Sec. 147A.11(b)(1)(i); or
    (ii) The vessel, if no space is determined to be safe for occupancy 
under Sec. 147A.11(b)(1)(i).
    (2) He must make inspections at the intervals that are determined to 
be necessary by the marine chemist or qualified person under Sec. 
147A.11 (b)(1)(ii).
    (b) If leakage occurs, the person in charge of fumigation shall:
    (1) Notify the person in charge of the vessel that there is leakage;
    (2) Ensure that all necessary measures are taken for the health and 
safety of any person; and
    (3) Notify the person in charge of the vessel when there is no 
danger to the health and safety of any person.
    (c) After the exposure period, if the vessel is in port, the person 
in charge of fumigation shall ensure that fumigators or other qualified 
persons ventilate the space that is fumigated as follows:
    (1) Hatch covers and vent seals must be removed, other routes of 
access to the atmosphere must be opened, and if

[[Page 13]]

necessary, mechanical ventilation must be used.
    (2) Personal protection equipment that is appropriate for the 
fumigant that is used must be worn.
    (d) If ventilation is completed before the vessel leaves port, the 
person in charge of fumigation shall:
    (1) Ensure that a qualified person, who is wearing the personal 
protection equipment for the fumigant that is used if remote detection 
equipment is not used, tests the space that is fumigated and determines 
if there is any danger to the health and safety of any person, including 
a danger from fumigant that may be retained in bagged, baled, or other 
absorbent cargo;
    (2) Notify the person in charge of the vessel of this determination; 
and
    (3) If it is determined that there is a danger:
    (i) Ensure that all measures are taken that are necessary for the 
health and safety of all persons; and
    (ii) Notify the person in charge of the vessel when there is no 
danger to the health and safety of any person.


<R05>
Sec. 147A.23  Person in charge of vessel; during fumigation.

    (a) The person in charge of the vessel shall ensure that the crew 
and all other persons on board the vessel who are not participating in 
the fumigation restrict their movement during fumigation to the spaces 
that are determined to be safe for occupancy under Sec. 
147A.11(b)(1)(i).
    (b) The person in charge of the vessel shall ensure that the crew 
and all other persons who are not participating in the fumigation follow 
any instructions of the person in charge of fumigation that are issued 
under Sec. 147A.21(b)(2) or (d)(3)(i) and that the vessel does not leave 
port if he is notified under:
    (1) Section 147A.21(b)(1) that there is leakage, unless the person 
in charge of fumigation notifies him under Sec. 147A.21(b)(3) of this 
subpart that there is no danger; or
    (2) Section 147A.21(d)(2) that there is a danger after ventilation, 
unless the person in charge of the fumigation notifies him under Sec. 
147A.21(d)(3)(ii) that there is no danger.
    (c) If fumigation is not completed before the vessel leaves port, 
the person in charge of the vessel shall ensure that personal protection 
and fumigant detection equipment for the fumigant that is used is on 
board the vessel.
    (d) If the vessel leaves port before fumigation is completed, the 
person in charge of the vessel shall ensure that a qualified person 
makes periodic inspections until ventilation is completed and this 
person shall use detection equipment for the fumigant that is used to 
determine if:
    (1) There is leakage of fumigant; or
    (2) There is a concentration of fumigant that is a danger to the 
health and safety of any person.
    (e) If the qualified person determines under paragraph (d) of this 
section that there is leakage or a concentration of fumigant that is a 
danger to the health and safety of any person, the person in charge of 
the vessel shall take all measures that are, in his discretion, 
necessary to ensure health and safety of all persons who are on board 
the vessel. If the danger is due to leakage, he shall also ensure that 
qualified persons immediately ventilate in accordance with paragraphs 
(c)(1) and (2) of Sec. 147A.21.
    (f) If the vessel leaves port during the exposure period, the person 
in charge of the vessel shall ensure that the space that is fumigated is 
ventilated by qualified persons after the exposure period in accordance 
with paragraphs (c) (1) and (2) of Sec. 147A.21.
    (g) If ventilation is completed after the vessel leaves port, the 
person in charge of the vessel shall ensure that a qualified person, who 
is wearing the personal protection equipment for the fumigant that is 
used if remote detection equipment is not used, tests the space that is 
fumigated to determine if there is a danger to the health and safety of 
any person, including a danger from fumigant that may be retained in 
bagged, baled, or other absorbent cargo. If the qualified person 
determines that there is a danger, the person in charge of the vessel 
shall take all measures that are, in his discretion, necessary to ensure 
the health and safety of all persons who are on board the vessel.

[[Page 14]]


<R05>
Sec. 147A.25  Entry.

    (a) No person may enter the spaces that immediately adjoin the space 
that is fumigated during fumigation unless entry is for emergency 
purposes or the space is tested and declared safe for human occupancy by 
a marine chemist or other qualified person and is inspected under Sec. 
147A.21(a)(2) or Sec. 147A.23(d).
    (b) If entry is made for emergency purposes:
    (1) No person may enter the space that is fumigated or any adjoining 
spaces during fumigation unless he wears the personal protection 
equipment for the fumigant that is in use;
    (2) No person may enter the space that is fumigated unless the entry 
is made by a two person team; and
    (3) No person may enter the space that is fumigated unless he wears 
a lifeline and safety harness and each life-line is tended by a person 
who is outside the space and who is wearing the personal protection 
equipment for the fumigant that is in use.

                            After Ventilation


<R05>
Sec. 147A.31  Removal of fumigation material and warning signs.

    After ventilation is completed and a marine chemist or other 
qualified person determines that there is no danger to the health and 
safety of any person under Sec. 147A.21(d) or Sec. 147A.23(g), the 
person in charge of fumigation, or, if the vessel has left port, the 
person in charge of the vessel, shall ensure that all warning signs are 
removed and fumigation containers and materials are removed and disposed 
of in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.

              Special Requirements for Flammable Fumigants


<R05>
Sec. 147A.41  Person in charge of fumigation; flammable fumigants.

    (a) The person in charge of fumigation shall ensure that:
    (1) Before the space that is to be fumigated is sealed, it is 
thoroughly cleaned, and all refuse, oily waste, and other combustible 
material is removed;
    (2) Before fumigation, all fire fighting equipment, including 
sprinklers and fire pumps, is in operating condition; and
    (3) Before and during fumigation, electrical circuits that are in 
the space that is fumigated are de-energized.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 147A.43  Other sources of ignition; flammable fumigants.

    While the space that is fumigated is being sealed or during 
fumigation, no person may use matches, smoking materials, fires, open 
flames, or any other source of ignition in any spaces that are not 
determined to be safe for occupancy under Sec. 147A.11(b)(1)(i).


<R03>
PART 148--CARRIAGE OF SOLID HAZARDOUS MATERIALS IN BULK--Table of Contents

<R05>


                         Subpart 148.01--General

Sec.
148.01-1 Purpose and applicability.
148.01-7 Permitted cargoes.
148.01-9 Filing of special petition for special permit.
148.01-11 Special permits; standard conditions.
148.01-13 Assignment and certification.
148.01-15 Right of appeal.

                   Subpart 148.02--Vessel Requirements

148.02-1 Shipping papers.
148.02-3 Dangerous cargo manifest.
148.02-5 Report of hazardous materials incidents.

           Subpart 148.03--Minimum Transportation Requirements

148.03-1 General.
148.03-3 Direction and observation.
148.03-5 Prior to loading.
148.03-7 During transport.
148.03-11 Stowage conditions.
148.03-13 Completion of off-loading.

  Subpart 148.04--Special Additional Requirements for Certain Materials

148.04-1 Radioactive material, Low Specific Activity (LSA).
148.04-9 Fishmeal or scrap, ground or pelletized; fishmeal or scrap, 
          ground and pelletized (mixture).
148.04-13 Ferrous metal borings, shavings, turnings or cuttings 
          (excluding stainless steel).
148.04-15 Petroleum coke, uncalcined; petroleum coke, uncalcined and 
          calcined (mixture).
148.04-17 Petroleum coke, calcined, at 130 <deg>F or above.

[[Page 15]]

148.04-19 Tankage, garbage or rough ammoniate, solid.
148.04-20 Sulfur.
148.04-21 Coconut meal pellets (also known as copra pellets).
148.04-23 Unslaked lime in bulk.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 5103; 49 CFR 1.46.

    Source: CGD 83-067a, 49 FR 16794, Apr. 20, 1984, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R04>
                         Subpart 148.01--General


<R05>
Sec. 148.01-1  Purpose and applicability.

    (a) This part prescribes regulations under which bulk solid 
hazardous materials may be transported. Each master, person in charge of 
the vessel, owner, charterer and agent shall ensure compliance with this 
part and communicate the requirements of this part to every person 
performing any function covered by this part. Each person involved in 
the transportation of bulk solid hazardous materials shall comply with 
the requirements of this part within the scope of his job 
responsibilities.
    (b) For the purposes of this part, the term bulk applies only to 
cargoes transported on board cargo vessels or barges without mark or 
count and which are to be directly loaded into the holds of such vessels 
or barges without containers or wrappers.
    (c) For purposes of this part, the term vessel means a ``cargo 
vessel or barge'' which is not exempted under 49 U.S.C. 5107(d).
    (d) For the purposes of this part, the term transported includes the 
various operations associated with the cargo transportation such as, 
loading, off-loading, handling, storing, stowing, carrying, conveying, 
using, etc.
    (e) The term hazardous materials includes a number of specific 
classes, the definitions of which are contained in 49 CFR parts 170-189.

[CGD 83-067a, 49 FR 16794, Apr. 20, 1984, as amended by CGD 95-028, 62 
FR 51208, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 148.01-7  Permitted cargoes.

    (a) The solid hazardous materials cargoes listed here may be 
transported in bulk on board vessels if they comply with the regulations 
in this part. Unlisted cargoes may be transported only if express 
authority is given by the Commandant in accordance with Sec. 148.01-9 of 
this subpart.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                               Hazard class of       Characteristic
     Shipping name of the       the hazardous       properties of the
      hazardous material          materials             material
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Aluminum dross...............  Flammable solid  Contact with water may
                                                 cause self heating and
                                                 the evolution of
                                                 flammable gas.
Aluminum nitrate.............  Oxidizing        If involved in a fire
                                materials.       will greatly intensify
                                                 the burning of
                                                 combustible materials.
Ammonium nitrate containing    Oxidizing         Do.
 not more than 80 pct           material.
 ammonium nitrate and not
 less than 20 pct calcium
 carbonate with no more than
 2 pct inorganic coating, in
 the form of uniform and
 nonsegregatable granular
 particles.
Ammonium nitrate fertilizer,   ......do.......   Do.
 formulation or mixture
 containing less than 60 pct
 ammonium with no organic
 filler.
Ammonium sulfate nitrate.....  ORM-C..........  If involved in a fire
                                                 will intensify the
                                                 burning of combustible
                                                 materials.
Barium nitrate...............  Oxidizing        If involved in a fire
                                material.        will greatly intensify
                                                 the burning of
                                                 combustible materials.
Calcium nitrate..............  ......do.......   Do.
Charcoal briquets............  Flammable solid  Contact with water may
                                                 cause self heating.
Coconut meal pellets (or       ORM-C..........  Subject to spontaneous
 copra pellets) containing at                    heating by biological
 least 6 pct and not more                        decay or by oxidation.
 than 13 pct moisture and not
 more than 10 pct residual
 fat content.
Copra, dry...................  ......do.......  Susceptible to
                                                 spontaneous heating or
                                                 fire from spark or open
                                                 flame.
Ferrophosphorus..............  ORM-A..........  May evolve poisonous gas
                                                 (phosphine) in contact
                                                 with moisture.
Ferrosilicon, containing less  ......do.......  May evolve poisonous and
 than 45 pct or more than 70                     flammable gases (arsine/
 pct silicon.                                    phosphine) in contact
                                                 with water, acids or
                                                 alkalines.
Ferrous metal borings,         ORM-C..........  Susceptible to
 shavings, turnings, or                          spontaneous heating and
 cuttings (excluding                             ignition.
 stainless steel).

[[Page 16]]

 
Fishmeal or scrap, ground and  ......do.......   Do.
 pelletized (mixture),
 containing 6 to 12 pct
 moisture and no more than 18
 pct fat by weight.
Lead nitrate.................  Oxidizing        If involved in a fire
                                material.        will greatly intensify
                                                 the burning of
                                                 combustible materials.
Lime, unslaked...............  ORM-B..........  Evolves heat on contact
                                                 with water.
Magnesium nitrate............  Oxidizing        If involved in fire will
                                material.        greatly intensify the
                                                 burning of combustible
                                                 materials.
Petroleum coke, calcined, at   ORM-C..........  Susceptible to
 130 <deg>F or above.                            spontaneous heating and
                                                 ignition.
Petroleum coke, uncalcined...  ......do.......   Do.
Postassium nitrate...........  Oxidizing        If involved in a fire
                                material.        will greatly intensify
                                                 the burning of
                                                 combustible materials.
Radioactive material, low      Radioactive      Radiation hazard from
 specific activity (LSA).       material.        ingestion, inhalation
                                                 and contact with mucous
                                                 membranes.
Sawdust......................  ORM-C..........  Susceptible to fire from
                                                 sparks or open flames.
Sodium nitrate...............  Oxidizing        If involved in a fire
                                material.        will greatly intensify
                                                 the burning of
                                                 combustible materials.
Sodium nitrate, potassium      ......do.......   Do.
 nitrate mixture; 67 pct
 Sodium nitrate, 30 pct
 Postassium nitrate and not
 more than 3 percent
 miscellaneous inorganic
 compounds.
Strontium nitrate (not         ......do.......   Do.
 radioactive).
Sulfur.......................  ORM-C..........  Dust forms explosive
                                                 mixtures with air.
Tankage, garbage or rough      ......do.......  Susceptible to
 ammoniate solid, containing                     spontaneous heating and
 7 pct or more moisture.                         ignition.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Note: Definitions of hazard classes of hazardous materials are found 
in 49 CFR 171.8 and 49 CFR 173.500.
    (b) A mixture or blend of two or more cargoes, one or more of which 
is listed in paragraph (a) of this section, will be treated as an 
unlisted cargo and specific authorization by the Commandant, in 
accordance with Sec. 148.01-9, for shipment in bulk is required.


<R05>
Sec. 148.01-9  Filing of special petition for special permit.

    (a) A petition for authorization to transport an unlisted cargo or 
to use alternative procedures must be submitted to the U.S. Coast Guard 
(G-MSO), Washington, DC 20593, and must contain the following minimum 
information:
    (1) The regulatory provisions involved.
    (2) The justification for the proposed shipments or alternative 
procedure, including any reasons why the current regulations are not 
appropriate, why the public interest would be served by the proposal, 
and the basis upon which the proposal would provide an equivalent degree 
of safety to those shipments conducted in accordance with the current 
regulations.
    (3) A detailed description of the proposal, including when 
appropriate, drawings, plans, calculations, procedures, test results, 
previous approvals or permits, and any other supporting information.
    (4) The chemical name, common name, hazard classification for 
properties (chemical and physical), and characteristics of the materials 
covered by the proposal, including composition and ingredient 
percentages (specified by weight) if a mixture.
    (5) Any relevant shipping or accident experience.
    (6) A description of the vessel or vessels to be employed for the 
shipments and the U.S. ports to be involved.
    (7) A statement or recommendation regarding any changes to the 
regulations which would be desirable to obviate the need for similar 
permission from the Commandant.
    (b) Unless there is a good reason for priority treatment, each 
proposal is considered in the order in which it is received. To permit 
timely consideration, proposals should be submitted at least 45 days 
before the requested effective date.

[CGD 83-067a, 49 FR 16794, Apr. 20, 1984, as amended by CGD 95-072, 60 
FR 50465, Sept. 29, 19955; CGD 96-041, 61 FR 50731, Sept. 27, 1996]

[[Page 17]]


<R05>
Sec. 148.01-11  Special permits; standard conditions.

    (a) Each person to whom a special permit is issued under the terms 
of Sec. 148.01-9 shall comply with all requirements of this part except 
as specifically provided by the terms of the special permit.
    (b) Unless otherwise specified in the special permit, each shipment 
made under special permit must comply with the following:
    (1) Each shipping paper issued and the dangerous cargo manifest 
prepared in connection with such shipment must bear the notation ``CG 
Special Permit No. *'' with the * to be filled in with the assigned 
special permit number.
    (2) Each person to whom a special permit is issued shall furnish a 
summary of experience to the U.S. Coast Guard (G-MSO), Washington, DC 
20593, before the date of expiration of the permit and when any 
amendment to the special permit is requested. The information must 
include the number of shipments made, tonnage of each shipment, and what 
vessel's and U.S. Ports were involved. In addition, an immediate report 
must be submitted the U.S. Coast Guard (G-MSO) in the event of any 
casualty, accident, or damaging incident which occurs when transporting 
solid hazardous materials in bulk under the terms of a special permit.
    (3) A copy of the special permit, kept current, and any amendments 
thereto, must be on board each vessel while transporting solid hazardous 
materials in bulk under the terms of a special permit. The special 
permit must be kept with the dangerous cargo manifest (Sec. 148.02-3).
    (c) Each permit is subject to suspension or revocation for cause by 
the U.S. Coast Guard before its expiration date.

[CGD 83-067a, 49 FR 16794, Apr. 20, 1984, as amended by CGD 95-072, 60 
FR 50465, Sept. 29, 19955; CGD 96-041, 61 FR 50731, Sept. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 148.01-13  Assignment and certification.

    (a) The National Cargo Bureau, Inc., is authorized to assist the 
U.S. Coast Guard in administering the provisions contained in this part 
that are applicable to the transportation of solid hazardous materials 
in bulk on vessels with respect to:
    (1) Inspection of vessels for suitability for loading such materials 
in bulk;
    (2) Examination of stowage of such materials loaded in bulk on board 
vessels;
    (3) Making recommendations as to stowage requirements applicable to 
the transportation of such materials in bulk; and
    (4) Issuing of certificates of loading, setting forth that the 
stowage of such materials in bulk is in accordance with applicable 
regulations contained in this part.
    (b) Certificates of loading from the National Cargo Bureau, Inc., 
are accepted as evidence of compliance with the applicable provisions of 
this part with respect to the transportation of solid hazardous 
materials in bulk on board vessels.


<R05>
Sec. 148.01-15  Right of appeal.

    Any person directly affected by a decision or action taken under 
this part, by or on behalf of the Coast Guard, may appeal therefrom in 
accordance with subpart 1.03 of this chapter.

[CGD 88-033, 54 FR 50381, Dec. 6, 1989]


<R04>
                   Subpart 148.02--Vessel Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 148.02-1  Shipping papers.

    (a) Carriers may not accept for transportation nor transport by 
vessel in bulk any solid hazardous materials listed in Sec. 148.01-7(a) 
of this part, unless the hazardous materials offered for such shipment 
is accompanied by a shipping paper on which the following information is 
shown:
    (1) The shipping name and hazard class of the hazardous material as 
listed in Sec. 148.01-7(a) of this part.
    (2) The quantity of the hazardous material to be transported.
    (3) The name and address of the U.S. shipper or his authorized 
representative.
    (4) A certification which bears the following statement, signed by 
the shipper or his authorized representative: ``This is to certify that 
the above-named hazardous material is properly

[[Page 18]]

named, prepared, and otherwise in proper condition for bulk shipment by 
vessel in accordance with the applicable regulations of the U.S. Coast 
Guard''.
    (b) For import shipments, the consignee shall advise the carrier or 
foreign shipper (consignor) of the applicable U.S. Coast Guard 
regulations. The carrier or foreign shipper (consignor) shall then 
furnish the information required in paragraph (a) of this section, as 
advised by the consignee, either on the shipping papers or dangerous 
cargo manifest.
    (c) The shipping paper required in paragraph (a) of this section 
must be kept on board the towing vessel along with the dangerous cargo 
manifest (Sec. 148.02-3 of this subpart) except when the shipment is by 
an unmanned barge in which case it may be kept on board the towing 
vessel. When an unmanned barge is moored, the shipping paper must remain 
on board the barge, in a readily retrievable location, such as a metal 
tube attached to the barge.


<R05>
Sec. 148.02-3  Dangerous cargo manifest.

    (a) Each vessel, except for unmanned barges, transporting solid 
hazardous materials in bulk under the terms of this part must have on 
board a dangerous cargo manifest, kept in a conspicuous place on or near 
the bridge house, on which the following information is entered:
    (1) Name of vessel and official number. (If the vessel has no 
official number, the international radio call sign must be substituted.)
    (2) Nationality of vessel.
    (3) The name of the hazardous material as listed in Sec. 148.01-7(a) 
of this part.
    (4) The hold(s) in which the material is being transported.
    (5) The quantity of the material loaded in each hold.
    (6) Date and signature of Master of the vessel's owner or his 
authorized representative to acknowledge correctness of the dangerous 
cargo manifest.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 148.02-5  Report of hazardous materials incidents.

    In the event of an incident involving hazardous materials, an 
immediate report must be sent in accordance with 49 CFR 171.15.


<R04>
           Subpart 148.03--Minimum Transportation Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 148.03-1  General.

    The regulations in this subpart apply to each bulk shipment of a 
solid hazardous material listed in Sec. 148.01-7 of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 148.03-3  Direction and observation.

    Loading or off-loading of a solid hazardous material in bulk within 
the navigable waters of the U.S. must be conducted only under the 
direction and observation of a person assigned or employed for such duty 
by the vessel's master or owner or authorized representative.


<R05>
Sec. 148.03-5  Prior to loading.

    Prior to loading any solid hazardous material in bulk on board a 
vessel:
    (a) Each hold must be thoroughly cleaned of all loose debris and 
dunnage; but permanent wooden battens or sheathing may remain in the 
hold; and
    (b) Each hold and each bilge of that hold must be dry.


<R05>
Sec. 148.03-7  During transport.

    During the transport of a solid hazardous material in bulk, except 
for unmanned vessels, cargo shall be periodically inspected to ensure 
that there are no undetected increases in temperature in that cargo and 
that no other changes in the cargo are occurring that might affect the 
safety of his vessel and the results of these inspections shall be 
recorded in a log.


<R05>
Sec. 148.03-11  Stowage conditions.

    (a) Other hazardous materials cargo must not be stowed in the same 
hold or on deck above a hold in which a solid hazardous material in bulk 
is loaded.
    (b) No explosive Class C, flammable liquid, flammable solid, 
flammable or nonflammable compressed gas, organic peroxide, or extremely 
dangerous poison may be stowed in any hold adjacent to a hold in which a 
solid hazardous material in bulk is loaded.
    (c) All explosive Class A and B materials must be stowed 
longitudinally at

[[Page 19]]

least one hold (or an equivalent longitudinal distance if on deck) from 
any hold in which hazardous material in bulk is loaded.
    (d) Combustible cargo must not be stowed in a hold in which a solid 
hazardous material in bulk is loaded.


<R05>
Sec. 148.03-13  Completion of off-loading.

    Upon the completion of off-loading of a solid hazardous material in 
bulk, each hold must be thoroughly cleaned of all residue of such 
material.


<R04>
  Subpart 148.04--Special Additional Requirements for Certain Material


<R05>
Sec. 148.04-1  Radioactive material, Low Specific Activity (LSA).

    (a) Authorized materials are limited to:
    (1) Uranium or thorium ores and physical or chemical concentrates of 
such ores;
    (2) Uranium metal, natural thorium metal and alloys of these metals; 
and
    (3) Material of low radioactive concentration, if the estimated 
radioactivity concentration dose not exceed 0.001 millicurie per gram 
and the contribution from Group I material (See title 49 CFR parts 170 
to 189, inclusive) does not exceed 1 percent of the total radioactivity.
    (b) Each hold used for the transportation of any of these materials 
must be surveyed with appropriate radiation-detection instruments after 
the completion of off-loading. Such holds must not again be used for the 
transportation of any cargo until the radiation dose rate at any 
accessible surface is less than 0.5 millirem per hour and until there is 
no significant removable radioactive surface contamination according to 
49 CFR 173.443.
    (c) Each hold or barge used for transportation of any of these 
materials must be effectively closed or covered to prevent dispersal of 
the material during transportation.


<R05>
Sec. 148.04-9  Fishmeal or scrap, ground or pelletized; fishmeal or scrap, 
ground and pelletized (mixture).

    (a) The fishmeal or scrap, ground or pelletized and fishmeal or 
scrap, ground and pelletized mixture must contain at least 6 percent 
moisture by weight but not more than 12 percent moisture by weight.
    (b) The material must not contain more than 18 percent fat by 
weight.
    (c) At the time of production of the material, it must be treated 
with at least 400 ppm antioxidant (ethoxyquin); in the case where the 
material contains more than 12 percent fat by weight, it must be treated 
with at least 1000 ppm antioxidant (ethoxyquin) at the time of 
production.
    (d) Shipment of the material in bulk must take place within twelve 
months of the date of production.
    (e) The temperature of the material to be loaded must not, at the 
time of loading exceed 35 <deg>C (95 <deg>F), or 5 <deg>F above ambient 
temperature, whichever is greater.
    (f) The material must contain at least 100 ppm antioxidant 
(ethoxyquin) at the time of shipment.
    (g) Each shipment of the material in bulk must be accompanied by a 
statement in which the shipper certifies:
    (1) The moisture content of the material;
    (2) The fat content of the material;
    (3) The concentration of antioxidant (ethoxyquin) in the material in 
ppm at the time the material is loaded on a vessel in bulk;
    (4) Date and place of production of the material; and
    (5) The physical state of the material (ground, pelletized, or 
mixture).
    (h) Temperature readings must be taken three times a day and 
recorded. If the temperature of the cargo exceeds 130 <deg>F and 
continues to increase, ventilation to the hold must be restricted.


<R05>
Sec. 148.04-13  Ferrous metal borings, shavings, turnings, or cuttings 
(excluding stainless steel).

    (a) This section applies to the stowage and transportation in bulk 
of hazardous materials described as ferrous metal borings, shavings, 
turnings, or cuttings on board vessels (excluding stainless steel). 
However, unmanned barges on which the article is stowed for or 
transported on a voyage entirely on the navigable waters of the United 
States are exempt from the requirements of this section. Ferrous metal 
borings, shavings, turnings, or cuttings

[[Page 20]]

(excluding stainless steel) must not be stowed and transported in bulk 
unless the following conditions are met:
    (1) [Reserved]
    (2) All wooden sweat battens, dunnage and debris must be removed 
from the hold before the article is loaded.
    (3) During loading and transporting, the bilge of each hold in which 
the article is stowed or is to be stowed must be as dry as practicable.
    (4) During loading, the article must be compacted in the hold as 
frequently as practicable with a bulldozer or means that provide 
equivalent surface compaction. Upon completion of loading, the article 
must be trimmed to eliminate peaks or mounds and compacted.
    (5) Other cargo must not be loaded in a hold containing the article 
if:
    (i) The cargo to be loaded in the same hold with the article is 
another hazardous material as defined in this part or a combustible 
material;
    (ii) The loading of the article is not completed first; and
    (iii) The temperature of the article in the hold is above 130 <deg>F 
or has increased within eight hours before loading of the other cargo.
    (6) During loading, the temperature of the article in the pile being 
loaded must be less than 130 <deg>F.
    (7) Upon completion of loading, the vessel may not leave the port 
unless:
    (i) The temperature of each article in each hold is less than 150 
<deg>F and, if the temperature of the article in a hold has been more 
than 150 <deg>F during loading, the temperature of each article has 
shown a downward trend below 150 <deg>F for at least eight hours after 
completion of loading of the hold; or
    (ii) The vessel intends to sail directly to another port that is no 
further than twelve hours sailing time for the vessel concerned, for the 
purpose of loading more of the article in bulk or to completely off-load 
the article, and the temperature of the article is less than 190 <deg>F 
and has shown a downward trend for a least eight hours after completion 
of loading.
    (b) For the purposes of each temperature requirement of this 
section, the temperature of the article is the highest temperature taken 
between eight and fourteen inches below the surface at ten-foot 
intervals over its length and width.
    (c) The master or person in charge of a vessel that is loading or 
transporting the article must ensure that the temperature of the article 
is taken:
    (1) Before loading;
    (2) During loading, in each hold and in the pile being loaded at 
least every twenty-four hours and, if the temperature is rising, as 
often as necessary to ensure the conditions in this section are met; and
    (3) After loading, in each hold at least every twenty-four hours.
    (d) During loading, if the temperature of the article in a hold is 
200 <deg>F or higher, the master or person in charge of the vessel must 
notify the Coast Guard Captain of the Port and suspend loading until the 
temperature of the article is less than 190 <deg>F.
    (e) After loading:
    (1) If the temperature of the article is 150 <deg>F or above, the 
master or person in charge must notify the Captain of the Port and 
ensure that the vessel remains in the port area until the conditions of 
paragraph (a)(7)(i) of this section are met; or
    (2) In the case of a short-duration voyage to which paragraph 
(a)(7)(ii) of this section applies, if the temperature of the article in 
a hold is 190 <deg>F or above, the master or person in charge must 
notify the Captain of the Port and ensure that the vessel remains in the 
port area until the conditions of paragraph (a)(7)(ii) of this section 
are met.
    (f) Except for shipments of the article in bulk which leave the port 
of loading under the conditions specified in paragraphs (a)(7)(ii) of 
this section, after the vessel leaves the port, if the temperature of 
the article in the hold rises above 149 <deg>F, the master must notify 
the nearest Coast Guard Captain of the Port as soon as possible of:
    (1) The name, nationality, and position of the vessel;
    (2) The most recent temperature taken;
    (3) The length of time that the temperature has been above 149 
<deg>F and the rate of rise, if any;

[[Page 21]]

    (4) The port where the article was loaded and the destination of the 
article;
    (5) The last port of call of the vessel and its next port of call;
    (6) What action has been taken; and
    (7) Whether any other cargo is endangered.
    (g) To meet the conditions of this section, the master of a vessel 
that is transporting the article must ensure that each temperature taken 
is recorded.


<R05>
Sec. 148.04-15  Petroleum coke, uncalcined; petroleum coke, uncalcined and 
calcined (mixture).

    The material at 130 <deg>F or above must not be loaded in bulk on 
any vessel.


<R05>
Sec. 148.04-17  Petroleum coke, calcined, at 130 <deg>F or above.

    (a) The requirements of this part do not apply to bulk shipments of 
petroleum coke, calcined, on any vessel when the material is less than 
130 <deg>F.
    (b) The material must not be loaded in cargo vessels when 
temperatures exceed 225 <deg>F.
    (c) Other hazardous materials must not be stowed in any hold 
adjacent to any other containing this material except as provided in 
paragraph (d) of this section.
    (d) In holds over tanks containing fuel or material having a 
flashpoint under 200 <deg>F, a two-to-three foot layer of the material 
at a temperature not greater than 110 <deg>F must be first loaded into 
that hold. Only then may the material at 130 <deg>F or above be loaded 
into that hold.
    (e) The loading of the material must be as follows:
    (1) For shipments in holds over fuel tanks, the loading of the two-
to-three foot layer of the material at a temperature not greater than 
110 <deg>F (as required by paragraph (d) of this section) in these holds 
must be completed prior to the loading of the material at 130 <deg>F or 
above in any hold of the vessel.
    (2) Upon completion of the loading described in paragraph (e)(1) of 
this section, a two-to-three foot layer of the material at 130 <deg>F or 
above must first be loaded in each hold (including those holds, if any, 
already containing a layer of the material at a temperature not greater 
than 110 <deg>F) in which the material is to be loaded in accordance 
with this section.
    (3) Upon the completion of the loading of the two-to-three-foot 
layer of the material at 130 <deg>F or above in each hold, as required 
in paragraph (e)(2) of this section, the normal loading of the material 
at 130 <deg>F or above may proceed to completion.
    (f) Personnel must be warned by the Master of the vessel or his 
authorized representative that calcined petroleum coke loaded and 
transported under the terms of this section is hot and that injury due 
to burns is possible.


<R05>
Sec. 148.04-19  Tankage, garbage or rough ammoniate, solid.

    (a) The material must contain at least 7 percent moisture by weight.
    (b) The material must not be loaded if the temperature in the 
material, before loading, exceeds 100 <deg>F.


<R05>
Sec. 148.04-20  Sulfur.

    (a) When sulfur is loaded in a deep hold with general cargo in the 
'tween deck hold above the sulfur, a dust proof wooden bulkhead 
enclosure must be built in the hatchways from the over deck of the lower 
hold to the weather deck forming a tight enclosure capable of preventing 
sulfur dust from entering the 'tween decks during loading.
    (b) Ceiling must be made tight to prevent sulfur dust from entering 
the bilges; any chinking necessary in the way of tank tops or bilges 
must be made of noncombustible material.
    (c) Cowl ventilators serving the hold into which sulfur is being 
loaded or discharged must be opened to provide circulation of air.
    (d) No smoking is permitted on board the vessel and ``No Smoking'' 
signs must be conspicously posted.
    (e) If a metal chute is used it must be grounded using a flexible 
cable.
    (f) Upon completion of loading, the sulfur must be leveled off. Any 
decks, bulkheads, or overheads containing sulfur dust must be swept 
clean or washed down.
    (g) Other cargo, which is oxygen bearing, must not be stowed in the 
same hold with sulfur.

[[Page 22]]

    (h) An oxygen breathing apparatus, or proper gas mask, must be made 
available.
    (i) A fire hose, preferably supplied with fresh water from a shore 
supply source, must be available at each hatch through which sulfur is 
being loaded.


<R05>
Sec. 148.04-21  Coconut meal pellets (also known as copra pellets).

    (a) Coconut meal pellets;
    (1) Must contain at least 6 percent and not more than 13 percent 
moisture and not more than 10 percent residual fat contents;
    (2) Must not be loaded if the temperature exceeds 120 <deg>F;
    (3) Must not be stowed within 4 feet of any bulkheads subject to 
artificial heat; and
    (4) Must not be overstowed with any other cargo.
    (b) A clear space of at least 1 foot must be provided between the 
top of the cargo and underside of deck beams.


<R05>
Sec. 148.04-23  Unslaked lime in bulk.

    (a) Unslaked lime in bulk must be transported in unmanned, all 
steel, double-hulled barges equipped with weathertight hatches or 
covers. The barge must not carry any other cargo while unslaked lime is 
on board.
    (b) The originating shipping order and transfer shipping paper 
requirement in Sec. 148.02-1 and the dangerous cargo manifest 
requirements in Sec. 148.02-3 do not apply to the transportation of 
unslaked lime under paragraph (a) of this section.

                           PART 149 [RESERVED]

[[Page 23]]


<R03>
              SUBCHAPTER O--CERTAIN BULK DANGEROUS CARGOES

<R05>


<R03>
PART 150--COMPATIBILITY OF CARGOES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
150.105 OMB control numbers assigned pursuant to the Paperwork Reduction 
          Act.
150.110 Applicability.
150.115 Definitions.
150.120 Definition of incompatible cargoes.
150.130 Loading a cargo on vessels carrying cargoes with which it is 
          incompatible.
150.140 Cargoes not listed in Table I or II.
150.150 Exceptions to the compatibility chart.
150.160 Carrying a cargo as an exception to the compatibility chart.
150.170 Right of appeal.

Figure I--Compatibility Chart
Table I--Alphabetical List of Cargoes
Table II--Grouping of Cargoes
Appendix I to Part 150--Exceptions to the Chart
Appendix II to Part 150--Explanation of Figure 1
Appendix III to Part 150--Testing Procedures for Determining Exceptions 
          to the Chart
Appendix IV to Part 150--Data Sheet

    Authority: 46 U.S.C. 3306, 3703; 49 CFR 1.45, 1.46. Section 150.105 
issued under 44 U.S.C. 3507; 49 CFR 1.45.

    Source: CGD 75-59, 45 FR 70263, Oct. 23, 1980, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R05>
Sec. 150.105  OMB control numbers assigned pursuant to the Paperwork Reduction Act.

    (a) Purpose. This section collects and displays the control numbers 
assigned to information collection and recordkeeping requirements in 
this subchapter by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) pursuant to 
the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.). The Coast 
Guard intends that this section comply with the requirements of 44 
U.S.C. 3507(f) which requires that agencies display a current control 
number assigned by the Director of the OMB for each approved agency 
information collection requirement.
    (b) Display.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Current
                                                                  OMB
    46 CFR part or section where identified or described        control
                                                                  No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sec. 150.01-15..............................................   2115-0016
Sec. 153.5..................................................   2115-0016
Sec. 153.905................................................   2115-0089
Sec. 153.910................................................   2115-0089
Sec. 153.968................................................   2115-0089
Part 154....................................................   2115-0113
Sec. 154.12.................................................   2115-0016
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[49 FR 38121, Sept. 27, 1984, as amended by CGD 77-069, 52 FR 31626, 
Aug. 21, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 150.110  Applicability.

    This subpart prescribes rules for identifying incompatible hazardous 
materials and rules for carrying these materials in bulk as cargo in 
permanently attached tanks or in tanks that are loaded or discharged 
while aboard the vessel. The rules apply to all vessels that carry 
liquid dangerous cargoes in bulk that are subject to 46 U.S.C. Chapter 
37.

[CGD 95-028, 62 FR 51209, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 150.115  Definitions.

    As used in this subpart: Hazardous material means:
    (a) A flammable liquid as defined in Sec. 30.10-22 or a combustible 
liquid as defined in Sec. 30.10-15 of this chapter;
    (b) A material listed in Table 151.05, Table 1 of part 153, or Table 
4 of part 154 of this chapter; or
    (c) A liquid, liquefied gas, or compressed gas listed in 49 CFR 
172.101.
    Person in charge means the master of a self-propelled vessel, or the 
person in charge of a barge.


<R05>
Sec. 150.120  Definition of incompatible cargoes.

    Except as described in Sec. 150.150, a cargo of hazardous material 
is incompatible with another cargo listed in Table I if the chemical 
groups of the two cargoes have an ``X'' where their columns intersect in 
Figure 1 and are not shown as exceptions in Appendix I. (See also Sec. 
150.140.)

[CGD 83-047, 50 FR 33038, Aug. 16, 1985]

[[Page 24]]


<R05>
Sec. 150.130  Loading a cargo on vessels carrying cargoes with which it is 
incompatible.

    Except as described in Sec. 150.160, the person in charge of a 
vessel shall ensure that the containment system for a cargo that is a 
hazardous material meets the following requirements:
    (a) The containment system must separate the hazardous material or 
its residue from any cargo in table I with which it is incompatible by 
two barriers such as formed by a:
    (1) Cofferdam;
    (2) Empty tank;
    (3) Void space;
    (4) Cargo handling space;
    (5) Tank containing a compatible cargo; or
    (6) Piping tunnel.
    (b) In this subpart, isolation across a cruciform joint is 
equivalent to isolation by two barriers.
    (c) The containment system for the hazardous material must not have 
a piping or venting system that connects to a containment system 
carrying a cargo with which the hazardous material is incompatible. Any 
such piping or venting system must have been separated from the 
containment system carrying the incompatible cargo by:
    (1) Removing a valve or spool piece and blanking off the exposed 
pipe ends, or
    (2) Installing two spectacle flanges in series with a means of 
detecting leakage into the pipe between the spectacle flanges.


<R05>
Sec. 150.140  Cargoes not listed in Table I or II.

    A cargo of hazardous material not listed in Table I or II must be 
handled as if incompatible with all other cargoes until the Commandant 
(G-MSO) (tel. no. (202) 267-1577) assigns the hazardous material to a 
compatibility group. (Table I lists cargoes alphabetically while Table 
II lists cargoes by compatibility group).

[CGD 83-047, 50 FR 33038, Aug. 16, 1985, CGD 86-100, 52 FR 21037, June 
4, 1987; CGD 95-072, 60 FR 50465, Sept. 29, 19955; CGD 96-041, 61 FR 
50731, Sept. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 150.150  Exceptions to the compatibility chart.

    The Commandant (G-MSO) authorizes, on a case by case basis, 
exceptions to the rules in this subpart under the following conditions:
    (a) When two cargoes shown to be incompatible in Figure 1 meet the 
standards for a compatible pair in Appendix III, or
    (b) When two cargoes shown to be compatible in Figure 1 meet the 
standards for an incompatible pair in Appendix III.
    Appendix I contains cargoes which have been found to be exceptions 
to Figure 1, the Compatibility Chart.

[CGD 83-047, 50 FR 33038, Aug. 16, 1985, as amended at CGD 95-072, 60 FR 
50465, Sept. 29, 1995; CGD 96-041, 61 FR 50731, Sept. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 150.160  Carrying a cargo as an exception to the compatibility chart.

    The Operator of a vessel having on board a cargo carried as an 
exception under Sec. 150.150 but not listed in Appendix I, Exceptions to 
the Chart, shall make sure that:
    (a) The Commandant (G-MSO) has authorized by letter or message the 
cargo pair as an exception to the compatibility chart; and
    (b) A copy of the letter or message is on the vessel.

[CGD 75-59, 45 FR 70263, Oct. 23, 1980, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4781, Feb. 3, 1983; CGD 83-047, 50 FR 33038, Aug. 16, 1985; CGD 95-072, 
60 FR 50465, Sept. 29, 19955; CGD 96-041, 61 FR 50731, Sept. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 150.170  Right of appeal.

    Any person directly affected by a decision or action taken under 
this part, by or on behalf of the Coast Guard, may appeal therefrom in 
accordance with subpart 1.03 of this chapter.

[CGD 88-033, 54 FR 50381, Dec. 6, 1989]

[[Page 25]]

                Figure 1 to Part 150--Compatibility Chart
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02FE91.079

            Table I to Part 150--Alphabetical List of Cargoes

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             Group    Foot-
               Chemical name                  No.      note       CHRIS Code           Related CHRIS Codes
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Acetaldehyde..............................       19  .......  AAD                ...............................
Acetic acid...............................        4        2  AAC                ...............................
Acetic anhydride..........................       11  .......  ACA                ...............................
Acetochlor................................       10  .......  ACG                ...............................
Acetone...................................       18        2  ACT                ...............................
Acetone cyanohydrin.......................        0     1, 2  ACY                ...............................
Acetonitrile..............................       37  .......  ATN                ...............................
Acetophenone..............................       18  .......  ACP                ...............................
Acrolein..................................       19        2  ARL                ...............................
Acrylamide solution.......................       10  .......  AAM                ...............................
Acrylic acid..............................        4        2  ACR                ...............................
Acrylonitrile.............................       15        2  ACN                ...............................
Acrylonitrile-Styrene copolymer dispersion       20  .......  ALE                ...............................
 in Polyether polyol.
Adiponitrile..............................       37  .......  ADN                ...............................
Alachlor..................................       33  .......  ALH
Alcohols (C13+)...........................       20  .......  ALY                ...............................
    Including:                              .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Oleyl alcohol (octadecenol)             .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Pentadecanol                            .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Tallow alcohol                          .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Tetradecanol                            .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Tridecanol                              .......  .......  .................  ...............................
Alcoholic beverages.......................       20  .......  .................  ...............................
Alcohol polyethoxylates...................       20  .......  .................  APU/APV/APW/AET

[[Page 26]]

 
Alcohol polyethoxylates, secondary........       20  .......  .................  AEA/AEB
Alkanes (C6-C9)...........................       31        1  ALK                ...............................
    Including:                              .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Heptanes                                .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Hexanes                                 .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Nonanes                                 .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Octanes                                 .......  .......  .................  ...............................
n-Alkanes (C10+)..........................       31        1  ALJ                ...............................
    Including:                              .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Decanes                                 .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Dodecanes                               .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Heptadecanes                            .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Tridecanes                              .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Undecanes                               .......  .......  .................  ...............................
iso- & cyclo-Alkanes (C10-C11)............       31        1  AKI                ...............................
iso- & cyclo-Alkanes (C12+)...............       31        1  AKJ                ...............................
Alkane (C14-C17) sulfonic acid, sodium           34  .......  AKA                ...............................
 salt solution.
Alkaryl polyether (C9-C20)................       41  .......  AKP
Alkenyl(C11+)amide........................       11  .......  AKM                ...............................
Alkenyl(C16-C20)succinic anhydride........       11  .......  AAH
Alkyl acrylate-Vinyl pyridine copolymer in       32        2  AAP                ...............................
 Toluene.
Alkyl(C8+)amine, Alkenyl (C12+) acid ester       34  .......  AAA
 mixture.
Alkylaryl phosphate mixtures (more than          34  .......  APD                ...............................
 40% Diphenyl tolyl phosphate, less than
 0.02% ortho-isomer).
Alkyl(C3-C4)benzenes......................       32        2  AKC
    Including:                              .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Butylbenzenes                           .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Cumene                                  .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Propylbenzenes                          .......  .......  .................  ...............................
Alkyl(C5-C8)benzenes......................       32        2  AKD                ...............................
    Including:                              .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Amylbenzenes                            .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Heptylbenzenes                          .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Hexylbenzenes                           .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Octylbenzenes                           .......  .......  .................  ...............................
Alkyl(C9+)benzenes........................       32        2  AKB                ...............................
    Including:                              .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Decylbenzenes                           .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Dodecylbenzenes                         .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Nonylbenzenes                           .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Tetradecylbenzenes                      .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Tetrapropylbenzenes                     .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Tridecylbenzenes                        .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Undecylbenzenes                         .......  .......  .................  ...............................
Alkylbenzene, Alkylindane, Alkylindene           32        2  AIH
 mixture (each C12-C17).
Alkylbenzenesulfonic acid.................        0     1, 2  .................  ABS/ABN
Alkylbenzenesulfonic acid, sodium salt           33  .......  ABT                ...............................
 solutions.
Alkyl dithiothiadiazole (C6-C24)..........       33  .......  ADT
Alkyl ester copolymer (C4-C20)............       34  .......  AES
Alkyl(C7-C9) nitrates.....................       34        2  AKN                ONE
Alkyl(C7-C11) phenol poly(4-12)ethoxylate.       40  .......  APN                ...............................
Alkyl(C8-C40) phenol sulfide..............       34  .......  AKS
Alkyl(C8-C9) phenylamine in aromatic              9  .......  ALP                ...............................
 solvents.
Alkyl(C9-C15) phenyl propoxylate..........       40  .......  .................  ...............................
Alkyl phthalates..........................       34  .......  .................  ...............................
Alkyl(C10-C20, saturated and unsaturated)        34  .......  AKL                ...............................
 phosphite.
Alkyl polyglucoside solutions.............       43  .......  .................  AGL/AGN/AGO/AGP/AGM
Alkyl sulfonic acid ester of phenol.......       34  .......  .................
Allyl alcohol.............................       15        2  ALA                ...............................
Allyl chloride............................       15        1  ALC                ...............................
Aluminium chloride, Hydrochloric acid             0        1  AHS                ...............................
 solution.
Aluminum sulfate solution.................       43        2  ASX                ALM
2-(2-Aminoethoxy)ethanol..................        8  .......  AEX                ...............................
Aminoethyldiethanolamine,                         8  .......  .................  ...............................
 Aminoethylethanolamine solution.
Aminoethylethanolamine....................        8  .......  AEE                ...............................
N-Aminoethylpiperazine....................        7  .......  AEP                ...............................
2-Amino-2-hydroxymethyl-1,3-propanediol          43  .......  AHL                ...............................
 solution.
2-Amino-2-methyl-1-propanol...............        8  .......  APQ                APR
Ammonia, anhydrous........................        6  .......  AMA                ...............................
Ammonia, aqueous (28% or less Ammonia)            6  .......  .................  AMH
 (IMO cargo name), see Ammonium hydroxide.
Ammonium bisulfite solution...............       43        2  ABX                ASU

[[Page 27]]

 
Ammonium hydrogen phosphate solution......        0        1  AMI                ...............................
Ammonium hydroxide (28% or less Ammonia)..        6  .......  AMH                ...............................
Ammonium lignosulfonate solution, see also       43  .......  .................  ...............................
 Lignin liquor.
Ammonium nitrate solution.................        0        1  ANR                AND/AMN
Ammonium nitrate, Urea solution                   6  .......  UAS                ...............................
 (containing Ammonia).
Ammonium nitrate, Urea solution (not             43  .......  ANU                UAT
 containing Ammonia).
Ammonium polyphosphate solution...........       43  .......  AMO                APP
Ammonium sulfate solution.................       43  .......  AME                AMS
Ammonium sulfide solution.................        5  .......  ASS                ASF
Ammonium thiocyanate, Ammonium thiosulfate        0        1  ACS                ...............................
 solution.
Ammonium thiosulfate solution.............       43  .......  ATV                ATF
Amyl acetate..............................       34  .......  AEC                IAT/AML/AAS/AYA
Amyl alcohol..............................       20  .......  AAI                IAA/AAN/ASE/APM
Amylene, see Pentene......................  .......  .......  AMZ                PTX
tert-Amyl methyl ether (see also, Methyl         41  .......  AYE                ...............................
 tert-pentyl ether).
Amyl methyl ketone, see Methyl amyl ketone  .......  .......  AMK                MAK
Aniline...................................        9  .......  ANL                ...............................
Animal and Fish oils, n.o.s...............       34  .......  AFN
    Including:                              .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Cod liver oil                           .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Lanolin                                 .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Neatsfoot oil                           .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Pilchard oil                            .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Sperm oil                               .......  .......  .................  ...............................
Animal and Fish acid oils and distillates,       34  .......  AFA
 n.o.s..
    Including:                              .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Animal acid oil                         .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Fish acid oil                           .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Lard acid oil                           .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Mixed acid oil                          .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Mixed general acid oil                  .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Mixed hard acid oil                     .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Mixed soft acid oil                     .......  .......  .................  ...............................
Anthracene oil (Coal tar fraction), see          33  .......  AHO                COR
 Coal tar.
Apple juice...............................       43  .......  .................
Aryl polyolefin (C11-C50).................       30  .......  AYF
Asphalt...................................       33  .......  ASP                ACU
Asphalt blending stocks, roofers flux.....       33  .......  ARF                ...............................
Asphalt blending stocks, straight run            33  .......  ASR                ...............................
 residue.
Asphalt emulsion (ORIMULSION).............       33  .......  ASQ                ...............................
Aviation alkylates........................       33  .......  AVA                GAV
Barium long chain alkaryl(C11-C50)               34  .......  BCA
 sulfonate.
Barium long chain alkyl(C8-C14)phenate           34  .......  BCH
 sulfide.
Behenyl alcohol...........................       20  .......  .................  ...............................
Benzene...................................       32        2  BNZ                ...............................
Benzene hydrocarbon mixtures (having 10%         32        2  BHB                BHA
 Benzene or more).
Benzenesulfonyl chloride..................        0     1, 2  BSC                ...............................
Benzene, Toluene, Xylene mixtures.........       32        2  BTX                ...............................
Benzene tricarboxylic acid, trioctyl ester       34  .......  .................  ...............................
Benzylacetate.............................       34  .......  BZE                ...............................
Benzyl alcohol............................       21  .......  BAL                ...............................
Benzyl chloride...........................       36  .......  BCL                ...............................
Brake fluid base mixtures.................       20  .......  BFX                ...............................
Bromochloromethane........................       36  .......  BCM                ...............................
Butadiene.................................       30  .......  BDI                ...............................
Butadiene, Butylene mixtures (cont.              30  .......  BBM                ...............................
 Acetylenes).
Butane....................................       31        1  BMX                IBT/BUT
1,4-Butanediol, see Butylene glycol.......  .......  .......  BDO                BUG
2-Butanone, see Methyl ethyl ketone.......  .......  .......  .................  ...............................
Butene, see Butylene......................  .......  .......  .................  IBL/BTN
Butene oligomer...........................       30  .......  BOL                ...............................
Butyl acetate.............................       34  .......  BAX                IBA/BCN/BTA/BYA
Butyl acrylate............................       14        1  BAR                BAI/BTC
Butyl alcohol.............................       20        2  BAY                IAL/BAN/BAS/BAT
Butylamine................................        7  .......  BTY                IAM/BAM/BTL/BUA
Butylbenzene, see Alky(C3-C4)benzenes.....       32        2  BBE                AKC
Butyl benzyl phthalate....................       34  .......  BPH                ...............................
Butyl butyrate............................       34  .......  BBA                BUB/BIB
Butylene..................................       30  .......  BTN                IBL
Butylene glycol...........................       20        2  BUG                BDO
1,3-Butylene glycol, see Butylene glycol..  .......  .......  .................  BUG
Butylene oxide............................       16        1  BTO                ...............................
Butyl ether...............................       41  .......  BTE                ...............................

[[Page 28]]

 
Butyl formate.............................       34  .......  .................  BFI/BFN
Butyl heptyl ketone.......................       18  .......  BHK                ...............................
Butyl methacrylate........................       14        1  BMH                BMI/BMN
Butyl methacrylate, Decyl methacrylate,          14        1  DER                ...............................
 Cetyl-Eicosyl methacrylate mixture.
Butyl methyl ketone, see Methyl butyl       .......  .......  .................  MBK
 ketone.
Butyl phenol, Formaldehyde resin in Xylene       32        2  .................  ...............................
n-Butyl propionate........................       34  .......  BPN
Butyl stearate............................       34  .......  .................
Butyl toluene.............................       32        2  BUE                ...............................
Butyraldehyde.............................       19  .......  BAE                BAD/BTR
Butyric acid..............................        4  .......  BRA                IBR
gamma-Butyrolactone.......................        0     1, 2  BLA                ...............................
C9 Resinfeed (DSM)........................       32        2  CNR                ...............................
Calcium alkyl(C9)phenol sulfide,                 34  .......  CPX
 polyolefin phosphorosulfide mixture.
Calcium alkyl salicylate, see Calcium long  .......  .......  .................  CAK
 chain alkyl salicylate (C13+).
Calcium bromide solution, see Drilling      .......  .......  .................  DRB
 brines.
Calcium bromide, Zinc bromide solution,     .......  .......  .................  DZB
 see Drilling brine (containing Zinc
 salts).
Calcium carbonate slurry..................       34  .......  .................
Calcium chloride solution.................       43  .......  CCS                CLC
Calcium hydroxide slurry..................        5  .......  COH
Calcium hypochlorite solutions............        5  .......  .................  CHZ/CHU/CHY
Calcium lignosulfonate solution, see also        43  .......  .................  ...............................
 Lignin liquor.
Calcium long chain alkaryl sulfonate (C11-       34  .......  CAY
 C50).
Calcium long chain alkyl phenates.........       34  .......  .................  CAN/CAW
Calcium long chain alkyl phenate sulfide         34  .......  CPI
 (C8-C40).
Calcium long chain alkyl salicylate (C13+)       34  .......  CAK
Calcium long chain alkyl phenolic amine           9  .......  CPQ
 (C8-C40).
Calcium nitrate solution..................       34  .......  CNU                ...............................
Calcium nitrate, Magnesium nitrate,              34  .......  .................  ...............................
 Potassium chloride solution.
Calcium sulfonate, Calcium carbonate,            33  .......  .................  ...............................
 Hydrocarbon solvent mixture.
Camphor oil...............................       18  .......  CPO                ...............................
Canola oil, see rapeseed oil under ``oils,  .......  .......  .................  ...............................
 edible.''.
Caprolactam solution......................       22  .......  CLS                ...............................
Caramel solutions.........................       43  .......  .................  ...............................
Carbolic oil..............................       21  .......  CBO                ...............................
Carbon disulfide..........................       38  .......  CBB                ...............................
Carbon tetrachloride......................       36        2  CBT                ...............................
Cashew nut shell oil (untreated)..........        4  .......  OCN                ...............................
Catoxid feedstock.........................       36        2  CXF                ...............................
Caustic potash solution...................        5        2  CPS                ...............................
Caustic soda solution.....................        5        2  CSS                ...............................
Cetyl alcohol (hexadecanol), see Alcohols   .......  .......  .................  ALY
 (C13+).
Cetyl-Eicosyl methacrylate mixture........       14        1  CEM                ...............................
Cetyl-Stearyl alcohol, see Alcohols (C13+)  .......  .......  .................  ALY
Chlorinated paraffins (C10-C13)...........       36  .......  CLH                ...............................
Chlorinated paraffins (C14-C17) (with 52%        36  .......  CLJ                ...............................
 Chlorine).
Chlorine..................................        0        1  CLX                ...............................
Chloroacetic acid solution................        4  .......  CHM                CHL/MCA
Chlorobenzene.............................       36  .......  CRB                ...............................
Chlorodifluoromethane                            36  .......  MCF                ...............................
 (monochlorodifluoromethane).
Chloroform................................       36  .......  CRF                ...............................
Chlorohydrins.............................       17        1  CHD                ...............................
4-Chloro-2-methylphenoxyacetic acid,              9  .......  CDM                ...............................
 Dimethylamine salt solution.
Chloronitrobenzene........................       42  .......  CNO                ...............................
1-(4-Chlorophenyl)-4,4-dimethyl pentan-3-        18        2  CDP
 one.
Chloropropionic acid......................        4  .......  CPM                CLA/CLP
Chlorosulfonic acid.......................        0        1  CSA                ...............................
Chlorotoluene.............................       36  .......  CHI                CTM/CTO/CRN
Choline chloride solutions................       20  .......  CCO                ...............................
Citric acid...............................        4  .......  CIS                CIT
Clay slurry, see also Kaolin clay slurry..       43  .......  .................
Coal tar..................................       33  .......  COR                OCT
Coal tar distillate.......................       33  .......  CDL                ...............................
Coal tar, high temperature................       33  .......  CHH
Coal tar pitch............................       33  .......  CTP                ...............................
Cobalt naphthenate in solvent naphtha.....       34  .......  CNS
Coconut oil, fatty acid...................       34  .......  CFA                ...............................
Copper salt of long chain (C17+) alkanoic        34  .......  CUS                CFT
 acid.
Corn syrup................................       43  .......  CSY                ...............................
Cottonseed oil, fatty acid................       34  .......  CFY                ...............................
Creosote..................................       21        2  CCT                CCW/CWD

[[Page 29]]

 
Cresols...................................       21  .......  CRS                CRL/CSL/CSO
Cresylate spent caustic...................        5  .......  CSC                ...............................
Cresylic acid.............................       21  .......  CRY                ...............................
Cresylic acid, dephenolized...............       21  .......  CAD
Cresylic acid, sodium salt solution (IMO          5  .......  .................  CSC
 cargo name), see Cresylate spent caustic.
Cresylic acid tar.........................       21  .......  CRX                ...............................
Crotonaldehyde............................       19        2  CTA                ...............................
Cumene (isopropyl benzene), see             .......  .......  CUM                PBY
 Propylbenzene.
1,5,9-Cyclododecatriene...................       30  .......  CYT                ...............................
Cycloheptane..............................       31        1  CYE                ...............................
Cyclohexane...............................       31        1  CHX                ...............................
Cyclohexanol..............................       20  .......  CHN                ...............................
Cyclohexanone.............................       18  .......  CCH                ...............................
Cyclohexanone, Cyclohexanol mixtures......       18        2  CYX                ...............................
Cyclohexyl acetate........................       34  .......  CYC                ...............................
Cyclohexylamine...........................        7  .......  CHA                ...............................
1,3-Cyclopentadiene dimer.................       30  .......  CPD                DPT
Cyclopentadiene, Styrene, Benzene mixture.       30  .......  CSB                ...............................
Cyclopentane..............................       31        1  CYP                ...............................
Cyclopentene..............................       30  .......  CPE                ...............................
Cymene....................................       32        2  CMP                ...............................
Decahydronaphthalene......................       33  .......  DHN                ...............................
Decaldehyde...............................       19  .......  .................  IDA/DAL
Decane, see n-Alkanes (C10+)..............  .......  .......  DCC                ALJ
Decanoic acid.............................        4  .......  DCO                ...............................
Decene....................................       30  .......  DCE                ...............................
Decyl acetate.............................       34  .......  DYA
Decyl acrylate............................       14        1  DAT                IAI/DAR
Decyl alcohol.............................       20        2  DAX                ISA/DAN
Decylbenzene, see Alkyl(C9+) benzenes.....       32        2  DBZ                AKB
Decyloxytetrahydro-thiophene dioxide......        0     1, 2  DHT                ...............................
Degummed C9 (DOW).........................       33  .......  DGC                ...............................
Dextrose solution, see Glucose solution...       43  .......  DTS                GLU
Diacetone alcohol.........................       20        2  DAA                ...............................
Dialkyl(C10-C14) benzenes, see Alkyl(C9+)        32        2  DAB                AKB
 benzenes.
Dialkyl(C8-C9) diphenylamines.............        9  .......  DAQ
Dialkyl(C7-C13) phthalates................       34  .......  DAH                ...............................
    Including:                              .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Diisodecyl phthalate                    .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Diisononyl phthalate                    .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Dinonyl phthalate                       .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Ditridecyl phthalate                    .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Diundecyl phthalate                     .......  .......  .................  ...............................
Dibromomethane............................       36  .......  DBH                ...............................
Dibutylamine..............................        7  .......  DBA                ...............................
Dibutyl carbinol, see Nonyl alcohol.......  .......  .......  .................  NNS
Dibutyl hydrogen phosphonate..............       34  .......  DHD
Dibutylphenols............................       21  .......  .................  DBT/DBV, DBW
Dibutyl phthalate.........................       34  .......  DPA                ...............................
Dichlorobenzene...........................       36  .......  DBX                DBM/DBO/DBP
3,4-Dichloro-1-butene.....................       36  .......  DCD                DCB
Dichlorodifluoromethane...................       36  .......  DCF                ...............................
1,1-Dichloroethane........................       36  .......  DCH                ...............................
2,2'-Dichloroethyl ether..................       41  .......  DEE                ...............................
1,6-Dichlorohexane........................       36  .......  DHX
2,2'-Dichloroisopropyl ether..............       36  .......  DCI                ...............................
Dichloromethane...........................       36        2  DCM                ...............................
2,4-Dichlorophenol........................       21  .......  DCP                ...............................
2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid,                  43  .......  DDE                ...............................
 Diethanolamine salt solution.
2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid,                   0     1, 2  DAD                DDA/DSX
 Dimethylamine salt solution.
2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid,                  43        2  DTI                ...............................
 Triisopropano-lamine salt solution.
Dichloropropane...........................       36  .......  DPX                DPB/DPP/DPC/DPL
1,3-Dichloropropene.......................       15        1  DPS                DPU/DPF
Dichloropropene, Dichloropropane mixtures.       15        1  DMX                ...............................
2,2-Dichloropropionic acid................        4  .......  DCN                ...............................
Dicyclopentadiene, see also 1,3-                 30  .......  DPT                CPD
 Cyclopentadiene dimer.
Diethanolamine............................        8  .......  DEA                ...............................
Diethanolamine salt of 2,4-                 .......  .......  .................  DDE
 Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid solution, see
 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid,
 Diethanolamine salt solution.
Diethylamine..............................        7  .......  DEN                ...............................
Diethylaminoethanol (IMO cargo name), see         8  .......  .................  DAE
 Diethylethanolamine.
2,6-Diethylaniline........................        9  .......  DMN                ...............................

[[Page 30]]

 
Diethylbenzene............................       32        2  DEB                ...............................
Diethylene glycol.........................       40        2  DEG                ...............................
Diethylene glycol butyl ether, see Poly(2-  .......  .......  DME                PAG
 8)alkylene glycol monoalkyl(C1-C6) ether.
Diethylene glycol butyl ether acetate, see  .......  .......  DEM                PAF
 Poly(2-8)alkylene glycol monoalkyl(C1-C6)
 ether acetate.
Diethylene glycol dibenzoate..............       34  .......  DGZ                ...............................
Diethylene glycol dibutyl ether...........       40  .......  DIG                ...............................
Diethylene glycol diethyl ether...........       40  .......  .................
Diethylene glycol ethyl ether, see Poly(2-  .......  .......  DGE                PAG
 8)alkylene glycol monoalkyl (C1-C6) ether.
Diethylene glycol ethyl ether acetate, see  .......  .......  DGA                PAF
 Poly(2-8)alkylene glycol monoalkyl(C1-C6)
 ether acetates.
Diethylene glycol n-hexyl ether, see        .......  .......  DHE                PAG
 Poly(2-8)alkylene glycol monoalkyl(C1-C6)
 ether.
Diethylene glycol methyl ether, see Poly(2- .......  .......  DGM                PAG
 8)alkylene glycol monoalkyl(C1-C6) ether.
Diethylene glycol methyl ether acetate,     .......  .......  DGR                PAF
 see Poly(2-8)alkylene glycol monoalkyl(C1-
 C6) ether acetate.
Diethylene glycol phenyl ether............       40  .......  DGP                ...............................
Diethylene glycol phthalate...............       34  .......  DGL                ...............................
Diethylene glycol propyl ether, see Poly(2- .......  .......  DGO                PAG
 8)alkylene glycol monoalkyl(C1-C6) ether.
Diethylenetriamine........................        7        2  DET                ...............................
Diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid,             43  .......
 pentasodium salt solution.
Diethylethanolamine.......................        8  .......  DAE                ...............................
Diethyl ether (IMO cargo name), see Ethyl        41  .......  .................  EET
 ether.
Diethyl hexanol, see Decyl alcohol........  .......  .......  .................  DAX
Di-(2-ethylhexyl)adipate..................       34  .......  DEH                ...............................
Di-(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid..........        1        1  DEP                ...............................
Di-(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate, see Dioctyl          34  .......  DIE                DOP
 phthalate.
Diethyl phthalate.........................       34  .......  DPH                ...............................
Diethyl sulfate...........................       34  .......  DSU                ...............................
Diglycidyl ether of Bisphenol A...........       41  .......  BDE                BPA
Diglycidyl ether of Bisphenol F...........       41  .......  DGF                ...............................
Diheptyl phthalate........................       34  .......  DHP                ...............................
Di-n-hexyl adipate........................       34  .......  DHA                ...............................
Dihexyl phthalate.........................       34  .......  .................
1,4-Dihydro-9,10-dihydroxy anthracene,            5  .......  DDH                ...............................
 disodium salt solution.
Diisobutylamine...........................        7  .......  DBU                ...............................
Diisobutyl carbinol (commercial cargo            20  .......  DBC                NNS
 name), see Nonyl alcohol.
Diisobutylene.............................       30  .......  DBL                ...............................
Diisobutyl ketone.........................       18  .......  DIK                ...............................
Diisobutyl phthalate......................       34  .......  DIT                ...............................
Diisodecyl phthalate, see Dialkyl(C7-C13)   .......  .......  DID                DAH
 phthalates.
Diisononyl adipate........................       34  .......  DNY                ...............................
Diisononyl phthalate, see Dialkyl(C7-C13)   .......  .......  DIN                DAH
 phthalates.
Diisooctyl phthalate......................       34  .......  DIO                ...............................
Diisopropanolamine........................        8  .......  DIP                ...............................
Diisopropylamine..........................        7  .......  DIA                ...............................
Diisopropylbenzene........................       32        2  DIX                ...............................
Diisopropyl naphthalene...................       32        2  DII                ...............................
N,N-Dimethylacetamide.....................       10  .......  DAC                ...............................
N,N-Dimethylacetamide solution............       10  .......  DLS                ...............................
Dimethyl adipate..........................       34  .......  DLA                ...............................
Dimethylamine.............................        7  .......  DMA                ...............................
Dimethylamine solution....................        7  .......  .................  DMG/DMY/DMC
Dimethylamine salt of 4-Chloro-2-           .......  .......  .................  CDM
 methylphenoxyacetic acid solution, see 4-
 Chloro-2-methylphenoxyacetic acid,
 Dimethylamine salt solution.
Dimethylamine salt of 2,4-                  .......  .......  .................  DAD/(DDA/DSX)
 Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid solution, see
 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid,
 Dimethylamine salt solution.
2,6-Dimethylaniline.......................        9  .......  DMM                ...............................
Dimethylbenzene, see Xylenes..............  .......  .......  .................  XLX
Dimethylcyclicsiloxane hydrolyzate........       34  .......  .................  ...............................
N,N-Dimethylcyclohexylamine...............        7  .......  DXN                ...............................
N,N-Dimethyldodecylamine (IMO cargo name),        7  .......  DDY                ...............................
 see Dodecyldimethylamine.
Dimethylethanolamine......................        8  .......  DMB                ...............................
Dimethylformamide.........................       10  .......  DMF                ...............................
Dimethyl furan............................       41  .......  .................  ...............................
Dimethyl glutarate........................       34  .......  DGT                ...............................
Dimethyl hydrogen phosphite...............       34        2  DPI                ...............................
Dimethyl naphthalene sulfonic acid, sodium       34        2  DNS                ...............................
 salt solution.
Dimethyloctanoic acid.....................        4  .......  DMO                ...............................

[[Page 31]]

 
Dimethyl phthalate........................       34  .......  DTL                ...............................
Dimethylpolysiloxane, see                        34  .......  DMP                ...............................
 Polydimethylsiloxane.
2,2-Dimethylpropane-1,3-diol..............       20  .......  DDI                ...............................
Dimethyl succinate........................       34  .......  DSE                ...............................
Dinitrotoluene............................       42  .......  DNM                DTT/DNL/DNU
Dinonyl phthalate, see Dialkyl(C7-C13)      .......  .......  DIF                DAH
 phthalates.
Dioctyl phthalate.........................       34  .......  DOP                DIE
1,4-Dioxane...............................       41  .......  DOX                ...............................
Dipentene.................................       30  .......  DPN                ...............................
Diphenyl..................................       32        2  DIL                ...............................
Diphenylamine (molten)....................        9  .......  DAG                DAM/LRM
Diphenylamines, alkylated.................        7  .......  DAJ
Diphenylamine, reaction product with 2,2,4-       7  .......  DAK                ...............................
 trimethylpentene.
Diphenyl, Diphenyl ether mixture..........       33  .......  DDO                DTH
Diphenyl ether............................       41  .......  DPE                ...............................
Diphenyl ether, Diphenyl phenyl ether            41  .......  DOB                ...............................
 mixture.
Diphenylmethane diisocyanate..............       12  .......  DPM                ...............................
Diphenylol propane-Epichlorohydrin resins.        0        1  DPR                ...............................
Diphenyl oxide, see as diphenyl ether.....  .......  .......  .................  ...............................
Di-n-propylamine..........................        7  .......  DNA                ...............................
Dipropylene glycol........................       40  .......  DPG                ...............................
Dipropylene glycol butyl ether, see Poly(2- .......  .......  DBG                PAG
 8)alkylene glycol monoalkyl(C1-C6) ether.
Dipropylene glycol dibenzoate.............       34  .......  DGY                ...............................
Dipropylene glycol methyl ether, see Poly   .......  .......  DPY                PAG
 (2-8)alkylene glycol monoalkyl(C1-C6)
 ether.
Distillates, flashed feed stocks..........       33  .......  DFF                ...............................
Distillates, straight run.................       33  .......  DSR                ...............................
Dithiocarbamate ester (C7-C35)............       34  .......  DHO
Ditridecyl adipate........................       34  .......  .................  ...............................
Ditridecyl phthalate, see Dialkyl(C7-C13)   .......  .......  DTP                DAH
 phthalates.
Diundecyl phthalate, see Dialkyl(C7-C13)    .......  .......  DUP                DAH
 phthalates.
Dodecane..................................       31        1  DOC                ALJ
tert-Dodecanethiol........................        0        2  DDL                ...............................
Dodecanol.................................       20        2  DDN                LAL
Dodecene..................................       30  .......  DOZ                DDC/DOD
2-Dodecenylsuccinic acid, dipotassium salt       34  .......  .................  DSP
 solution.
Dodecyl alcohol (IMO cargo name), see       .......  .......  .................  DDN
 Dodecanol.
Dodecylamine, Tetradecylamine mixture.....        7        2  DTA                ...............................
Dodecylbenzene, see Alkyl(C9+)benzenes....       32        2  DDB                AKB
Dodecylbenzenesulfonic acid...............        0     1, 2  DSA                ...............................
Dodecyldimethylamine,                             7  .......  DOT
 Tetradecyldimethylamine mixture.
Dodecyl diphenyl ether disulfonate               43  .......  DOS                ...............................
 solution.
Dodecyl hydroxypropyl sulfide.............        0     1, 2  DOH                ...............................
Dodecyl methacrylate......................       14        1  DDM                ...............................
Dodecyl-Octadecyl methacrylate mixture....       14        1  DOM                ...............................
Dodecyl-Pentadecyl methacrylate mixtures..       14        1  DDP                ...............................
Dodecyl phenol............................       21  .......  DOL                ...............................
Dodecyl xylene............................       32        2  DXY
Drilling brine (containing Calcium,              43  .......  .................  DRB
 Potassium or Sodium salts).
Drilling brine (containing Zinc salts)....       43  .......  DZB                ...............................
Drilling mud (low toxicity) (if flammable        33  .......  .................  DRM
 or combustible).
Drilling mud (low toxicity) (if non-             43  .......  .................  DRM
 flammable or non-combustible).
Epichlorohydrin...........................       17        1  EPC                ...............................
Epoxy resin...............................       18  .......  .................  ...............................
ETBE, see Ethyl tert-butyl ether..........  .......  .......  .................  EBE
Ethane....................................       31        1  ETH                ...............................
Ethanolamine (monoethanolamine)...........        8  .......  MEA                ...............................
2-Ethoxyethanol, see Ethylene glycol        .......  .......  EEO                EGC
 monoalkyl ethers.
2-Ethoxyethyl acetate.....................       34  .......  EEA                ...............................
Ethoxylated alcohols, C11-C15, see the      .......  .......  .................  ...............................
 alcohol poylethoxylates.
Ethoxylated long chain (C16+)                     8  .......  ELA                ...............................
 alkyloxyalkanamine.
Ethoxy triglycol..........................       40  .......  ETG                ...............................
Ethyl acetate.............................       34  .......  ETA                ...............................
Ethyl acetoacetate........................       34  .......  EAA                ...............................
Ethyl acrylate............................       14        1  EAC                ...............................
Ethyl alcohol.............................       20        2  EAL                ...............................
Ethylamine................................        7        2  EAM                ...............................
Ethylamine solution.......................        7  .......  EAN                ...............................
Ethyl amyl ketone.........................       18  .......  EAK                ELK
Ethylbenzene..............................       32        2  ETB                ...............................
Ethyl butanol.............................       20  .......  EBT                ...............................
N-Ethyl-n-butylamine......................        7  .......  EBA                ...............................

[[Page 32]]

 
Ethyl tert-butyl ether....................       41        2  EBE                ...............................
Ethyl butyrate............................       34  .......  EBR                ...............................
Ethyl chloride............................       36  .......  ECL                ...............................
Ethyl cyclohexane.........................       31        1  ECY
N-Ethylcyclohexylamine....................        7  .......  ECC                ...............................
Ethylene..................................       30  .......  ETL                ...............................
Ethyleneamine EA 1302.....................        7        2  EMX                EDA
Ethylene carbonate........................       34  .......  .................
Ethylene chlorohydrin.....................       20  .......  ECH                ...............................
Ethylene cyanohydrin......................       20  .......  ETC                ...............................
Ethylenediamine...........................        7        2  EDA                EMX
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid,                 43  .......  EDS                ...............................
 tetrasodium salt solution.
Ethylene dibromide........................       36  .......  EDB                ...............................
Ethylene dichloride.......................       36        2  EDC                ...............................
Ethylene glycol...........................       20        2  EGL                ...............................
Ethylene glycol acetate...................       34  .......  EGO                ...............................
Ethylene glycol butyl ether, see Ethylene   .......  .......  EGM                EGC
 glycol monoalkyl ethers.
Ethylene glycol tert-butyl ether, see       .......  .......  .................  EGC
 Ethylene glycol monoalkyl ethers.
Ethylene glycol butyl ether acetate.......       34  .......  EMA                ...............................
Ethylene glycol diacetate.................       34  .......  EGY                ...............................
Ethylene glycol dibutyl ether.............       40  .......  EGB                ...............................
Ethylene glycol ethyl ether, see Ethyl      .......  .......  EGE                EGC/EEO
 glycol monoalkyl ethers.
Ethylene glycol ethyl ether acetate, see 2- .......  .......  EGA                EEA
 Ethoxyethyl acetate.
Ethylene glycol hexyl ether...............       40  .......  EGH                ...............................
Ethylene glycol isopropyl ether, see        .......  .......  EGI                EGC
 Ethylene glycol monoalkyl ethers.
Ethylene glycol methyl butyl ether, see          40  .......  EMB                EGC
 Ethylene glycol monoalkyl ethers.
Ethylene glycol methyl ether, see Ethylene  .......  .......  EME                EGC
 glycol monoalkyl ethers.
Ethylene glycol methyl ether acetate......       34  .......  EGT                ...............................
Ethylene glycol monoalkyl ethers..........       40  .......  EGC                ...............................
    Including:                              .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Ethylene glycol butyl ether             .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Ethylene glycol isobutyl ether          .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Ethylene glycol tert-butyl ether        .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Ethylene glycol ethyl ether             .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Ethylene glycol hexyl ether             .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Ethylene glycol methyl ether            .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Ethylene glycol propyl ether            .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Ethylene glycol isopropyl ether         .......  .......  .................  ...............................
Ethylene glycol phenyl ether..............       40  .......  EPE                ...............................
Ethylene glycol phenyl ether, Diethylene         40  .......  EDX                ...............................
 glycol phenyl ether mixture.
Ethylene glycol propyl ether, see Ethylene  .......  .......  EGP                EGC
 glycol monoalkyl ethers.
Ethylene glycol iso-propyl ether, see       .......  .......  EGI                EGC
 Ethylene glycol monoalkyl ethers.
Ethylene oxide............................        0        1  EOX                ...............................
Ethylene oxide, Propylene oxide mixture...       16        1  EPM                ...............................
Ethylene-Propylene copolymer..............       30  .......
Ethylene-Vinyl acetate copolymer emulsion.       43  .......  .................  ...............................
Ethyl ether...............................       41  .......  EET                ...............................
Ethyl-3-ethoxypropionate..................       34  .......  EEP                ...............................
2-Ethylhexaldehyde, see Octyl aldehydes...  .......  .......  HA                 OAL
2-Ethylhexanoic acid, see Octanoic acids..  .......  .......  EHO                OAY
2-Ethylhexanol, see Octanol...............  .......  .......  EHX                OCX
2-Ethylhexyl acrylate.....................       14        1  EAI                ...............................
2-Ethylhexylamine.........................        7  .......  EHM                ...............................
Ethyl hexyl phthalate.....................       34  .......  EHE                ...............................
Ethyl hexyl tallate.......................       34  .......  EHT                ...............................
2-Ethyl-1-(hydroxymethyl)propane-1,3-diol,       34  .......  EHD                ...............................
 C8-C10 ester.
Ethylidene norbornene.....................       30        2  ENB                ...............................
Ethyl methacrylate........................       14        1  ETM                ...............................
N-Ethylmethylallylamine...................        7  .......  EML                ...............................
2-Ethyl-6-methyl-N-(1'-methyl-2-                  9  .......  EEM                ...............................
 methoxyethyl)aniline.
o-Ethyl phenol............................       21  .......  EPL                ...............................
Ethyl propionate..........................       34  .......  EPR                ...............................
2-Ethyl-3-propylacrolein..................       19        2  EPA                ...............................
Ethyl toluene.............................       32        2  ETE                ...............................
Fatty acids (saturated, C13+), see Fatty    .......  .......  .................  ...............................
 acids (saturated, C14+).
Fatty acids (saturated, C14+).............       34  .......  FAD                SRA
Ferric chloride solution..................        1        1  FCS                FCL
Ferric                                           43        2  FHX                STA
 hydroxyethylethylenediaminetriacetic
 acid, trisodium salt solution.
Ferric nitrate, Nitric acid solution......        3  .......  FNN                ...............................
Fish solubles (water based fish meal             43  .......  FSO                ...............................
 extracts).
Fluorosilicic acid........................        1        1  FSJ                ...............................
Formaldehyde, Methanol mixtures...........       19        2  MTM                ...............................
Formaldehyde solution.....................       19        2  FMS                ...............................

[[Page 33]]

 
Formamide.................................       10  .......  FAM                ...............................
Formic acid...............................        4        2  FMA                ...............................
Fructose solution.........................       43  .......  .................  ...............................
Fumaric adduct of Rosin, water dispersion.       43  .......  FAR                ...............................
Furfural..................................       19  .......  FFA                ...............................
Furfuryl alcohol..........................       20        2  FAL                ...............................
Gas oil, cracked..........................       33  .......  GOC                ...............................
Gasoline blending stock, alkylates........       33  .......  GAK                ...............................
Gasoline blending stock, reformates.......       33  .......  GRF                ...............................
Gasolines:
    Automotive (not over 4.23 grams lead         33  .......  GAT                ...............................
     per gal.).
    Aviation (not over 4.86 grams lead per       33  .......  GAV                AVA
     gal).
    Casinghead (natural)..................       33  .......  GCS                ...............................
    Polymer...............................       33  .......  GPL                ...............................
    Straight run..........................       33  .......  GSR                ...............................
Glucose solution..........................       43  .......  GLU                DTS
Glutaraldehyde solution...................       19  .......  GTA                ...............................
Glycerine.................................       20        2  GCR                ...............................
Glycerine, Dioxanedimethanol mixture......       20  .......  GDM
Glycerol monooleate.......................       20  .......  GMO                ...............................
Glycerol polyalkoxylate...................       34  .......  .................  ...............................
Glyceryl triacetate.......................       34  .......  .................  ...............................
Glycidyl ester of C10 trialkyl acetic acid       34  .......  .................  GLT
 (IMO cargo name), see Glycidyl ester of
 tridecyl acetic acid.
Gylcidyl ester of tridecylacetic acid.....       34  .......  GLT                ...............................
Glycidyl ester of Versatic acid, see        .......  .......  .................  GLT
 Gylcidyl ester of tridecylacetic acid.
Glycine, sodium salt solution.............        7  .......  .................  ...............................
Glycol diacetate, see Ethylene glycol       .......  .......  .................  EGY
 diacetate.
Glycolic acid solution....................        4  .......  GLC                ...............................
Glyoxal solutions.........................       19  .......  GOS                ...............................
Glyoxylic acid............................        4  .......  GAC
Glyphosate solution (not containing               7  .......  GIO
 surfactant) (See also ROUNDUP).
Heptadecane, see n-Alkanes (C10+).........  .......  .......  .................  ALJ
Heptane...................................       31        1  HMX                ALK (HPI/HPT)
n-Heptanoic acid..........................        4  .......  HEP                ...............................
Heptanol..................................       20  .......  HTX                HTN
Heptene...................................       30  .......  HPX                HTE
Heptyl acetate............................       34  .......  HPE                ...............................
Herbicide (C15-H22-NO2-Cl), see             .......  .......  .................  MCO
 Metolachlor.
Hexadecanol (cetyl alcohol), see Alcohols   .......  .......  .................  ALY
 (C13+).
1-Hexadecylnaphthalene, 1,4-                     32        2  .................
 bis(Hexadecyl)naphthalene mixture.
Hexaethylene glycol, see Polyethylene       .......  .......
 glycol.
Hexamethylene glycol......................       20  .......
Hexamethylenediamine......................        7  .......  HME                HMD/HMC
Hexamethylenediamine solution.............        7  .......  HMC                HMD/HME
Hexamethylenediamine adipate solution.....       43  .......  HAM                ...............................
Hexamethylene diisocyanate................       12  .......  HDI
Hexamethylenetetramine....................        7  .......  HMT                ...............................
Hexamethylenetetramine solutions..........        7  .......  HTS                ...............................
Hexamethylenimine.........................        7  .......  HMI                ...............................
Hexane....................................       31        2  HXS                ALK (IHA/HXA)
Hexanoic acid.............................        4  .......  HXO                ...............................
Hexanol...................................       20  .......  HXN                ...............................
Hexene....................................       30  .......  HEX                HXE/HXT/MPN/MTN
Hexyl acetate.............................       34  .......  HAE                HSA
Hexylene glycol...........................       20  .......  HXG                ...............................
HiTec 321.................................        7  .......  HIT                ...............................
Hog grease, see Lard......................  .......  .......  .................  ...............................
Hydrochloric acid.........................        1        1  HCL                ...............................
Hydrofluorosilicic acid, see Fluorosilicic  .......  .......  HFS                FSJ
 acid.
bis(Hydrogenated tallow alkyl)methyl              7  .......  HTA                ...............................
 amines.
Hydrogen peroxide solutions...............        0        1  .................  HPN/HPS/HPO
2-Hydroxyethyl acrylate...................       14        2  HAI                ...............................
N-(Hydroxyethyl)ethylenediamine triacetic        43  .......  HET                FHX
 acid, trisodium salt solution.
N,N-bis(2-Hydroxyethyl) oleamide..........       10  .......  HOO
2-Hydroxy-4-(methylthio)butanoic acid.....        4  .......  HBA                ...............................
Hydroxy terminated polybutadiene (IMO            20  .......  .................  ...............................
 cargo name), see Polybutadiene, hydroxy
 terminated.
alpha-hydro-omega-                          .......  .......  .................  HTO
 Hydroxytetradeca(oxytetramethylene), see
 Poly(tetramethylene ether) glycols (mw
 950-1050).
Icosa(oxypropane-2,3-diyl)s...............       20  .......  IOP                ...............................
Isophorone................................       18        2  IPH                ...............................
Isophorone diamine........................        7  .......  IPI                ...............................

[[Page 34]]

 
Isophorone diisocyanate...................       12  .......  IPD                ...............................
Isoprene..................................       30  .......  IPR                ...............................
Isoprene concentrate (Shell)..............       30  .......  ISC                ...............................
Isopropylbenzene (cumene), see              .......  .......  .................  PBY
 Propylbenzene.
Jet fuels:
    JP-4..................................       33  .......  JPF                ...............................
    JP-5..................................       33  .......  JPV                ...............................
    JP-8..................................       33  .......  JPE                ...............................
Kaolin clay slurry........................       43  .......  .................  ...............................
Kerosene..................................       33  .......  KRS                ...............................
Ketone residue............................       18  .......  KTR                ...............................
Kraft black liquor........................        5  .......  .................  KPL
Kraft pulping liquors (Black, Green, or           5  .......  KPL                ...............................
 White).
Lactic acid...............................        0     1, 2  LTA
Lactonitrile solution.....................       37  .......  LNI                ...............................
Lard......................................       34  .......  .................  ...............................
Latex (ammonia inhibited).................       30  .......  LTX
Latex, liquid synthetic...................       43  .......  LLS                LTX
Lauric acid...............................       34  .......  LRA                ...............................
Lauryl polyglucose, see Alkyl(C12 -C14)     .......  .......  LAP                AGM
 polyglucoside solution (55% or less).
Lecithin..................................       34  .......  LEC                ...............................
Lignin liquor.............................       43  .......  .................  ...............................
Lignin sulfonic acid, sodium salt           .......  .......  .................  ...............................
 solution, see Sodium lignosulfonate
 solution.
d-Limonene, see Dipentene.................  .......  .......  .................
Liquid Streptomyces solubles..............       43  .......
Long chain alkaryl polyether (C11-C20)....       41  .......  LCP
Long chain alkaryl sulfonic acid (C16-C60)        0     1, 2  LCS
Long chain alkylphenate/Phenol sulfide           21  .......  LPS
 mixture.
Long chain polyetheramine in alkyl(C2-            7  .......  LCE                ...............................
 C4)benzenes.
l-Lysine solution.........................       43  .......  LYS                ...............................
Magnesium chloride solution...............        0     1, 2  .................  ...............................
Magnesium hydroxide slurry................        5  .......  .................  ...............................
Magnesium long chain alkaryl sulfonate           34  .......  MAS                MSE
 (C11-C50).
Magnesium long chain alkyl phenate sulfide       34  .......  MPS
 (C8-C20).
Magnesium long chain alkyl salicylate            34  .......  MLS
 (C11+).
Magnesium nonyl phenol sulfide, see         .......  .......  .................  MPS
 Magnesium long chain alkyl phenate
 sulfide (C8-C20).
Magnesium sulfonate, see Magnesium long     .......  .......  MSE                MAS
 chain alkaryl sulfonate (C11-C50).
Maleic anhydride..........................       11  .......  MLA                ...............................
Mercaptobenzothiazol, sodium salt solution        5  .......  .................  SMB
 (IMO cargo name), see Sodium-2-
 mercaptobenzothiazol solution.
Mesityl oxide.............................       18        2  MSO                ...............................
Metam sodium solution.....................        7  .......  MSS                SMD
Methacrylic acid..........................        4  .......  MAD                ...............................
Methacrylic resin in Ethylene dichloride..       14        1  MRD
Methacrylonitrile.........................       15        2  MET                ...............................
Methane...................................       31        1  MTH                ...............................
3-Methoxy-1-butanol.......................       20  .......  .................  ...............................
3-Methoxybutyl acetate....................       34  .......  MOA                ...............................
N-(2-Methoxy-1-methyl ethyl)-2-ethyl-6-          34  .......  .................  MCO
 methyl chloroacetanilide (IMO cargo
 name), see Metolachlor.
1-Methoxy-2-propyl acetate................       34  .......  MPO                ...............................
Methoxy triglycol.........................       40  .......  MTG                ...............................
Methyl acetate............................       34  .......  MTT                ...............................
Methyl acetoacetate.......................       34  .......  MAE                ...............................
Methyl acetylene, Propadiene mixture......       30  .......  MAP                ...............................
Methyl acrylate...........................       14        1  MAM                ...............................
Methyl alcohol............................       20        2  MAL                ...............................
Methylamine solutions.....................        7  .......  MSZ                ...............................
Methyl amyl acetate.......................       34  .......  MAC                ...............................
Methyl amyl alcohol.......................       20  .......  MAA                MIC
Methyl amyl ketone........................       18  .......  MAK                ...............................
Methyl bromide............................       36  .......  MTB                ...............................
Methyl butanol, see the amyl alcohols.....  .......  .......  .................  AAI
Methyl butenol............................       20  .......  MBL                ...............................
Methyl butenes (tert-amylenes), see         .......  .......  .................  PTX
 Pentene.
Methyl tert-butyl ether...................       41        2  MBE                ...............................
Methyl butyl ketone.......................       18        2  MBK                ...............................
Methylbutynol, see 2-Methyl-2-hydroxy-3-         20  .......  MBY                MHB
 butyne.
3-Methyl butyraldehyde....................       19  .......  .................

[[Page 35]]

 
Methyl butyrate...........................       34  .......  MBU                ...............................
Methyl chloride...........................       36  .......  MTC                ...............................
Methylcyclohexane.........................       31        1  MCY                ...............................
Methylcyclopentadiene dimer...............       30  .......  MCK                ...............................
Methyl diethanolamine.....................        8  .......  MDE                MAB
Methylene chloride, see Dichloromethane...  .......  .......  .................  DCM
2-Methyl-6-ethylaniline...................        9  .......  MEN                ...............................
Methyl ethyl ketone.......................       18        2  MEK                ...............................
2-Methyl-5-ethylpyridine..................        9  .......  MEP                ...............................
Methyl formate............................       34  .......  MFM                ...............................
N-Methylglucamine solution................       43  .......  MGC                ...............................
Methyl heptyl ketone......................       18  .......  MHK                ...............................
2-Methyl-2-hydroxy-3-butyne...............       20  .......  MHB                ...............................
Methyl isoamyl ketone.....................       18  .......  .................  MAK
Methyl isobutyl carbinol, see Methyl amyl   .......  .......  MIC                MAA
 alcohol.
Methyl isobutyl ketone....................       18        2  MIK                ...............................
Methyl methacrylate.......................       14        1  MMM                ...............................
3-Methyl-3-methoxybutanol.................       20  .......  .................  ...............................
3-Methyl-3-methoxybutyl acetate...........       34  .......  .................  ...............................
Methyl naphthalene........................       32        2  MNA                ...............................
Methylolureas.............................       19  .......  MUS                ...............................
2-Methyl pentane..........................       31        1  .................  IHA
2-Methyl-1-pentene, see Hexene............  .......  .......  MPN                HEX
4-Methyl-1-pentene, see Hexene............  .......  .......  MTN                HEX
Methyl tert-pentyl ether (IMO cargo name),       41  .......  .................  AYE
 see tert-Amyl methyl ether.
2-Methyl-1,3-propanediol..................       20  .......  MDL
Methyl propyl ketone......................       18  .......  MKE
Methylpyridine............................        9  .......  .................  MPR/MPE/MPF
N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone....................        9        2  MPY                ...............................
Methyl salicylate.........................       34  .......  MES                ...............................
alpha-Methylstyrene.......................       30  .......  MSR                ...............................
3-(Methylthio)propionaldehyde.............       19  .......  MTP                ...............................
Metolachlor...............................       34  .......  MCO                ...............................
Milk......................................       43  .......  .................  ...............................
Mineral spirits...........................       33  .......  MNS                ...............................
Molasses..................................       20  .......  .................  ...............................
Molasses residue..........................        0        1  .................  ...............................
Monochlorodifluoromethane.................       36  .......  MCF                ...............................
Monoethanolamine, see Ethanolamine........  .......  .......  .................  ...............................
Monoisopropanolamine, see Propanolamine...  .......  .......  .................  ...............................
Morpholine................................        7        2  MPL                ...............................
Motor fuel antiknock compounds containing         0        1  MFA                ...............................
 lead alkyls.
MTBE, see Methyl tert-butyl ether.........  .......  .......  .................  MBE
Myrcene...................................       30  .......  MRE                ...............................
Naphtha:
    Aromatic..............................       33  .......  .................  ...............................
    Coal tar solvent......................       33  .......  NCT                ...............................
    Heavy.................................       33  .......  .................  ...............................
    Paraffinic............................       33  .......  .................
    Petroleum.............................       33  .......  PTN                ...............................
    Solvent...............................       33  .......  NSV                ...............................
    Stoddard solvent......................       33  .......  NSS                ...............................
    Varnish Makers' and Painters'.........       33  .......  NVM                ...............................
Naphthalene...............................       32        2  NTM                ...............................
Naphthalene still residue.................       32        2  NSR                ...............................
Naphthalene sulfonic acid-formaldehyde            0        1  NFS                ...............................
 copolymer, sodium salt solution.
Naphthalene sulfonic acid, sodium salt           34  .......  NSA                ...............................
 solution.
Naphthenic acid...........................        4  .......  NTI                ...............................
Naphthenic acid, sodium salt solution.....       43  .......  NTS                ...............................
Neodecanoic acid..........................        4  .......  NEA                ...............................
NIAX POLYOL APP 240C......................        0     1, 2  NXP                ...............................
Nitrating acid............................        0        1  NIA                ...............................
Nitric acid (70% or less).................        3  .......  NCD                ...............................
Nitric acid (greater than 70%)............        0        1  .................  NAC
Nitrobenzene..............................       42  .......  NTB                ...............................
o-Nitrochlorobenzene, see                   .......  .......  .................  CNO
 Chloronitrobenzene.
Nitroethane...............................       42  .......  NTE                ...............................
Nitroethane, 1-Nitropropane mixtures......       42  .......  NNO                ...............................
o-Nitrophenol.............................        0     1, 2  NTP                NIP/NPH
Nitropropane..............................       42  .......  NPM                NPN/NPP
Nitropropane, Nitroethane mixture.........       42  .......  .................  NNO (NNM/NNL)
Nitrotoluene..............................       42  .......  NIT                NIE/NTT/NTR
Nonane....................................       31        1  NAX                ALK (NAN)

[[Page 36]]

 
Nonanoic acid.............................        4  .......  NNA                NAI/NIN
Nonanoic, Tridecanoic acid mixture........        4  .......  NAT
Nonene....................................       30  .......  NOO                NON/NNE
Nonyl acetate.............................       34  .......  NAE
Nonyl alcohol.............................       20        2  NNS                NNI/NNN/DBC
Nonylbenzene, see Alkyl(C9+)benzenes......  .......  .......  .................  AKB
Nonyl methacrylate........................       14        1  NMA                ...............................
Nonyl phenol..............................       21  .......  NNP                ...............................
Nonyl phenol poly(4+)ethoxylates..........       40  .......  NPE                ...............................
Nonyl phenol sulfide solution, see Alkyl    .......  .......  .................  AKS/NPS
 phenol sulfide (C8-C40).
Noxious Liquid Substance, n.o.s. (NLS's)..        0        1  .................  ...............................
1-Octadecene, see the olefin or alpha-      .......  .......  .................  ...............................
 olefin entries.
Octadecenoamide...........................       10  .......  ODD                ...............................
Octadecenol (oleyl alcohol), see Alcohols   .......  .......  .................  ALY
 (C13+).
Octane....................................       31        1  OAX                ALK (IOO/OAN)
Octanoic acid.............................        4  .......  OAY                OAA/EHO
Octanol...................................       20        2  OCX                IOA/OTA/EHX
Octene....................................       30  .......  OTX                OTE
n-Octyl acetate...........................       34  .......  OAF                OAE
Octyl alcohol, see Octanol................  .......  .......  .................  OCX
Octyl aldehyde............................       19  .......  OAL                IOC/OLX/EHA
Octyl decyl adipate.......................       34  .......  ODA                ...............................
Octyl nitrate, see Alkyl(C7-C9) nitrates..  .......  .......  ONE                AKN
Octyl phenol..............................       21  .......  .................  ...............................
Octyl phthalate, see Dioctyl phthalate....  .......  .......  .................  DOP
Oil, edible:
    Beechnut..............................       34  .......  OBN                VEO
    Castor................................       34  .......  OCA                VEO
    Cocoa butter..........................       34  .......  OCB                VEO
    Coconut...............................       34        2  OCC                VEO
    Cod liver.............................       34  .......  OCL                AFN
    Corn..................................       34  .......  OCO                VEO
    Cottonseed............................       34  .......  OCS                VEO
    Fish..................................       34        2  OFS                AFN
    Groundnut.............................       34  .......  OGN                VEO
    Hazelnut..............................       34  .......  OHN                VEO
    Lard..................................       34  .......  OLD                AFN
    Maize.................................       34  .......  .................  VEO (OCO)
    Nutmeg butter.........................       34  .......  ONB                VEO
    Olive.................................       34  .......  OOL                VEO
    Palm..................................       34        2  OPM                VEO
    Palm kernel...........................       34  .......  OPO                VEO
    Peanut................................       34  .......  OPN                VEO
    Poppy.................................       34  .......  OPY                VEO
    Poppy seed............................       34  .......  .................  VEO
    Raisin seed...........................       34  .......  ORA                VEO
    Rapeseed..............................       34  .......  ORP                VEO
    Rice bran.............................       34  .......  ORB                VEO
    Safflower.............................       34  .......  OSF                VEO
    Salad.................................       34  .......  OSL                VEO
    Sesame................................       34  .......  OSS                VEO
    Soya bean.............................       34  .......  OSB                VEO
    Sunflower seed........................       34  .......  OSN                VEO
    Tucum.................................       34  .......  OTC                VEO
    Vegetable.............................       34  .......  OVG                VEO
    Walnut................................       34  .......  OWN                VEO
Oil, fuel:
    No. 1.................................       33  .......  OON                ...............................
    No. 1-D...............................       33  .......  OOD                ...............................
    No. 2.................................       33  .......  OTW                ...............................
    No. 2-D...............................       33  .......  OTD                ...............................
    No. 4.................................       33  .......  OFR                ...............................
    No. 5.................................       33  .......  OFV                ...............................
    No. 6.................................       33  .......  OSX                ...............................
Oil, misc:
    Aliphatic.............................       33  .......  .................  ...............................
    Animal................................       34  .......  OMA                AFN
    Aromatic..............................       33  .......  .................  ...............................
    Clarified.............................       33  .......  OCF                ...............................
    Coal..................................       33  .......  .................  ...............................
    Coconut oil, fatty acid methyl ester..       34  .......  OCM                ...............................
    Cotton seed oil, fatty acid...........       34  .......  CFY                ...............................
    Crude.................................       33  .......  OIL                ...............................

[[Page 37]]

 
    Diesel................................       33  .......  ODS                ...............................
    Gas, high pour........................       33  .......  .................  ...............................
    Gas, low pour.........................       33  .......  .................  ...............................
    Gas, low sulfur.......................       33  .......  .................  ...............................
    Heartcut distillate...................       33  .......  .................  ...............................
    Lanolin...............................       34  .......  OLL                AFN
    Linseed...............................       33  .......  OLS                ...............................
    Lubricating...........................       33  .......  OLB                ...............................
    Mineral...............................       33  .......  OMN                ...............................
    Mineral seal..........................       33  .......  OMS                ...............................
    Motor.................................       33  .......  OMT                ...............................
    Neatsfoot.............................       33  .......  ONF                AFN
    Oiticica..............................       34  .......  OOI                ...............................
    Palm oil, fatty acid methyl ester.....       34  .......  OPE                ...............................
    Penetrating...........................       33  .......  OPT                ...............................
    Perilla...............................       34  .......  OPR
    Pilchard..............................       34  .......  OPL                AFN
    Pine..................................       33  .......  OPI                PNL
    Residual..............................       33  .......  .................  ...............................
    Road..................................       33  .......  ORD                ...............................
    Rosin.................................       33  .......  ORN                ...............................
    Seal..................................       34  .......  .................  ...............................
    Soapstock.............................       34  .......  OIS                ...............................
    Soybean (epoxidized)..................       34  .......  .................  EVO
    Sperm.................................       33  .......  OSP                AFN
    Spindle...............................       33  .......  OSD                ...............................
    Tall..................................       34  .......  OTL                ...............................
    Tall, fatty acid......................       34        2  TOF                ...............................
    Transformer...........................       33  .......  OTF                ...............................
    Tung..................................       34  .......  OTG                ...............................
    Turbine...............................       33  .......  OTB                ...............................
    Wood..................................       34  .......  .................  ...............................
Olefin/Alkyl ester copolymer (molecular          34  .......  OCP
 weight 2000+).
Olefin mixtures...........................       30  .......  .................  OFX/OFY
alpha-Olefins (C6-C18) mixtures...........       30  .......  OAM                ...............................
Olefins (C13+)............................       30  .......  .................  ...............................
Oleic acid................................       34  .......  OLA                ...............................
Oleum.....................................        0     1, 2  OLM                ...............................
Oleyl alcohol (octadecenol), see Alcohols   .......  .......  .................  ALY
 (C13+).
Oleylamine................................       10  .......  OLY                ...............................
ORIMULSION, see Asphalt emulsion..........  .......  .......  .................  ASQ
Oxyalkylated alkyl phenol formaldehyde....       33  .......  .................  ...............................
Palm kernel acid oil......................       34  .......  PNO                ...............................
Palm kernel acid oil, methyl ester........       34  .......  PNF                ...............................
Palm kernel oil, fatty acid, see Palm       .......  .......  .................  PNO
 kernel acid oil.
Palm kernel oil, fatty acid methyl ester,   .......  .......  .................  PNF
 see Palm kernel acid oil, methyl ester.
Palm stearin..............................       34  .......  PMS                ...............................
n-Paraffins (C10-C20), see n-Alkanes        .......  .......  PFN                ALJ
 (C10+).
Paraldehyde...............................       19  .......  PDH                ...............................
Paraldehyde-Ammonia reaction product......        9  .......  PRB                ...............................
Pentachloroethane.........................       36  .......  PCE                ...............................
Pentacosa(oxypropane-2,3-diyl)s...........       20  .......  POY                ...............................
Pentadecanol, see Alcohols (C13+).........  .......  .......  PDC                ALY
1,3-Pentadiene............................       30  .......  PDE                PDN
Pentaethylene glycol, see Polyethylene      .......  .......  .................  ...............................
 glycols.
Pentaethylene glycol methyl ether, see      .......  .......  .................  PAG
 Poly(2-8)alkylene glycol monoalkyl(C1-C6)
 ether.
Pentaethylenehexamine.....................        7  .......  PEN
Pentaethylenehexamine,                            7  .......  PEP                ...............................
 Tetraethylenepentamine mixture.
Pentane...................................       31        1  PTY                IPT/PTA
Pentanoic acid............................        4  .......  POC                ...............................
n-Pentanoic acid, 2-Methyl butryic acid           4  .......  POJ                POC
 mixture.
Pentasodium salt of Diethylenetriamine      .......  .......  .................  ...............................
 pentaacetic acid solution, see
 Diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid,
 pentasodium salt solution.
Pentene...................................       30  .......  PTX                PTE
Pentyl aldehyde...........................       19  .......  .................
n-Pentyl propionate.......................       34  .......  PPE
Perchloroethylene.........................       36        2  PER                TTE
Petrolatum................................       33  .......  PTL                ...............................
Phenol....................................       21  .......  PHN                ...............................
1-Phenyl-1-xylyl ethane...................       32        2  PXE                ...............................
Phosphate esters, alkyl(C12-C14)amine.....        7  .......  PEA                ...............................

[[Page 38]]

 
Phosphoric acid...........................        1        1  PAC                ...............................
Phosphorus................................        0        1  PPW                PPR/PPB
Phthalate based polyester polyol..........        0     1, 2  PBE                ...............................
Phthalic anhydride........................       11  .......  PAN                ...............................
alpha-Pinene..............................       30  .......  PIO                PIN
beta-Pinene...............................       30  .......  PIP                PIN
Pine oil..................................       33  .......  PNL                OPI
Polyalkyl(C18-C22) acrylate in Xylene.....       14        1  PIX                ...............................
Polyalkylene glycol butyl ether, see        .......  .......  PGB                PAG
 Poly(2-8)alkylene glycol monoalkyl(C1-C6)
 ether.
Poly(2-8)alkylene glycol monoalkyl(C1-C6)        40  .......  PAG
 ether.
    Including:                              .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Diethylene glycol butyl ether           .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Diethylene glycol ethyl ether           .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Diethylene glycol n-hexyl ether         .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Diethylene glycol methyl ether          .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Diethylene glycol n-propyl ether        .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Dipropylene glycol butyl ether          .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Dipropylene glycol methyl ether         .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Polyalkylene glycol butyl ether         .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Polyethylene glycol monoalkyl ether     .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Polypropylene glycol methyl ether       .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Tetraethylene glycol methyl ether       .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Triethylene glycol butyl ether          .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Triethylene glycol ethyl ether          .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Triethylene glycol methyl ether         .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Tripropylene glycol methyl ether        .......  .......  .................  ...............................
Poly(2-8)alkylene glycol monoalkyl(C1-C6)        34  .......  PAF
 ether acetate.
    Including:                              .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Diethylene glycol butyl ether acetate   .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Diethylene glycol ethyl ether acetate   .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Diethylene glycol methyl ether acetate  .......  .......  .................  ...............................
Polyalkylene glycols, Polyalkylene glycol        40  .......  PPX                ...............................
 monoalkyl ethers mixtures.
Polyalkylene oxide polyol.................       20  .......  PAO                ...............................
Polyalkyl methacrylate (C1-C20)...........  .......  .......  .................  ...............................
Polyalkyl(C10-C20)methacrylate............       14        1  PMT                ...............................
Polyalkyl(C10-C18)methacrylate/Ethylene          14        1  PEM                ...............................
 propylene copolymer mixture.
Polyaluminum chloride solution............        1        1  .................  ...............................
Polybutadiene, hydroxyl terminated........       20  .......  .................  ...............................
Polybutene................................       30  .......  PLB                ...............................
Polybutenyl succinimide...................       10  .......  PBS                ...............................
Poly(2+)cyclic aromatics..................       32        2  PCA                ...............................
Polydimethylsiloxane......................       34  .......  .................  ...............................
Polyether (molecular weight 2000+)........       41  .......  PYR
Polyethylene glycol.......................       40  .......  .................  ...............................
Polyethylene glycol dimethyl ether........       40  .......  .................  ...............................
Polyethylene glycol monoalkyl ether, see    .......  .......  PEE                PAG
 Poly(2-8)alkylene glycol monoalkyl(C1-C6)
 ether.
Polyethylene polyamines...................        7        2  PEB                ...............................
Polyferric sulfate solution...............       34  .......  PSS                ...............................
Polyglycerine, Sodium salts solution             20        2  PGT
 (containing less than 3% Sodium
 hydroxide).
Polyglycerol..............................       20  .......  .................  GCR
Polyisobutenamine in aliphatic (C10-C14)          7  .......  PIB                ...............................
 solvent.
Polyisobutenyl anhydride adduct...........       11  .......  .................
Poly(4+)isobutylene.......................       30  .......
Polymethylene polyphenyl isocyanate.......       12  .......  PPI                ...............................
Polymethylsiloxane........................       34  .......  .................  ...............................
Polyolefin (molecular weight 300+)........       30  .......
Polyolefin amide alkeneamine (C17+).......       33  .......  POH
Polyolefin amide alkeneamine (C28+).......       33  .......  POD
Polyolefin amide alkeneamine borate (C28-        33  .......  PAB
 C250).
Polyolefin amide alkeneamine/Molybdenum           7  .......
 oxysulfide mixture.
Polyolefin amide alkeneamine polyol.......       20  .......  PAP
Poly(C17+)olefin amine....................        7  .......  POG                ...............................
Polyolefinamine (C28-C250)................       33  .......  POM                ...............................
Polyolefinamine in alkyl(C2-C4)benzenes...       32        2  POF
Polyolefin aminoester salt................       34  .......  PAE                ...............................
Polyolefin anhydride......................       11  .......  PAR
Polyolefin ester (C28-C250)...............       34  .......  POS
Polyolefin phenolic amine (C28-C250)......        7  .......  PPH
Polyolefin phosphorosulfide, barium              34  .......  PPS
 derivative (C28-C250).
Poly(20)oxyethylene sorbitan monooleate...       34  .......  PSM                ...............................

[[Page 39]]

 
Poly(5+)propylene.........................       30  .......  PLQ                PLP
Polypropylene glycol......................       40  .......  PGC                ...............................
Polypropylene glycol methyl ether, see      .......  .......  PGM                PGE
 Propylene glycol monoalkyl ether.
Polysiloxane..............................       34  .......  .................  DMP
Poly(tetramethylene ether) glycols (mw 950-      40  .......  HTO                ...............................
 1050) (alpha-hydro-omega-
 Hydroxytetradeca(oxytetramethylene)).
Polytetramethylene ether glycol...........       40  .......  .................  ...............................
Potassium chloride solution...............       43  .......  PCS                (DRB)
Potassium formate solution................       34  .......  PFR                ...............................
Potassium hydroxide solution (IMO cargo           5        2  .................  CPS
 name), see Caustic potash solution.
Potassium oleate..........................       34  .......  POE                ...............................
Potassium salt of polyolefin acid.........       34  .......  .................  ...............................
Potassium thiosulfate solution............       43  .......  PTF                ...............................
Propane...................................       31        1  PRP                ...............................
Propanolamine.............................        8  .......  PAX                MPA/PLA
Propionaldehyde...........................       19  .......  PAD                ...............................
Propionic acid............................        4  .......  PNA                ...............................
Propionic anhydride.......................       11  .......  PAH                ...............................
Propionitrile.............................       37  .......  PCN                ...............................
n-Propoxypropanol, see Propylene glycol     .......  .......  PXP                PGE
 monoalkyl ether.
Propyl acetate............................       34  .......  .................  IAC/PAT
Propyl alcohol............................       20        2  .................  IPA/PAL
Propylamine...............................        7  .......  .................  IPP/PRA
iso-Propylamine solution..................        7  .......  .................  IPO/IPQ
Propylbenzene.............................       32        2  PBY                PBZ/CUM
n-Propyl chloride.........................       36  .......  PRC
iso-Propylcyclohexane.....................       31        1  IPX                ...............................
Propylene.................................       30  .......  PPL                ...............................
Propylene-butylene copolymer..............       30  .......  PBP                ...............................
Propylene carbonate.......................       34  .......  .................  ...............................
Propylene dimer...........................       30  .......  PDR                ...............................
Propylene glycol..........................       20        2  PPG                ...............................
Propylene glycol n-butyl ether, see         .......  .......  PGD                PGE
 Propylene glycol monoalkyl ether.
Propylene glycol ethyl ether, see           .......  .......  PGY                PGE
 Propylene glycol monoalkyl ether.
Propylene glycol methyl ether, see          .......  .......  PME                PGE
 Propylene glycol monoalkyl ether.
Propylene glycol methyl ether acetate.....       34  .......  PGN
Propylene glycol monoalkyl ether..........       40  .......  PGE                ...............................
    Including:                              .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    n-Propoxypropanol                       .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Propylene glycol n-butyl ether          .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Propylene glycol ethyl ether            .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Propylene glycol methyl ether           .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Propylene glycol propyl ether           .......  .......  .................  ...............................
Propylene glycol phenyl ether.............       40  .......  PGP                ...............................
Propylene glycol propyl ether, see          .......  .......  .................  PGE
 Propylene glycol monoalkyl ether.
Propylene oxide...........................       16        1  POX                ...............................
Propylene, Propane, MAPP gas mixture......       30        2  PPM                ...............................
Propylene tetramer........................       30  .......  PTT                ...............................
Propylene trimer..........................       30  .......  PTR                ...............................
Propyl ether..............................       41  .......  .................  IPE/PRE
Pseudocumene, see Trimethylbenzene........  .......  .......  .................  TME/TRE
Pyridine..................................        9  .......  PRD                ...............................
Pyridine bases, see Paraldehyde-Ammonia     .......  .......  .................  PRB
 reaction product.
Roehm monomer 6615........................       14        1  RMN                ...............................
Rosin oil.................................       33  .......  ORN                ...............................
Rosin soap (disproportionated) solution...       43  .......  RSP                ...............................
ROUNDUP (See also Glyphosate solution)....        7  .......  RUP                ...............................
Rum, see Alcoholic beverages..............  .......  .......  .................  ...............................
SAP 7001..................................        0        1  SON                ...............................
Sewage sludge.............................       43  .......  .................  ...............................
Silica slurry.............................       43  .......  .................  ...............................
Sludge, treated...........................       43  .......  .................  ...............................
Sodium acetate, Glycol, Water mixture (not       34        2  SAO                SAP
 containing Sodium hydroxide).
Sodium acetate, Glycol, Water mixture             5  .......  SAP                SAO
 (containing Sodium hydroxide).
Sodium acetate solution...................       34  .......  SAN                AKP
Sodium alkyl sulfonate solution...........       43  .......  SSU                ...............................
Sodium alkyl (C14-C17) sulfonates 60-65%         34  .......  AKA                ...............................
 solution (IMO cargo name), see Alkane
 (C14-C17) sulfonic acid, sodium salt
 solution.
Sodium aluminate solution.................        5  .......  SAU                ...............................
Sodium aluminosillicate slurry............       34  .......  .................  ...............................
Sodium benzoate solution..................       34  .......  SBN                ...............................
Sodium borohydride, Sodium hydroxide              5  .......  SBX                SBH/SBI
 solution.

[[Page 40]]

 
Sodium carbonate solutions................        5  .......  SCE                ...............................
Sodium chlorate solution..................        0     1, 2  SDD                SDC
Sodium cyanide solution...................        5  .......  SCS                SCN
Sodium dichromate solution................        0     1, 2  SDL                SCR
Sodium dimethyl naphthalene sulfonate       .......  .......  .................  DNS
 solution, see Dimethyl naphthalene
 sulfonic acid, sodium salt solution.
Sodium hydrogen sulfide, Sodium carbonate         0     1, 2  SSS                ...............................
 solution.
Sodium hydrogen sulfite solution..........       43  .......  SHX                ...............................
Sodium hydrosulfide solution..............        5        2  SHR                ...............................
Sodium hydrosulfide, Ammonium sulfide             5        2  SSA                ...............................
 solution.
Sodium hydroxide solution (IMO cargo              5        2  .................  CSS
 name), see Caustic soda solution.
Sodium hypochlorite solution..............        5  .......  .................  SHP/SHQ/(SHC)
Sodium lignosulfonate solution, see also         43  .......  .................  ...............................
 Lignin liquor.
Sodium long chain alkyl salicylate (C13+).       34  .......  SLS
Sodium 2-mercaptobenzothiazol solution....        5  .......  SMB                ...............................
Sodium N-methyl dithio carbamate solution,  .......  .......  .................  MSS
 see Metam sodium solution.
Sodium naphthalene sulfonate solution, see  .......  .......  SNS                NSA
 Naphthalene sulfonic acid, sodium salt
 solution.
Sodium naphthenate solution, see            .......  .......  .................  NTS
 Naphthenic acid, sodium salt solution.
Sodium nitrite solution...................        5  .......  SNI                SNT
Sodium petroleum sulfonate................       33  .......  SPS                ...............................
Sodium polyacrylate solution..............       43        2  .................  ...............................
Sodium salt of Ferric                       .......  .......  STA                FHX
 hydroxyethylethylenediaminetriacetic acid
 solution, see Ferric
 hydroxyethylethylenediaminetriacetic
 acid, trisodium salt solution.
Sodium silicate solution..................       43        2  SSN                SSC
Sodium sulfide, Hydrosulfide solution.....        0     1, 2  .................  SSH/SSI/SSJ
Sodium sulfide solution...................       43  .......  SDR
Sodium sulfite solution...................       43  .......  SUP                SUS
Sodium tartrates, Sodium succinates              43  .......  STM
 solution.
Sodium thiocyanate solution...............        0     1, 2  STS                SCY
Sorbitol solutions........................       20  .......  .................  SBT
Soyabean oil (expoxidized)................       34  .......  .................  OSC/EVO
Stearic acid, see Fatty acids (saturated,   .......  .......  SRA                FAD
 C14+).
Stearyl alcohol...........................       20  .......
Styrene...................................       30  .......  STY                STX
Sulfohydrocarbon (C3-C88).................       33  .......  SFO
Sulfohydrocarbon, long chain (C18+)               7  .......  SFX
 alkylamine mixture.
Sulfolane.................................       39  .......  SFL                ...............................
Sulfonated polyacrylate solutions.........       43        2
Sulfur....................................        0        1  SXX                ...............................
Sulfuric acid.............................        2        2  SFA                ...............................
Sulfuric acid, spent......................        2        2  SAC                ...............................
Sulfurized fat (C14-C20)..................       33  .......  SFT                ...............................
Sulfurized polyolefinamide alkene(C28-           33  .......  SPO                ...............................
 C250) amine.
Tall oil..................................       34  .......  OTL                ...............................
Tall oil fatty acid (Resin acids less than       34        2  TOF                ...............................
 20%).
Tall oil fatty acid, barium salt..........        0     1, 2  TOB                ...............................
Tall oil soap (disproportionated) solution       43  .......  TOS                ...............................
Tallow....................................       34        2  TLO                ...............................
Tallow fatty acid.........................       34        2  TFD                ...............................
Tallow fatty alcohol, see Alcohols (C13+).  .......  .......  TFA                ALY
Tallow nitrile............................       37  .......  TAN                ...............................
TAME, see tert-Amyl methyl ether..........  .......  .......  .................  AYE
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane.................       36  .......  TEC                ...............................
Tetrachloroethylene, see Perchloroethylene  .......  .......  TTE                PER
Tetradecanol, see Alcohols (C13+).........  .......  .......  TTN                ALY
Tetradecene, see the olefins entries......  .......  .......  TTD                ...............................
Tetradecylbenzene, see Alkyl(C9+) benzenes       32        2  TDB                AKB
Tetraethylene glycol......................       40  .......  TTG                ...............................
Tetraethylene glycol methyl ether, see      .......  .......  .................  PAG
 Poly(2-8)alkylene glycol monoalkyl(C1-C6)
 ether.
Tetraethylenepentamine....................        7        2  TTP                ...............................
Tetrahydrofuran...........................       41  .......  THF                ...............................
Tetrahydronaphthalene.....................       32        2  THN                ...............................
1,2,3,5-Tetramethylbenzene, see             .......  .......  TTB                TTC
 Tetramethylbenzene.
Tetramethylbenzene........................       32        2  TTC                TTB
Tetrapropylbenzene, see Alkyl(C9+)benzenes  .......  .......  .................  AKB
Tetrasodium salt of EDTA solution, see      .......  .......  .................  EDS
 Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid,
 tetrasodium salt solution.
Titanium dioxide slurry...................       43  .......  TDS                ...............................
Titanium tetrachloride....................        2        2  TTT                ...............................
Toluene...................................       32        2  TOL                ...............................

[[Page 41]]

 
Toluenediamine............................        9  .......  TDA                ...............................
Toluene diisocyanate......................       12  .......  TDI                ...............................
o-Toluidine...............................        9  .......  TLI                ...............................
Triarylphosphate, see Triisopropylated      .......  .......  TRA                TPL
 phenyl phosphates.
Tributyl phosphate........................       34  .......  TBP                ...............................
1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene....................       36  .......  TCB                ...............................
1,1,1-Trichloroethane.....................       36        2  TCE                ...............................
1,1,2-Trichloroethane.....................       36  .......  TCM                ...............................
Trichloroethylene.........................       36        2  TCL                ...............................
1,2,3-Trichloropropane....................       36        2  TCN                ...............................
1,1,2-Trichloro-1,2,2-trifluoroethane.....       36  .......  TTF                ...............................
Tricresyl phosphate.......................       34  .......  .................  TCO/TCP
Tridecane, see n-Alkanes (C10+)...........  .......  .......  TRD                ALJ
Tridecanoic acid..........................       34  .......  TDO
Tridecanol, see Alcohols (C13+)...........  .......  .......  TDN                ALY
Tridecene, see Olefins (C13+).............  .......  .......  TDC                ...............................
Tridecyl acetate..........................       34  .......  TAE
Tridecylbenzene, see Alkyl(C9+) benzenes..       32        2  TRB                AKB
Triethanolamine...........................        8        2  TEA                ...............................
Triethylamine.............................        7  .......  TEN                ...............................
Triethylbenzene...........................       32        2  TEB                ...............................
Triethylene glycol........................       40  .......  TEG                ...............................
Triethylene glycol butyl ether, see Poly(2- .......  .......  .................  PAG
 8)alkylene glycol monoalkyl(C1-C6) ether.
Triethylene glycol butyl ether mixture....       40  .......  .................  ...............................
Triethylene glycol dibenzoate.............       34  .......  TGB                ...............................
Triethylene glycol di-(2-ethylbutyrate)...       34  .......  TGD                ...............................
Triethylene glycol ether mixture..........       40  .......  .................  ...............................
Triethylene glycol ethyl ether, see Poly(2- .......  .......  TGE                PAG
 8)alkylene glycol monoalkyl(C1-C6) ether.
Triethylene glycol methyl ether, see        .......  .......  TGY                PAG
 Poly(2-8)alkylene glycol monoalkyl(C1-C6)
 ether.
Triethylenetetramine......................        7        2  TET                ...............................
Triethyl phosphate........................       34  .......  TPS                ...............................
Triethyl phosphite........................       34        2  TPI                ...............................
Triisobutylene............................       30  .......  TIB                ...............................
Triisooctyl trimellitate..................       34  .......  .................  ...............................
Triisopropanolamine.......................        8  .......  TIP                ...............................
Triisopropanolamine salt of 2,4-            .......  .......  .................  DTI
 Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid solution, see
 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid,
 Triisopropanolamine salt solution.
Triisopropylated phenyl phosphates........       34  .......  TPL
Trimethylacetic acid......................        4  .......  TAA                ...............................
Trimethylamine solution...................        7  .......  TMT
Trimethylbenzene..........................       32        2  TRE                TME/TMB/TMD
Trimethylhexamethylenediamine (2,2,4- and         7  .......  THA                ...............................
 2,4,4-).
Trimethylhexamethylene diisocyanate (2,2,4-      12  .......  THI                ...............................
  and 2,4,4-).
Trimethyl nonanol, see Dodecanol..........  .......  .......  .................  DDN
Trimethylol propane polyethoxylate........       20  .......  TPR                ...............................
2,2,4-Trimethyl-1,3-pentanediol                  34  .......  TMQ                ...............................
 diisobutyrate.
2,2,4-Trimethyl-1,3-pentanediol-1-               34  .......  TMP                ...............................
 isobutyrate.
2,2,4-Trimethyl-3-pentanol-1-isobutyrate..       34  .......  .................  ...............................
Trimethyl phosphite.......................       34        2  TPP                ...............................
1,3,5-Trioxane............................       41        2  TRO                ...............................
Triphenylborane, Caustic soda solution....        5  .......  TPB
Tripropylene, see Propylene trimer........  .......  .......  .................  PTR
Tripropylene glycol.......................       40  .......  TGC                ...............................
Tripropylene glycol methyl ether, see       .......  .......  TGM                PAG
 Poly(2-8)alkylene glycol monoalkyl(C1-C6)
 ether.
Trisodium nitrilotriacetate...............       34  .......  .................  ...............................
Trisodium phosphate solution..............        5  .......  TSP
Trisodium salt of N-                        .......  .......  .................  HET
 (Hydroxyethyl)ethylenediaminetriacetic
 acid solution, see N-
 (Hydroxyethyl)ethylenediaminetriacetic
 acid, trisodium salt solution.
Trixylyl phosphate (IMO cargo name), see         34  .......  .................  TRP
 Trixylenyl phosphate.
Trixylenyl phosphate......................       34  .......  TRP                ...............................
Turpentine................................       30  .......  TPT                ...............................
Ucarsol CR Solvent 302 SG.................        8  .......  UCS                ...............................
Undecanoic acid...........................        4  .......  UDA                ...............................
Undecanol, see Undecyl alcohol............  .......  .......  .................  UND
Undecene..................................       30  .......  UDC                ...............................
Undecyl alcohol...........................       20  .......  UND                ...............................
Undecylbenzene, see Alkyl(C9+) benzenes...  .......  .......  UDB                AKB
Urea, Ammonium mono- and di-hydrogen              0        1  UPX                ...............................
 phosphate, Potassium chloride solution.

[[Page 42]]

 
Urea, Ammonium nitrate solution                   6  .......  UAS                ...............................
 (containing Ammonia).
Urea, Ammonium nitrate solution (not             43  .......  UAT                ANU
 containing Ammonia).
Urea, Ammonium phosphate solution.........       43  .......  UAP                ...............................
Urea solution.............................       43  .......  .................  URE
Valeraldehyde.............................       19  .......  VAK                IVA/VAL
Vanillin black liquor.....................        5  .......  VBL                ...............................
Vegetable oils, n.o.s.....................       34  .......  VEO
    Including:                              .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Beechnut oil                            .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Castor oil                              .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Cocoa butter                            .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Coconut oil                             .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Corn oil                                .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Cottonseed oil                          .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Groundnut oil                           .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Hazelnut oil                            .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Linseed oil                             .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Nutmeg butter                           .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Oiticica oil                            .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Olive oil                               .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Palm kernel oil                         .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Palm oil                                .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Peel oil (oranges and lemons)           .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Perilla oil                             .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Poppy oil                               .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Raisin seed oil                         .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Rapeseed oil                            .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Rice bran oil                           .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Safflower oil                           .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Salad oil                               .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Sesame oil                              .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Soya bean oil                           .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Sunflower seed oil                      .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Tucum oil                               .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Tung oil                                .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Walnut oil                              .......  .......  .................  ...............................
Vegetable acid oils and distillates,             34  .......  VAO
 n.o.s..
    Including:                              .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Corn acid oil                           .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Cottonseed acid oil                     .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Dark mixed acid oil                     .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Groundnut acid oil                      .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Mixed acid oil                          .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Mixed general acid oil                  .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Mixed hard acid oil                     .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Mixed soft acid oil                     .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Rapeseed acid oil                       .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Safflower acid oil                      .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Soya acid oil                           .......  .......  .................  ...............................
    Sunflower seed acid oil                 .......  .......  .................  ...............................
Vegetable protein solution................       43  .......  .................  ...............................
Vinyl acetate.............................       13        1  VAM                ...............................
Vinyl chloride............................       35  .......  VCM                ...............................
Vinyl ethyl ether.........................       13        1  VEE                ...............................
Vinylidene chloride.......................       35  .......  VCI                ...............................
Vinyl neodecanate.........................       13        1  VND                ...............................
Vinyltoluene..............................       13        1  VNT                ...............................
Water.....................................       43  .......  .................  ...............................
Waxes:....................................  .......  .......  WAX                ...............................
    Candelilla............................       34  .......  WDC                ...............................
    Carnauba..............................       34  .......  WCA                ...............................
    Paraffin..............................       31        1  WPF                ...............................
    Petroleum.............................       33  .......  .................  ...............................
Wine, see Alcoholic beverages.............  .......  .......  .................  ...............................
White spirit (low (15-20%) aromatic)......       33  .......  WSL                WSP
Xylene....................................       32        2  XLX                XLM/XLO/XLP
Xylenes, Ethylbenzene mixture.............       32        2  XEB                ...............................
Xylenols..................................       21  .......  XYL                ...............................
Zinc alkaryl dithiophosphate (C7-C16).....       34  .......  ZAD
Zinc alkenyl carboxamide..................       10  .......  ZAA                ...............................
Zinc alkyl dithiophosphate (C3-C14).......       34  .......  ZAP

[[Page 43]]

 
Zinc bromide, Calcium bromide solution,     .......  .......  .................  DZB
 see Drilling brine (containing Zinc
 salts).
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Because of very high reactivity or unusual conditions of carriage or potential compatibility problems, this
  commodity is not assigned to a specific group in the Compatibility Chart. For additional compatibility
  information, contact Commandant (G-MSO), U.S. Coast Guard, 2100 Second Street, SW., Washington, DC 20593-0001.
  Telephone (202) 267-1577.
2. See Appendix I-Exceptions to the Chart.


[USCG 2000-7079, 65 FR 67162, Nov. 8, 2000]

                Table II to Part 150--Grouping of Cargoes

                          0. Unassigned Cargoes

    Acetone cyanohydrin <SUP>1,2</SUP>
    Alkylbenzenesulfonic acid <SUP>1,2</SUP>
    Aluminium chloride, Hydrochloric acid solution <SUP>1</SUP>
    Ammonium hydrogen phosphate solution <SUP>1</SUP>
    Ammonium nitrate solution <SUP>1</SUP>
    Ammonium thiocyanate, Ammonium thiosulfate solution <SUP>1</SUP>
    Benzenesulfonyl chloride <SUP>1,2</SUP>
    gamma-Butyrolactone <SUP>1,2</SUP>
    Chlorine <SUP>1</SUP>
    Chlorosulfonic acid <SUP>1</SUP>
    Decyloxytetrahydro-thiophene dioxide <SUP>2</SUP>
    tert-Dodecanethiol <SUP>2</SUP>
    2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid, Dimethylamine salt solution 
<SUP>1,2</SUP>
    Dimethylamine salt of 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid solution 
<SUP>1,2</SUP>
    Diphenylol propane-Epichlorohydrin resins <SUP>1</SUP>
    Dodecylbenzenesulfonic acid <SUP>1,2</SUP>
    Dodecyl hydroxypropyl sulfide <SUP>2</SUP>
    Ethylene oxide <SUP>1</SUP>
    Fluorosilicic acid
    Hydrogen peroxide solutions <SUP>1</SUP>
    Lactic acid <SUP>2</SUP>
    Long chain alkaryl sulfonic acid (C16-C60) <SUP>2</SUP>
    Magnesium chloride solution <SUP>1,2</SUP>
    Molasses residue <SUP>1</SUP>
    Motor fuel antiknock compounds containing Lead alkyls <SUP>1</SUP>
    Naphthalene sulfonic acid-formaldehyde copolymer, sodium salt 
solution <SUP>1</SUP>
    NIAX POLYOL APP 240C <SUP>1, 2</SUP>
    Nitrating acid <SUP>1</SUP>
    Nitric acid (greater than 70%) <SUP>1</SUP>
    o-Nitrophenol <SUP>1,2</SUP>
    Noxious Liquid Substance, n.o.s. (NLS's) <SUP>1</SUP>
    Oleum <SUP>1,2</SUP>
    Phosphorus <SUP>1</SUP>
    Phthalate based polyester polyol <SUP>2</SUP>
    SAP 7001 <SUP>1</SUP>
    Sodium chlorate solution <SUP>1,2</SUP>
    Sodium dichromate solution <SUP>1,2</SUP>
    Sodium hydrogen sulfide, Sodium carbonate solution <SUP>1,2</SUP>
    Sodium sulfide, Hydrosulfide solution <SUP>1,2</SUP>
    Sodium thiocyanate solution <SUP>1,2</SUP>
    Sulfur <SUP>1</SUP>
    Tall oil fatty acid, barium salt <SUP>2</SUP>
    Urea, Ammonium mono- and di-hydrogen phosphate, Potassium chloride 
solution

                     1. Non-Oxidizing Mineral Acids

    Di-(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid
    Ferric chloride solution
    Fluorosilicic acid
    Hydrochloric acid
    Phosphoric acid
    Polyaluminum chloride solution

                            2. Sulfuric Acids

    Sulfuric acid <SUP>2</SUP>
    Sulfuric acid, spent
    Titanium tetrachloride

                             3. Nitric Acid

    Ferric nitrate, Nitric acid solution
    Nitric acid (70% or less)

                            4. Organic Acids

    Acetic acid <SUP>2</SUP>
    Acrylic acid <SUP>2</SUP>
    Butyric acid
    Cashew nut shell oil (untreated)
    Citric acid
    Chloroacetic acid solution
    Chloropropionic acid
    Decanoic acid
    2,2-Dichloropropionic acid
    2,2-Dimethyloctanoic acid
    2-Ethylhexanoic acid
    Formic acid <SUP>2</SUP>
    Glycolic acid
    Glyoxylic acid
    n-Heptanoic acid
    Hexanoic acid
    2-Hydroxy-4-(methylthio)butanoic acid
    Methacrylic acid
    Naphthenic acid
    Neodecanoic acid
    Nonanoic acid
    Nonanoic, Tridecanoic acid mixture
    Octanoic acid
    n-Pentanoic acid, 2-Methyl butryic acid mixture
    Pentanoic acid
    Propionic acid
    Trimethylacetic acid
    Undecanoic acid

                               5. Caustics

    Ammonium sulfide solution

[[Page 44]]

    Calcium hypochlorite solutions
    Caustic potash solution <SUP>2</SUP>
    Caustic soda solution <SUP>2</SUP>
    Cresylate spent caustic
    Cresylic acid, sodium salt solution
    Kraft black liquor
    Kraft pulping liquors
    Mercaptobenzothiazol, sodium salt solution
    Potassium hydroxide solution <SUP>2</SUP>
    Sodium acetate, Glycol, Water mixture (containing Sodium hydroxide)
    Sodium aluminate solution
    Sodium borohydride, Sodium hydroxide solution
    Sodium carbonate solutions
    Sodium cyanide solution
    Sodium hydrosulfide solution <SUP>2</SUP>
    Sodium hydrosulfide, Ammonium sulfide solution <SUP>2</SUP>
    Sodium hydroxide solution <SUP>2</SUP>
    Sodium hypochlorite solution
    Sodium 2-mercaptobenzothiazol solution
    Sodium naphthenate solution
    Sodium nitrite solution
    Triphenylborane, Caustic soda solution
    Trisodium phosphate solution
    Vanillin black liquor

                               6. Ammonia

    Ammonia, anhydrous
    Ammonia, aqueous
    Ammonium hydroxide (28% or less Ammonia)
    Ammonium nitrate, Urea solution (containing Ammonia)
    Urea, Ammonium nitrate solution (containing Ammonia)

                           7. Aliphatic Amines

    N-Aminoethylpiperazine
    Butylamine
    Cyclohexylamine
    Dibutylamine
    Diethylamine <SUP>2</SUP>
    Diethylenetriamine <SUP>2</SUP>
    Diisobutylamine
    Diisopropylamine
    Dimethylamine
    Dimethylamine solution
    N,N-Dimethylcyclohexylamine
    N,N-Dimethyldodecylamine
    Di-n-propylamine
    Diphenylamine, reaction product with 2,2,4-Trimethylpentene
    Diphenylamines, alkylated
    Dodecylamine, Tetradecylamine mixture <SUP>2</SUP>
    Dodecyldimethylamine, Tetradecyldimethylamine mixture
    Ethylamine <SUP>2</SUP>
    Ethylamine solution
    Ethyleneamine EA 1302 <SUP>2</SUP>
    N-Ethyl-n-butylamine
    N-Ethyl cyclohexylamine
    Ethylenediamine <SUP>2</SUP>
    2-Ethyl hexylamine
    N-Ethylmethylallylamine
    Glyphosate solution (not containing surfactant)
    Hexamethylenediamine
    Hexamethylenediamine solution
    Hexamethylenetetramine
    Hexamethylenetetramine solutions
    Hexamethylenimine
    HiTec 321
    bis-(Hydrogenated tallow alkyl)methyl amines
    Isophorone diamine
    Long chain polyetheramine in alkyl(C2-C4)benzenes
    Metam sodium solution
    Methylamine solutions
    Morpholine <SUP>2</SUP>
    Oleylamine
    Pentaethylenehexamine
    Pentaethylenehexamine, Tetraethylenepentamine mixture
    Phosphate esters, alkyl (C12-C14) amine
    Polyethylene polyamines <SUP>2</SUP>
    Polyolefin amide alkeneamine (C28+)
    Polyisobutenamine in aliphatic (C10-C14) solvent
    Poly (C17+) olefin amine
    Polyolefin amide alkeneamine/Molybdenum oxysulfide mixture
    Propanil, Mesityl oxide, Isophorone mixture
    Propylamine
    iso-Propylamine solution
    Roundup
    Sulfohydrocarbon, long chain (C18+) alkylamine mixture
    Tetraethylenepentamine <SUP>2</SUP>
    Triethylamine
    Triethylenetetramine <SUP>2</SUP>
    Trimethylamine solution
    Trimethylhexamethylene diamine (2,2,4- and 2,4,4-)

                            8. Alkanolamines

    2-(2-Aminoethoxy)ethanol
    Aminoethyldiethanolamine, Aminoethylethanolamine solution
    Aminoethylethanolamine
    2-Amino-2-methyl-1-propanol
    Diethanolamine
    Diethylaminoethanol
    Diethylethanolamine
    Diisopropanolamine
    Dimethylethanolamine
    Ethanolamine
    Ethoxylated long chain (C16+) alkyloxyalkanamine
    Methyl diethanolamine
    Propanolamine
    Triethanolamine <SUP>2</SUP>
    Triisopropanolamine
    Ucarsol CR Solvent 302 SG

                           9. Aromatic Amines

    Alkyl (C8-C9) phenylamine in aromatic solvents

[[Page 45]]

    Aniline
    Calcium long chain alkyl phenolic amine (C8-C40)
    4-Chloro-2-methylphenoxyacetic acid, Dimethylamine salt solution
    Dialkyl (C8-C9) diphenylamines
    2,6-Diethylaniline
    Dimethylamine salt of 4-Chloro-2-methylphenoxyacetic acid solution
    2,6-Dimethylaniline
    Diphenylamine
    2-Ethyl-6-methyl-N-(1'-methyl-2-methoxyethyl)aniline
    2-Methyl-6-ethyl aniline
    2-Methyl-5-ethyl pyridine
    Methyl pyridine
    3-Methylpyridine
    N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone <SUP>2</SUP>
    Paraldehyde-Ammonia reaction product
    Pyridine
    Pyridine bases
    Toluenediamine
    p-Toluidine

                               10. Amides

    Acetochlor
    Acrylamide solution
    Alkenyl(C11+)amide
    N,N-Dimethylacetamide
    N,N-Dimethylacetamide solution
    Dimethylformamide
    Formamide
    N,N-bis(2-Hydroxyethyl) oleamide
    Octadecenoamide
    Zinc alkenyl carboxamide

                         11. Organic Anhydrides

    Acetic anhydride
    Alkenylsuccinic anhydride
    Maleic anhydride
    Phthalic anhydride
    Polyisobutenyl anhydride adduct
    Polyolefin anhydride
    Propionic anhydride

                             12. Isocyanates

    Diphenylmethane diisocyanate
    Hexamethylene diisocyanate
    Isophorone diisocyanate
    Polymethylene polyphenyl isocyanate
    Toluene diisocyanate
    Trimethylhexamethylene diisocyanate (2,2,4- and 2,4,4-)

                            13. Vinyl Acetate

    Vinyl acetate
    Vinyl ethyl ether
    Vinyl neodecanate
    Vinyl toluene

                              14. Acrylates

    Butyl acrylate
    Butyl methacrylate
    Butyl methacrylate, Decyl methacrylate, Cetyl-Eicosyl methacrylate 
mixture
    Cetyl-Eicosyl methacrylate mixture
    Decyl acrylate
    Dodecyl methacrylate
    Dodecyl-Octadecyl methacrylate mixture
    Dodecyl-Pentadecyl methacrylate mixture
    Ethyl acrylate
    2-Ethylhexyl acrylate
    Ethyl methacrylate
    2-Hydroxyethyl acrylate <SUP>2</SUP>
    Methacrylic resin in Ethylene dichloride
    Methyl acrylate
    Methyl methacrylate
    Nonyl methacrylate
    Polyalkyl(C18 - C22) acrylate in Xylene
    Polyalkyl (C10-C18) methacrylate/Ethylene
    Polyalkyl (C10-C20) methacrylate
    Propylene copolymer mixture
    Roehm monomer 6615

                         15. Substituted Allyls

    Acrylonitrile <SUP>2</SUP>
    Allyl alcohol <SUP>2</SUP>
    Allyl chloride
    1,3-Dichloropropene
    Dichloropropene, Dichloropropane mixtures
    Methacrylonitrile

                           16. Alkylene Oxides

    Butylene oxide
    Ethylene oxide, Propylene oxide mixtures
    Propylene oxide

                           17. Epichlorohydrin

    Chlorohydrins
    Epichlorohydrin

                               18. Ketones

    Acetone <SUP>2</SUP>
    Acetophenone
    Amyl methyl ketone
    Butyl heptyl ketone
    Camphor oil
    1-(4-Chlorophenyl)-4,4-dimethyl pentan-3-one <SUP>2</SUP>
    Cyclohexanone
    Cyclohexanone, Cyclohexanol mixtures <SUP>2</SUP>
    Diisobutyl ketone
    Ethyl amyl ketone
    Epoxy resin
    Ketone residue
    Isophorone <SUP>2</SUP>
    Mesityl oxide <SUP>2</SUP>
    Methyl amyl ketone
    Methyl butyl ketone
    Methyl butyl ketone
    Methyl ethyl ketone <SUP>2</SUP>
    Methyl heptyl ketone
    Methyl isoamyl ketone
    Methyl isobutyl ketone <SUP>2</SUP>
    Methyl propyl ketone
    Trifluralin in Xylene

                              19. Aldehydes

    Acetaldehyde
    Acrolein <SUP>2</SUP>
    Butyraldehyde

[[Page 46]]

    Crotonaldehyde <SUP>2</SUP>
    Decaldehyde
    Ethylhexaldehyde
    2-Ethyl-3-propylacrolein <SUP>2</SUP>
    Formaldehyde, Methanol mixtures <SUP>2</SUP>
    Formaldehyde solution <SUP>2</SUP>
    Furfural
    Glutaraldehyde solution
    Glyoxal solutions
    3-Methyl butyraldehyde
    Methylolureas
    3-(Methylthio)propionaldehyde
    Octyl aldehyde
    Paraldehyde
    Pentyl aldehyde
    Propionaldehyde
    Valeraldehyde

                          20. Alcohols, Glycols

    Acrylonitrile-Styrene copolymer dispersion in Polyether polyol
    Alcoholic beverages
    Alcohol polyethoxylates
    Alcohol polyethoxylates, secondary
    Alcohols (C13+)
    Amyl alcohol
    Behenyl alcohol
    Brake fluid base mixtures
    1,4-Butanediol
    Butyl alcohol <SUP>2</SUP>
    Butylene glycol <SUP>2</SUP>
    Cetyl-Stearyl alcohol
    Choline chloride solutions
    Cyclohexanol
    Decyl alcohol <SUP>2</SUP>
    Diacetone alcohol <SUP>2</SUP>
    Diethyl hexanol
    Diisobutyl carbinol
    2,2-Dimethylpropane-1,3-diol
    Dodecanol
    Dodecyl alcohol
    Ethoxylated alcohols, C11-C15
    2-Ethoxyethanol
    Ethyl alcohol <SUP>2</SUP>
    Ethyl butanol
    Ethylene chlorohydrin
    Ethylene cyanohydrin
    Ethylene glycol <SUP>2</SUP>
    2-Ethylhexanol
    Furfuryl alcohol <SUP>2</SUP>
    Glycerine <SUP>2</SUP>
    Glycerine, Dioxanedimethanol mixture
    Glycerol monooleate
    Heptanol
    Hexamethylene glycol
    Hexanol
    Hexylene glycol
    Hydroxy terminated polybutadiene
    Icosa(oxypropane-2,3-diyl)s
    Lauryl polyglucose (50% or less)
    3-Methoxy-1-butanol
    Methyl alcohol <SUP>2</SUP>
    Methyl amyl alcohol
    Methyl butenol
    Methylbutynol
    2-Methyl-2-hydroxy-3-butyne
    Methyl isobutyl carbinol
    3-Methyl-3-methoxybutanol
    2-Methyl-1,3-propanediol
    Molasses
    Nonyl alcohol <SUP>2</SUP>
    Octanol \2\
    Octyl alcohol <SUP>2</SUP>
    Penacosa(oxypropane-2,3-diyl)s
    Pentadecanol
    Polyalkylene oxide polyol
    Polybutadiene, hydroxy terminated
    Polyglycerol
    Polyglycerine, Sodium salts solution (containing less than 3% Sodium 
hydroxide) \2\
    Polyolefin amide alkeneamine polyol
    Propyl alcohol <SUP>2</SUP>
    Propylene glycol <SUP>2</SUP>
    Rum
    Sorbitol solutions
    Stearyl alcohol
    Tallow fatty alcohol
    Tetradecanol
    Tridecanol
    Trimethyl nonanol
    Trimethylol propane polyethoxylate
    Undecanol
    Undecyl alcohol

                          21. Phenols, Cresols

    Benzyl alcohol
    Carbolic oil
    Creosote <SUP>2</SUP>
    Cresols
    Cresylic acid
    Cresylic acid dephenolized
    Cresylic acid, tar
    Dibutylphenols
    2,4-Dichlorophenol
    Dodecyl phenol
    o-Ethylphenol
    Long chain alkylphenate/phenol sulfide mixture
    Nonyl phenol
    Octyl phenol
    Phenol
    Xylenols

                        22. Caprolactam Solutions

    Caprolactam solution

                            23-29. Unassigned

                               30. Olefins

    Amylene
    Aryl polyolefin (C11-C50)
    Butadiene
    Butadiene, Butylene mixtures (cont. Acetylenes)
    Butene
    Butene oligomer
    Butylene
    1,5,9-Cyclododecatriene
    1,3-Cyclopentadiene dimer
    Cyclopentadiene, Styrene, Benzene mixture
    Cyclopentene
    Decene

[[Page 47]]

    Dicyclopentadiene
    Diisobutylene
    Dipentene
    Dodecene
    Ethylene
    Ethylene-Propylene copolymer
    Ethylidene norbornene <SUP>2</SUP>
    1-Heptene
    Hexene
    Isoprene
    Isoprene concentrate (Shell)
    Latex (ammonia (1% or less) inhibited)
    Methyl acetylene, Propadiene mixture
    Methyl butene
    Methylcyclopentadiene dimer
    2-Methyl-1-pentene
    4-Methyl-1-pentene
    alpha-Methyl styrene
    Myrcene
    Nonene
    1-Octadecene
    Octene
    Olefin mixtures
    alpha-Olefins (C6 - C18) mixtures
    alpha-Olefins (C13+)
    1,3-Pentadiene
    Pentene
    alpha-Pinene
    beta-Pinene
    Polybutene
    Poly(4+)isobutylene
    Polyolefin (molecular weight 300+)
    Polypropylene
    Poly(5+)propylene
    Propylene
    Propylene-butylene copolymer
    Propylene dimer
    Propylene, Propane, MAPP gas mixture
    Propylene tetramer
    Propylene trimer
    Styrene
    Tetradecene
    Tridecene
    Triisobutylene
    Tripropylene
    Turpentine
    Undecene

                              31. Paraffins

    Alkanes (C6-C9)
    n-Alkanes (C10+)
    iso- & cyclo-Alkanes (C10-C11)
    iso- & cyclo-Alkanes (C12+)
    Butane
    Cycloheptane
    Cyclohexane
    Cyclopentane
    Decane
    Dodecane
    Ethane
    Ethyl cyclohexane
    Heptane
    Hexane <SUP>2</SUP>
    Methane
    Methylcyclohexane
    2-Methyl pentane
    Nonane
    Octane
    Pentane
    Propane
    iso-Propylcyclohexane
    Tridecane
    Waxes:
     Paraffin

                        32. Aromatic Hydrocarbons

    Alkyl(C3-C4)benzenes
    Alkyl(C5-C8)benzenes
    Alkyl(C9+)benzenes
    Alkyl acrylate-Vinyl pyridine copolymer in Toluene
    Alkylbenzene, Alkylindane, Alkylindene mixture (each C12-C17)
    Benzene
    Benzene hydrocarbon mixtures (having 10% Benzene or more)
    Benzene, Toluene, Xylene mixtures
    Butylbenzene
    Butyl phenol, Formaldehyde resin in Xylene
    Butyl toluene
    Cumene
    Cymene
    Decylbenzene
    Dialkyl(C10 - C14) benzenes
    Diethylbenzene
    Diisopropylbenzene
    Diisopropyl naphthalene
    Diphenyl
    Dodecylbenzene
    Dodecyl xylene
    Ethylbenzene
    Ethyl toluene
    1-Hexadecylnaphthalene, 1,4-bis(Hexadecyl)
    Isopropylbenzene
    Methyl naphthalene
    Naphthalene
    Naphthalene mixture
    Naphthalene still residue
    1-Phenyl-1-xylyl ethane
    Poly(2+)cyclic aromatics
    Polyolefin amine in alkylbenzenes (C2-C4)
    Propylbenzene
    Pseudocumene
    C9 Resinfeed (DSM) <SUP>2</SUP>
    Tetradecylbenzene
    Tetrahydronaphthalene
    1,2,3,5-Tetramethylbenzene
    Toluene
    Tridecylbenzene
    Triethylbenzene
    Trimethylbenzene
    Undecylbenzene
    Xylene
    Xylenes, Ethylbenzene mixture

                 33. Miscellaneous Hydrocarbon Mixtures

    Alachlor
    Alkylbenzenesulfonic acid, sodium salt solutions
    Alkyl dithiothiadiazole (C6-C24)
    Asphalt blending stocks, roofers flux
    Asphalt blending stocks, straight run residue

[[Page 48]]

    Asphalt emulsion
    Aviation alkylates
    Calcuim sulfonate, Calcium carbonate, Hydrocarbon solvent mixture
    Coal tar
    Coal tar distillate
    Coal tar, high temperature
    Coal tar pitch
    Decahydronaphthalene
    Degummed C9 (DOW)
    Diphenyl, Diphenyl ether
    Distillates, flashed feed stocks
    Distillates, straight run
    Drilling mud (low toxicity) (if flammable or combustible)
    Gas oil, cracked
    Gasoline blending stock, alkylates
    Gasoline blending stock, reformates
    Gasolines:
     Automotive (not over 4.23 grams lead per gal.)
     Aviation (not over 4.86 grams lead per gal.)
     Casinghead (natural)
     Polymer
     Straight run
    Jet Fuels:
     JP-4
     JP-5
     JP-8
    Kerosene
    Mineral spirits
    Naphtha:
     Coal tar solvent
     Petroleum
     Solvent
     Stoddard solvent
     Varnish Makers' and Painters'
    Oil, fuel:
     No. 1
     No. 1-D
     No. 2
     No. 2-D
     No. 4
     No. 5
     No. 6
    Oil, misc:
     Aliphatic
     Aromatic
     Clarified
     Coal
     Crude
     Diesel
     Gas, high pour
     Heartcut distillate
     Linseed
     Lubricating
     Mineral
     Mineral seal
     Motor
     Neatsfoot
     Penetrating
     Pine
     Rosin
     Sperm
     Spindle
     Turbine
     Residual
     Road
     Transformer
    Oxyalkylated alkyl phenol formaldehyde
    Petrolatum
    Pine oil
    Polyolefin amine (C28-C250)
    Polyolefin amide alkeneamine (C17+)
    Polyolefin amide alkeneamine borate (C28-C250)
    Sodium petroleum sulfonate
    Sulfohydrocarbon (C3-C88)
    Waxes:
     Petroleum
    Sulfurized fat (C14-C20)
    Sulfurized polyolefinamide alkeneamines (C28-C250)
    White spirit (low (15-20%) aromatic)

                               34. Esters

    Alkane (C14-C17) sulfonic acid, sodium salt solution
    Alkyl(C8+)amine, Alkenyl (C12+) acid ester mixture
    Alkyl ester copolymer (C6-C18)
    Alkyl(C7-C9) nitrates \2\
    Alkyl (C8-C40) phenol sulfide
    Alkyl (C10-C20, saturated and unsaturated) phosphite
    Alkyl sulfonic acid ester of phenol
    Alkylaryl phosphate mixtures (more than 40%
    Amyl acetate
    Animal and Fish oils, n.o.s.
    Animal and Fish acid oils and distillates, n.o.s.
    Barium long chain alkaryl (C11-C50) sulfonate
    Barium long chain alkyl(C8-C14)phenate sulfide
    Benzene tricarboxylic acid trioctyl ester
    Benzyl acetate
    Butyl acetate
    Butyl benzyl phthalate
    n-Butyl butyrate
    Butyl formate
    iso-Butyl isobutyrate
    n-Butyl propionate
    Calcium alkyl(C9)phenol sulfide, polyolefin phosphorosulfide mixture
    Calcium long chain alkaryl sulfonate (C11-C50)
    Calcium long chain alkyl phenate sulfide (C8-C40)
    Calcium long chain alkyl phenates
    Calcium long chain alkyl salicylate (C13+)
    Calcium nitrate, Magnesium nitrate, Potassium chloride solution
    Calcium nitrate solution
    Cobalt naphthenate in solvent naphtha
    Coconut oil, fatty acid
    Copper salt of long chain alkanoic acids
    Cottonseed oil, fatty acid
    Cyclohexyl acetate
    Decyl acetate
    Dialkyl(C7 - C13) phthalates
    Dibutyl hydrogen phosphonate
    Dibutyl phthalate

[[Page 49]]

    Diethylene glycol butyl ether acetate
    Diethylene glycol dibenzoate
    Diethylene glycol ethyl ether acetate
    Diethylene glycol methyl ether acetate
    Diethylene glycol phthalate
    Di-(2-ethylhexyl)adipate
    Di-(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate
    Diethyl phthalate
    Diethyl sulfate
    Diheptyl phthalate
    Dihexyl phthalate
    Di-n-hexyl adipate
    Diisobutyl phthalate
    Diisodecyl phthalate
    Diisononyl adipate
    Diisononyl phthalate
    Diisooctyl phthalate
    Dimethyl adipate
    Dimethylcyclicsiloxane hydrolyzate
    Dimethyl glutarate
    Dimethyl hydrogen phosphite <SUP>2</SUP>
    Dimethyl naphthalene sulfonic acid, sodium salt solution 
<SUP>2</SUP>
    Dimethyl phthalate
    Dimethyl polysiloxane
    Dimethyl succinate
    Dinonyl phthalate
    Dioctyl phthalate
    Diphenyl tolyl phosphate, less than 0.02% ortho-isomer)
    Dipropylene glycol dibenzoate
    Dithiocarbamate ester (C7-C35)
    Ditridecyl adipate
    Ditridecyl phthalate
    2-Dodecenylsuccinic acid, dipotassium salt solution
    Diundecyl phthalate
    2-Ethoxyethyl acetate
    Ethyl acetate
    Ethyl acetoacetate
    Ethyl butyrate
    Ethylene carbonate
    Ethylene glycol acetate
    Ethylene glycol butyl ether acetate
    Ethylene glycol diacetate
    Ethylene glycol ethyl ether acetate
    Ethylene glycol methyl ether acetate
    Ethyl-3-ethoxypropionate
    Ethyl hexyl phthalate
    Ethyl propionate
    Ethyl propionate
    Fatty acids (saturated, C14+)
    Glycerol polyalkoxylate
    Glyceryl triacetate
    Glycidyl ester of C10 trialkyl acetic acid
    Gylcidyl ester of tridecylacetic acid
    Heptyl acetate
    Hexyl acetate
    Lauric acid
    Lecithin
    Magnesium long chain alkaryl sulfonate (C11-C50)
    Magnesium long chain alkyl phenate sulfide (C8-C20)
    Magnesium long chain alkyl salicylate (C11+)
    3-Methoxybutyl acetate
    1-Methoxy-2-propyl acetate
    Methyl acetate
    Methyl acetoacetate
    Methyl amyl acetate
    Methyl butyrate
    Methyl formate
    3-Methyl-3-methoxybutyl acetate
    Methyl salicylate
    Metolachlor
    Naphthalene sulfonic acid, sodium salt solution (40% or less)
    Nonyl acetate
    n-Octyl acetate
    Octyl decyl adipate
    Oil, edible:
     Beechnut
     Castor
     Cocoa butter
     Coconut <SUP>2</SUP>
     Cod liver
     Corn
     Cotton seed
     Fish <SUP>2</SUP>
     Groundnut
     Hazelnut
     Lard
     Lanolin
     Nutmeg butter
     Olive
     Palm <SUP>2</SUP>
     Palm kernel
     Peanut
     Poppy
     Poppy seed
     Raisin seed
     Rapeseed
     Rice bran
     Safflower
     Salad
     Sesame
     Soya bean
     Sunflower
     Sunflower seed
     Tucum
     Vegetable
     Walnut
    Oil, misc:
     Animal
     Coconut oil, fatty actid methyl ester
     Cotton seed oil, fatty acid
     Lanolin
     Palm kernel oil, fatty acid methyl ester
     Palm oil, methyl ester
     Pilchard
     Perilla
     Soapstock
     Soyabean (epoxidized)
     Tall
     Tall, fatty acid <SUP>2</SUP>
     Tung
    Olefin/Alkyl ester copolymer (molecular weight 2000+)
    Oleic acid
    Palm kernel acid oil
    Palm kernel acid oil, methyl ester
    Palm stearin
    n-Pentyl propionate

[[Page 50]]

    Poly(2-8)alkylene glycol monoalkyl(C1-C6) ether acetate
    Polydimethylsiloxane
    Polyferric sulfate solution
    Polymethylsiloxane
    Poly(20)oxyethylene sorbitan monooleate
    Polysiloxane
    Polyolefin aminoester salt
    Polyolefin ester (C28-C250)
    Polyolefin phosphorosulfide, barium derivative (C28-C250)
    Potassium formate solution
    Potassium oleate
    Potassium salt of polyolefin acid
    Propyl acetate
    Propylene carbonate
    Propylene glycol methyl ether acetate
    Sodium acetate, Glycol, Water mixture (not containing Sodium 
hydroxide) \2\
    Sodium acetate solution
    Sodium benzoate solution
    Sodium dimethyl naphthalene sulfonate solution <SUP>2</SUP>
    Sodium long chain alkyl salicylate (C13+)
    Sodium naphthalene sulfonate solution
    Soyabean oil (epoxidized)
    Stearic acid
    Tall oil
    Tall oil fatty acid (Resin acids less than 20%) <SUP>2</SUP>
    Tallow <SUP>2</SUP>
    Tallow fatty acid <SUP>2</SUP>
    Tributyl phosphate
    Tricresyl phosphate
    Tridecanoic acid
    Tridecyl acetate
    Triethylene glycol dibenzoate
    Triethylene glycol di-(2-ethylbutyrate)
    Triethyl phosphate
    Triethyl phosphite <SUP>2</SUP>
    Triisooctyl trimellitate <SUP>2</SUP>
    Triisopropylated phenyl phosphates
    2,2,4-Trimethyl-1,3-pentanediol diisobutyrate
    2,2,4-Trimethyl-1,3-pentanediol-1-isobutyrate
    2,2,4-Trimethyl-3-pentanol-1-isobutyrate
    Trimethyl phosphite <SUP>2</SUP>
    Trisodium nitrilotriacetate
    Trixylyl phosphate
    Trixylenyl phosphate
    Vegetable acid oils and distillates, n.o.s.
    Vegetable oils, n.o.s.
    Waxes:
     Carnauba
    Zinc alkaryl dithiophosphate (C7-C16)
    Zinc alkyl dithiophosphate (C3-C14)

                            35. Vinyl Halides

    Vinyl chloride
    Vinylidene chloride

                      36. Halogenated Hydrocarbons

    Benzyl chloride
    Bromochloromethane
    Carbon tetrachloride <SUP>2</SUP>
    Catoxid feedstock <SUP>2</SUP>
    Chlorinated paraffins (C10 - C13)
    Chlorinated paraffins (C14 - C17)
    Chlorobenzene
    Chlorodifluoromethane
    Chloroform
    Chlorotoluene
    Dibromomethane
    Dibutylphenols
    3,4-Dichloro-1-butene
    Dichlorobenzene
    Dichlorodifluoromethane
    1,1-Dichloroethane
    1,6-Dichlorohexane
    2,2'-Dichloroisopropyl ether
    Dichloromethane
    Dichloropropane
    Ethyl chloride
    Ethylene dibromide
    Ethylene dichloride <SUP>2</SUP>
    Methyl bromide
    Methyl chloride
    Monochlorodifluoromethane
    n-Propyl chloride
    Pentachloroethane
    Perchloroethylene
    1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane
    1,2,3-Trichlorobenzene
    1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene
    1,1,1-Trichloroethane <SUP>2</SUP>
    1,1,2-Trichloroethane
    Trichloroethylene <SUP>2</SUP>
    1,2,3-Trichloropropane
    1,1,2-Trichloro-1,2,2-trifluoroethane

                              37. Nitriles

    Acetonitrile
    Adiponitrile
    Lactonitrile solution
    Propionitrile
    Tallow nitrile

                          38. Carbon Disulfide

    Carbon disulfide

                              39. Sulfolane

    Sulfolane

                            40. Glycol Ethers

    Alkyl (C7-C11) phenol poly(4-12)ethoxylate
    Alkyl (C9-C15) phenyl propoxylate
    Diethylene glycol \2\
    Diethylene glycol butyl ether
    Diethylene glycol dibutyl ether
    Diethylene glycol diethyl ether
    Diethylene glycol ethyl ether
    Diethylene glycol methyl ether
    Diethylene glycol n-hexyl ether
    Diethylene glycol phenyl ether
    Diethylene glycol propyl ether
    Dipropylene glycol
    Dipropylene glycol butyl ether
    Dipropylene glycol methyl ether
    Ethoxy triglycol
    Ethylene glycol hexyl ether
    Ethylene glycol methyl butyl ether

[[Page 51]]

    Ethylene glycol monoalkyl ethers
    Ethylene glycol tert-butyl ether
    Ethylene glycol butyl ether
    Ethylene glycol dibutyl ether
    Ethylene glycol ethyl ether
    Ethylene glycol isopropyl ether
    Ethylene glycol methyl ether
    Ethylene glycol phenyl ether
    Ethylene glycol phenyl ether, Diethylene glycol phenyl ether mixture
    Ethylene glycol propyl ether
    Hexaethylene glycol
    Methoxy triglycol
    Nonyl phenol poly(4+)ethoxylates
    Pentaethylene glycol methyl ether
    Polyalkylene glycol butyl ether
    Polyalkylene glycols, Polyalkylene glycol monoalkyl ethers mixtures
    Polyethylene glycols
    Polyethylene glycol dimethyl ether
    Poly(2-8)alkylene glycol monoalkyl(C1-C6) ether
    Polyethylene glycol monoalkyl ether
    Polypropylene glycol methyl ether
    Polypropylene glycols
    Poly(tetramethylene ether) glycols (mw 950-1050)
    Polytetramethylene ether glycol
    n-Propoxypropanol
    Propylene glycol monoalkyl ether
    Propylene glycol ethyl ether
    Propylene glycol methyl ether
    Propylene glycol n-butyl ether
    Propylene glycol phenyl ether
    Propylene glycol propyl ether
    Tetraethylene glycol
    Tetraethylene glycol methyl ether
    Triethylene glycol
    Triethylene glycol butyl ether
    Triethylene glycol butyl ether mixture
    Triethylene glycol ether mixture
    Triethylene glycol ethyl ether
    Triethylene glycol methyl ether
    Tripropylene glycol
    Tripropylene glycol methyl ether

                               41. Ethers

    Alkaryl polyether (C9-C20)
    tert-Amyl methyl ether
    Butyl ether
    2,2'-Dichloroethyl ether
    Diethyl ether
    Diglycidyl ether of Bisphenol A
    Diglycidyl ether of Bisphenol F
    Dimethyl furan
    1,4-Dioxane
    Diphenyl ether
    Diphenyl ether, Diphenyl phenyl ether mixture
    Ethyl tert-butyl ether <SUP>2</SUP>
    Ethyl ether
    Long chain alkaryl polyether (C11-C20)
    Methyl-tert-butyl ether <SUP>2</SUP>
    Methyl tert-pentyl ether
    Propyl ether
    Tetrahydrofuran
    1,3, 5-Trioxane
    Polyether (molecular weight 2000+)

                           42. Nitrocompounds

    o-Chloronitrobenzene
    Dinitrotoluene
    Nitrobenzene
    Nitroethane
    Nitroethane, 1-Nitropropane mixture
    Nitropropane
    Nitropropane, Nitroethane mixtures
    Nitrotoluene

                    43. Miscellaneous Water Solutions

    Alkyl polyglucoside solutions
    Aluminum sulfate solution <SUP>2</SUP>
    2-Amino-2-hydroxymethyl-1,3-propanediol solution
    Ammonium bisulfite solution <SUP>2</SUP>
    Ammonium lignosulfonate solution
    Ammonium nitrate, Urea solution (not containing Ammonia)
    Ammonium polyphosphate solution
    Ammonium sulfate solution
    Ammonium thiosulfate solution
    Sulfonated polyacrylate solutions \2\
    Calcium bromide solution
    Calcium chloride solution
    Calcium lignosulfonate solution
    Caramel solutions
    Clay slurry
    Corn syrup
    Dextrose solution
    2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid, Diethanolamine salt solution
    2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid, Triisopropanolamine salt solution 
<SUP>2</SUP>
    Diethanolamine salt of 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid solution
    Diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid, pentasodium salt solution
    Dodecyl diphenyl ether disulfonate solution
    Drilling brine (containing Calcium, Potassium, or Sodium salts)
    Drilling brine (containing Zinc salts)
    Drilling mud (low toxicity) (if non-flammable or non-combustible)
    Ethylenediaminetetracetic acid, tetrasodium salt solution
    Ethylene-Vinyl acetate copolymer emulsion
    Ferric hydroxyethylethylenediamine triacetic acid, trisodium salt 
solution <SUP>2</SUP>
    Fish solubles (water based fish meal extracts)
    Fructose solution
    Fumaric adduct of Rosin, water dispersion
    Hexamethylenediamine adipate solution
    N-(Hydroxyethyl)ethylene diamine triacetic acid, trisodium salt 
solution
    Kaolin clay slurry
    Latex, liquid synthetic
    Lignin liquor
    Liquid Streptomyces solubles
    l-Lysine solution
    N-Methylglucamine solution
    Naphthenic acid, sodium salt solution

[[Page 52]]

    Potassium chloride solution
    Potassium thiosulfate solution
    Rosin soap (disproportionated) solution
    Sewage sludge, treated
    Sodium alkyl sulfonate solution
    Sodium hydrogen sulfite solution
    Sodium lignosulfonate solution
    Sodium polyacrylate solution <SUP>2</SUP>
    Sodium salt of Ferric hydroxyethylethylenediamine triacetic acid 
solution
    Sodium silicate solution <SUP>2</SUP>
    Sodium sulfide solution
    Sodium sulfite solution
    Sodium tartrates, Sodium succinates solution
    Sulfonated polyacrylate solutions <SUP>2</SUP>
    Tall oil soap (disproportionated) solution
    Tetrasodium salt of EDTA solution
    Titanium dioxide slurry
    Triisopropanolamine salt of 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid solution
    Urea, Ammonium nitrate solution (not containing Ammonia)
    Urea, Ammonium phosphate solution
    Urea solution
    Vegetable protein solution (hydrolysed)
    Water

                          Footnotes to Table II

    \1\ Because of very high reactivity or unusual conditions of 
carriage or potential compatibility problems, this product is not 
assigned to a specific group in the Compatibility Chart. For additional 
compatibility information, contact Commandant (G-MSO), U.S. Coast Guard, 
2100 Second Street, SW., Washington, DC 20593-0001. Telephone (202) 267-
1577.
    \2\ See Appendix I--Exceptions to the Chart.

[CGD 88-100, 54 FR 40012, Sept. 29, 1989, as amended by CGD 88-100, 55 
FR 17276, Apr. 24, 1990; CGD 92-100, 59 FR 17025, Apr. 11, 1994; CGD 94-
902, 60 FR 34043, June 29, 1995; CGD 95-900, 60 FR 34049, 34050, June 
29, 19955; CGD 96-041, 61 FR 50731, Sept. 27, 1996; USCG 2000-7079, 65 
FR 67182, Nov. 8, 2000]

             Appendix I to Part 150--Exceptions to the Chart

    (a). The binary combinations listed below have been tested as 
prescribed in Appendix III and found not to be dangerously reactive. 
These combinations are exceptions to the Compatibility Chart (Figure 1) 
and may be stowed in adjacent tanks.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Member of reactive group                  Compatible with
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Acetone (18)..............................  Diethylenetriamine (7)
 
Acetone cyanohydrin (0)...................  Acetic acid (4)
 
Acrylonitrile (15)........................  Triethanolamine (8)
 
1,3-Butylene glycol (20)..................  Morpholine (7)
 
1,4-Butylene glycol (20)..................  Ethylamine (7)
                                            Triethanolamine (8)
 
gamma-Butyrolactone (0)...................  N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (9)
 
Caustic potash, 50% or less (5)...........  Isobutyl alcohol (20)
                                            Ethyl alcohol (20)
                                            Ethylene glycol (20)
                                            Isopropyl alcohol (20)
                                            Methyl alcohol (20)
                                            iso-Octyl alcohol (20)
 
Caustic soda, 50% or less (5).............  Butyl alcohol (20)
                                            tert-Butyl alcohol, Methanol
                                             mixtures
                                            Decyl alcohol (20)
                                            iso-Decyl alcohol (20)
                                            Diacetone alcohol (20)
                                            Diethylene glycol (40)
                                            Dodecyl alcohol (20)
                                            Ethyl alcohol (20)
                                            Ethyl alcohol (40%, whiskey)
                                             (20)
                                            Ethylene glycol (20)
                                            Ethylene glycol, Diethylene
                                             glycol mixture (20)
                                            Ethyl hexanol (Octyl
                                             alcohol) (20)
                                            Methyl alcohol (20)
                                            Nonyl alcohol (20)
                                            iso-Nonyl alcohol (20)
                                            Propyl alcohol (20)
                                            iso-Propyl alcohol (20)
                                            Propylene glycol (20)
                                            Sodium chlorate solution (0)
                                            iso-Tridecanol (20)
 
tert-Dodecanethiol (0)....................  Acrylonitrile (15)
                                            Diisodecyl phthalate (34)
                                            Methyl ethyl ketone (18)
                                            iso-Nonyl alcohol (20)
                                            Perchloroethylene (36)
                                            iso-Propyl alcohol (20)
                                            Tall oil, crude
Dodecyl and Tetradecylamine mixture (7)...  Tall oil, fatty acid (34)
 
Ethylenediamine (7).......................  Butyl alcohol (20)
                                            tert-Butyl alcohol (20)
                                            Butylene glycol (20)
                                            Creosote (21)
                                            Diethylene glycol (40)
                                            Ethyl alcohol (20)
                                            Ethylene glycol (20)
                                            Ethyl hexanol (20)
                                            Glycerine (20)
                                            Isononyl alcohol (20)
                                            Isophorone (18)
                                            Methyl butyl ketone (18)
                                            Methyl iso-butyl ketone (18)
                                            Methyl ethyl ketone (18)
                                            Propyl alcohol (20)
                                            Propylene glycol (20)
 
Oleum (0).................................  Hexane (31)
                                            Dichloromethane (36)
                                            Perchloroethylene (36)
 
1,2-Propylene glycol (20).................  Diethylenetriamine (7)
                                            Polyethylene polyamines (7)
                                            Triethylenetetramine (7)
 
Sodium dichromate, 70% (0)................  Methyl alcohol (20)
 
Sodium hydrosulfide solution (5)..........  Methyl alcohol (20)
                                            Iso-Propyl alcohol (20)
 
Sulfuric acid (2).........................  Coconut oil (34)
                                            Coconut oil acid (34)
                                            Palm oil (34)
                                            Tallow (34)
 

[[Page 53]]

 
Sulfuric acid, 98% or less (2)............  Choice white grease tallow
                                             (34)
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b). The binary combinations listed below have been determined to be 
dangerously reactive, based on either data obtained in the literature or 
on laboratory testing which has been carried out in accordance with 
procedures prescribed in Appendix III. These combinations are exceptions 
to the Compatibility Chart (Figure 1) and may not be stowed in adjacent 
tanks.

Acetone cyanohydrin (0) is not compatible with Groups 1-12, 16, 17 and 
22.

Acrolein (19) is not compatible with Group 1, Non-Oxidizing Mineral 
Acids.

Acrylic acid (4) is not compatible with Group 9, Aromatic Amines.
Acrylonitrile (15) is not compatible with Group 5 (Caustics).

Alkylbenzenesulfonic acid (0) is not compatible with Groups 1-3, 5-9, 
15, 16, 18, 19, 30, 34, 37, and strong oxidizers.

Allyl alcohol (15) is not compatible with Group 12, Isocyanates.

Alkyl(C7-C9) nitrates (34) is not compatible with Group 1, Non-oxidizing 
Mineral Acids.

Aluminum sulfate solution (43) is not compatible with Groups 5-11.

Ammonium bisulfite solution (43) is not compatible with Groups 1, 3, 4, 
and 5.

Benzenesulfonyl chloride (0) is not compatible with Groups 5-7, and 43.

1,4-Butylene glycol (20) is not compatible with Caustic soda solution, 
50% or less (5).
gamma-Butyrolactone (0) is not compatible with Groups 1-9.

C9 Resinfeed (DSM) (32) is not compatible with Group 2, Sulfuric acid.

Carbon tetrachloride (36) is not compatible with Tetraethylenepentamine 
or Triethylenetetramine, both Group 7, Aliphatic amines.

Catoxid feedstock (36) is not compatible with Group 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 
12.

Caustic soda solution, 50% or less (5) is not compatible with 1,4-
Butylene glycol (20).

1-(4-Chlorophenyl)-4,4-dimethyl pentan-3-one (18) is not compatible with 
Group 5 (Caustics) or 10 (Amides).

Crotonaldehyde (19) is not compatible with Group 1, Non-Oxidizing 
Mineral Acids.

Cyclohexanone, Cyclohexanol mixture (18) is not compatible with Group 
12, Isocyanates.

2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid, Triisopropanolamine salt solution (43) 
is not compatible with Group 3, Nitric Acid.

2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid, Dimethylamine salt solution (0) is not 
compatible with Groups 1-5, 11, 12, and 16.

Diethylenetriamine (7) is not compatible with 1,2,3-Trichloropropane, 
Group 36, Halogenated hydrocarbons.

Dimethyl hydrogen phosphite (34) is not compatible with Groups 1 and 4.

Dimethyl naphthalene sulfonic acid, sodium salt solution (34) is not 
compatible with Group 12, Formaldehyde, and strong oxidizing agents.
Dodecylbenzenesulfonic acid (0) is not compatible with oxidizing agents 
and Groups 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 15, 16, 18, 19, 30, 34, and 37.

Ethylenediamine (7) and Ethyleneamine EA 1302 (7) are not compatible 
with either Ethylene dichloride (36) or 1,2,3-Trichloropropane (36).

Ethylene dichloride (36) is not compatible with Ethylenediamine (7) or 
Ethyleneamine EA 1302 (7).

Ethylidene norbornene (30) is not compatible with Groups 1-3 and 5-8.

2-Ethyl-3-propylacrolein (19) is not compatible with Group 1, Non-
Oxidizing Mineral Acids.

Ethyl tert-butyl ether (41) is not compatible with Group 1, Non-
oxidizing mineral acids.

Ferric hydroxyethylethylenediamine triacetic acid, Sodium salt solution 
(43) is not compatible with Group 3, Nitric acid.
Fish oil (34) is not compatible with Sulfuric acid (2).

Formaldehyde (over 50%) in Methyl alcohol (over 30%) (19) is not 
compatible with Group 12, Isocyanates.

Formic acid (4) is not compatible with Furfural alcohol (20).

Furfuryl alcohol (20) is not compatible with Group 1, Non-Oxidizing 
Mineral Acids and Formic acid (4).

2-Hydroxyethyl acrylate (14) is not compatible with Group 5, 6, or 12..

Isophorone (18) is not compatible with Group 8, Alkanolamines.

Magnesium chloride solution (0) is not compatible with Groups 2, 3, 5, 6 
and 12.

Mesityl oxide (18) is not compatible with Group 8, Alkanolamines.

Methacrylonitrile (15) is not compatible with Group 5 (Caustics).

Methyl tert-butyl ether (41) is not compatible with Group 1, Non-
oxidizing Mineral Acids.

NIAX POLYOL APP 240C (0) is not compatible with Group 2, 3, 5, 7, or 12.

o-Nitrophenol (0) is not compatible with Groups 2, 3, and 5-10.

Octyl nitrates (all isomers), see Alkyl(C7-C9) nitrates.

Oleum (0) is not compatible with Sulfuric acid (2) and 1,1,1-
Trichloroethane (36).


[[Page 54]]


Phthalate based polyester polyol (0) is not compatible with group 2, 3, 
5, 7 and 12.

Polyglycerine, Sodium salts solution (20) is not compatible with Groups 
1, 4, 11, 16, 17, 19, 21 and 22.

Propylene, Propane, MAPP gas mixture (containing 12% or less MAPP gas) 
(30) is not compatible with Group 1 (Non-oxidizing mineral acids), Group 
36 (Halogenated hydrocarbons), nitrogen dioxide, oxidizing materials, or 
molten sulfur.

Sodium acetate, Glycol, Water mixture (1% or less Sodium hydroxide) (34) 
is not compatible with Group 12 (Isocyanates).

Sodium chlorate solution (50% or less) (0) is not compatible with Groups 
1-3, 5, 7, 8, 10, 12, 13, 17 and 20.

Sodium dichromate solution (70% or less) (0) is not compatible with 
Groups 1-3, 5, 7, 8, 10, 12, 13, 17 and 20.

Sodium dimethyl naphthalene sulfonate solution (34) is not compatible 
with Group 12, Formaldehyde and strong oxidizing agents.

Sodium hydrogen sulfide, Sodium carbonate solution (0) is not compatible 
with Groups 6 (Ammonia) and 7 (Aliphatic amines).

Sodium hydrosulfide (5) is not compatible with Groups 6 (Ammonia) and 7 
(Aliphatic amines).

Sodium hydrosulfide, Ammonium sulfide solution (5) is not compatible 
with Groups 6 (Ammonia) and 7 (Aliphatic amines).

Sodium polyacrylate solution (43) is not compatible with Group 3, Nitric 
Acid.

Sodium silicate solution (43) is not compatible with Group 3, Nitric 
Acid.

Sodium sulfide, hydrosulfide solution (0) is not compatible with Groups 
6 (Ammonia) and 7 (Aliphatic amines).

Sodium thiocyanate (56% or less) (0) is not compatible with Groups 1-4.

Sulfonated polyacrylate solution (43) is not compatible with Group 5 
(Caustics).

Sulfuric acid (2) is not compatible with Fish oil (34), or Oleum (0).

Tall oil fatty acid (Resin acids less than 20%) (34) is not compatible 
with Group 5, Caustics.

Tallow fatty acid (34) is not compatible with Group 5, Caustics.

Tetraethylenepentamine (7) is not compatible with Carbon tetrachloride, 
Group 36, Halogenated hydrocarbons.

1,2,3-Trichloropropane (36) is not compatible with Diethylenetriamine, 
Ethylenediamine, Ethyleaneamine EA 1302, or Triethylenetetramine, all 
Group 7, Aliphatic amines.

1,1,1-Trichloroethane (36) is not compatible with Oleum (0).

Trichloroethylene (36) is not compatible with Group 5, Caustics.

Triethylenetetramine (7) is not compatible with Carbon tetrachloride, or 
1,2,3-Trichloropropane, both Group 36, Halogenated hydrocarbons.

Triethyl phosphite (34) is not compatible with Groups 1, and 4.

Trimethyl phosphite (34) is not compatible with Groups 1 and 4.

1,3,5-Trioxane (41) is not compatible with Group 1 (non-oxidizing 
mineral acids) and Group 4 (Organic acids).

[CGD 88-100, 54 FR 40012, Sept. 29, 1989 as amended by CGD 88-100, 55 FR 
17277, Apr. 24, 1990; CDG 92-100, 59 FR 17026, Apr. 11, 1994; CGD 94-
902, 60 FR 34043, June 29, 1995; CGD 95-900, 60 FR 34050, June 29, 1995; 
USCG 2000-7079, 65 FR 67182, Nov. 8, 2000]

            Appendix II to Part 150--Explanation of Figure 1

    Definition of a hazardous reaction-- As a first approximation, a 
mixture of two cargoes is considered hazardous when, under specified 
condition, the temperature rise of the mixture exceeds 25 <deg>C or a 
gas is evolved. It is possible for the reaction of two cargoes to 
produce a product that is significantly more flammable or toxic than the 
original cargoes even though the reaction is non-hazardous from 
temperature or pressure considerations, although no examples of such a 
reaction are known at this time.
    Chart format-- There are different degrees of reactivity among the 
various cargoes. Many of them are relatively non-reactive: For example, 
aromatic hydrocarbons or paraffins. Others will form hazardous 
combinations with many groups: For example, the inorganic acids.
    The cargo groups in the compatibility chart are separated into two 
categories: 1 through 22 are ``Reactive Groups'' and 30 through 43 are 
``Cargo Groups''. Left unassigned and available for future expansion are 
groups 23 through 29 and those past 43. Reactive Groups contain products 
which are chemically the most reactive; dangerous combinations may 
result between members of different Reactive Groups and between members 
of Reactive Groups and Cargo Groups. Products assigned to Cargo Groups, 
however, are much less reactive; dangerous combinations involving these 
can be formed only with members of certain Reactive Groups. Cargo Groups 
do not react hazardously with one another.
    Using the Compatibility Chart-- The following procedure explains how 
the compatibility chart should be used to find compatibility infomation:
    (1) Determine the group numbers of the two cargoes by referring to 
the alphabetical listing of cargoes and the corresponding groups (Table 
I). Many cargoes are listed under their parent names; unless otherwise

[[Page 55]]

indicated, isomers or mixtures of isomers of a particular cargo are 
assigned to the same group. For example, to find the group number for 
Isobutyl Alcohol, look under the parent name Butyl Alcohol. Similarly, 
the group number for para-Xylene is found under the entry Xylene. If a 
cargo cannot be found in this listing, contact the Coast Guard for a 
group determination (see Sec. 150.140).
    (2) If both group numbers are between 30 and 43 inclusive, the 
products are compatible and the chart need not be used.
    (3) If both group numbers do not fall between 30 and 43 inclusive, 
locate one of the numbers on the left of the chart (Cargo Groups) and 
the other across the top (Reactive Groups). (Note that if a group number 
is between 30 and 43, it can only be found on the left side of the 
chart.) The box formed by the intersection of the column and row 
containing the two numbers will contain one of the following:
    (a) Blank--The two cargoes are compatible.
    (b) ``X''--The two cargoes are not compatible.

(Note that reactivity may vary among the group members. Refer to Table I 
or Table II to find whether the products in question are referenced by a 
footnote which indicates that exceptions exist and are listed in 
Appendix I. Unless the combination is specifically mentioned in Appendix 
I, it is compatible.)

[CGD 75-59, 45 FR 70263, Oct. 23, 1980, as amended by CGD 83-047, 50 FR 
33046, Aug. 16, 1985]

                                Examples
------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Combination                Groups        Compatible
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Butyraldehyde/Acetic Acid...............    19/4  Yes.
Allyl Alcohol/Toluene Diisocyanate......   15/12  No.
Decene/Ethyl Benzene....................   30/32  Yes.
Ethanolamine/Acetone....................    8/18  Yes.
Ammonia/Dimethylformamide...............    6/10  No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Appendix III to Part 150--Testing Procedures for Determining Exceptions 
                              to the Chart

    experimental procedure for evaluating binary chemical reactivity

    General safety precautions--Chemical reactivity tests have, by their 
nature, serious potential for injuring the experimenter or destroying 
equipment. The experimenter should 1) have knowledge of the magnitude of 
the reactivity to be expected, 2) use adequate facilities and protective 
equipment to prevent injury from splatter of materials or release of 
fumes, and 3) start on a small scale so that unexpected reactions can be 
safely contained. All tests should be performed in a well-ventilated 
laboratory hood provided with shields.
    Testing chemicals other than liquids--The procedure outlined below 
was developed for chemicals which are liquids at ambient temperatures. 
If one or both chemicals are normally shipped at elevated temperatures, 
the same procedure may be followed except the chemicals are tested at 
their respective shipping temperatures and the oil bath in Step 3 is 
maintained at a level 25 <deg>C above the higher temperature. This 
information is then indicated on the data sheet. If one of the chemicals 
is a gas at ambient temperatures, consult the Coast Guard for additional 
instructions before proceeding with the compatibility test.

                                 Step 1

    Objective--To determine if the test chemicals react violently and 
present a safety hazard in further tests.
    Procedure--Place 0.5ml of one (A) of the test chemicals in a 
25x150mm test tube. Clamp the test tube to a stand behind a safety 
shield (in a hood). Carefully add from a dropper 0.5ml of the other 
substance (B). Shake to induce mixing. If no immediate reaction occurs, 
retain the mixture for at least 10 minutes to check for a delayed 
reaction.
    Results--If a violent reaction occurs, such as sputtering, boiling 
of reactants or release of fumes, record the results on the Data Sheet 
(appendix IV) and do not proceed to Step 2. If no reaction or a minor 
reaction occurs, proceed to Step 2.

                                 Step 2

    Objective--To determine the heat of reaction of two chemicals on 
mixing under specified conditions.
    Procedure--These separate mixes of the proposed binary combination 
will be tested. These are 2 ml : 18 ml, 10 ml : 10 ml, and 18 ml : 2 ml, 
respectively, to result in a final mixture of about 20 ml in each case.
    A reference-junctioned thermocouple is prepared by inserting two 
lengths of 20 gauge or finer iron-constantan or chromelalumel duplex 
thermocouple wire into glass capilary sheaths. The common wire of each 
probe is joined, while the other wire of each is connected to a strip-
chart recorder. The thermocouple probe which produces a negative pen 
deflection upon warming is the reference junction and is placed in a 
test tube of water at ambient laboratory temprature. The other probe is 
placed near the bottom of a Dewar flask of about 300ml capacity, such 
that the thermocouple will be below the surface of the test mixture. The 
Dewar flask is equipped with a magnetic stirrer having a stirring bar 
coated with an inert material such as a flourinated hydrocarbon.
    Start the temperature recorder and stirrer. Deliver the test 
chemicals to the Dewar

[[Page 56]]

Flask simultaneously from separate graduated syringes. If an exothermic 
reaction occurs, continue the test until the maximum temperature is 
reached and begins to subside. If no apparent reaction occurs, continue 
the test for at least 30 minutes to check for a delayed reaction. Stop 
agitation and observe the mixture at five-minute intervals to determine 
if the mixture is miscible, if gases are evolved, or if other visible 
changes occur. In the interest of safety, a mirror can be used for these 
observations. Repeat the above test for the other mixture combinations.
    Results--Record the results in the appropriate places on the Data 
Sheet. If no reaction occurs or if the temperature rise is less than 25 
<deg>C, proceed to Step 3. If the observed temperature rise exceeds 25 
<deg>C or gases are evolved, do not proceed to Step 3.

                                 Step 3

    Objective--To determine if exothermic reactions occur at 
temperatures up to 50 <deg>C.
    Procedure--If a non-hazardous reaction occurred in Step 2, the ratio 
of chemicals which resulted in the greatest temperature rise will be 
tested. Fresh chemicals will be used with a total volume for this test 
of about 10ml (a ratio of 1ml:9ml, 5ml:5ml, or 9ml:1ml). If no reaction 
was observed in Step 2, use a ratio of 5ml:5ml. Using the thermocouple 
prepared for Step 2, insert the reference probe into a 25x150mm test 
tube containing 10ml of water. Place the other probe into an empty test 
tube. Start the temperature recorder and add the two chemicals of the 
combination, one at a time, to the empty test tube. Lower the two test 
tubes into an oil bath maintained at 50 <plus-minus>2 <deg>C. Hold the 
samples in the oil bath until the maximum temperature differential is 
recorded, and in all cases at least 15 minutes. Observe the test mixture 
to determine if gases are evolved or if other visible changes occur. 
Follow prescribed safety precautions.
    Results--Record the maximum differential temperature measured, the 
time required to reach this temperature, and any other observations in 
the proper space on the Data Sheet.
    Send a copy of the Data Sheet for each binary chemical mixture 
tested to: Commandant (G-MSO), U.S. Coast Guard, Washington, DC 20593-
0001.

[CGD 75-59, 45 FR 70263, Oct. 23, 1980, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983; CGD 83-047, 50 FR 33046, Aug. 16, 1985; CGD 88-070, 
53 FR 34535, Sept. 7, 19885; CGD 96-041, 61 FR 50731, Sept. 27, 1996]

[[Page 57]]

                   Appendix IV to Part 150--Data Sheet
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02FE91.080


[[Page 58]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02FE91.081


<R03>
PART 151--BARGES CARRYING BULK LIQUID HAZARDOUS MATERIAL CARGOES
--Table of Contents

<R05>


                         Subpart 151.01--General

Sec.
151.01-1 Applicability.
151.01-2 Incorporation by reference.
151.01-3 [Reserved]
151.01-5 [Reserved]
151.01-10 Application of vessel inspection regulations.
151.01-15 Dangerous cargoes not specifically named.
151.01-20 Use of minimum requirements.
151.01-25 Existing barges.
151.01-30 Effective date.
151.01-35 Right of appeal.

                       Subpart 151.02--Equivalents

151.02-1 Conditions under which equivalents may be used.
151.02-5 Design of unmanned barges.

                       Subpart 151.03--Definitions

151.03-1 Definitions of terms.
151.03-3 Angle of downflooding.
151.03-5 Approved.
151.03-7 Barge.
151.03-9 Cargo.
151.03-11 Coastwise.
151.03-13 Cofferdam.
151.03-15 Commandant.
151.03-17 Compatible.
151.03-19 Environment.
151.03-21 Filling density.
151.03-23 Flame arrestor.
151.03-25 Flame screen.

[[Page 59]]

151.03-27 Gas free.
151.03-29 Great Lakes.
151.03-30 Hazardous material.
151.03-31 Headquarters.
151.03-33 Lakes, bays, and sounds.
151.03-35 Limiting draft.
151.03-36 Liquid.
151.03-37 Maximum allowable working pressure.
151.03-38 Nondestructive testing.
151.03-39 Ocean.
151.03-41 Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection (OCMI).
151.03-43 Pressure.
151.03-45 Rivers.
151.03-47 Service.
151.03-49 Sounding tube.
151.03-51 Tank barge.
151.03-53 Tankerman.
151.03-55 [Reserved]

              Subpart 151.04--Inspection and Certification

151.04-1 Certificate of inspection.
151.04-2 Inspection required.
151.04-3 Initial inspection.
151.04-5 Inspection for certification.
151.04-7 Nondestructive testing.

  Subpart 151.05--Summary of Minimum Requirements for Specific Cargoes

151.05-1 Explanation of column headings in Table 151.05.
151.05-2 Compliance with requirements for tank barges carrying benzene 
          and benzene containing cargoes, or butyl acrylate cargoes.

              Table 151.05--Summary of Minimum Requirements

          Subpart 151.10--Barge Hull Construction Requirements

151.10-1 Barge hull classifications.
151.10-5 Subdivision and stability.
151.10-15 Certificate endorsement.
151.10-20 Hull construction.

  Subpart 151.12--Equipment and Operating Requirements for Control of 
                  Pollution From Category D NLS Cargoes

151.12-5 Equipment for Category D NLS.
151.12-10 Operation of oceangoing non-self-propelled ships carrying 
          Category D NLS.

                    Subpart 151.13--Cargo Segregation

151.13-1 General.
151.13-5 Cargo segregation--tanks.

                          Subpart 151.15--Tanks

151.15-1 Tank types.
151.15-3 Construction.
151.15-5 Venting.
151.15-6 Venting piping.
151.15-10 Cargo gauging devices.

                     Subpart 151.20--Cargo Transfer

151.20-1 Piping--general.
151.20-5 Cargo system valving requirements.
151.20-10 Cargo system instrumentation.
151.20-15 Cargo hose if carried on the barge.
151.20-20 Cargo transfer methods.

                  Subpart 151.25--Environmental Control

151.25-1 Cargo tank.
151.25-2 Cargo handling space.

               Subpart 151.30--Portable Fire Extinguishers

151.30-1 Type.

      Subpart 151.40--Temperature or Pressure Control Installations

151.40-1 Definitions.
151.40-2 Materials.
151.40-5 Construction.
151.40-10 Operational requirements.
151.40-11 Refrigeration systems.

                       Subpart 151.45--Operations

151.45-1 General.
151.45-2 Special operating requirements.
151.45-3 Manning.
151.45-4 Cargo-handling.
151.45-5 Open hopper barges.
151.45-6 Maximum amount of cargo.
151.45-7 Shipping papers.
151.45-8 Illness, alcohol, drugs.
151.45-9 Signals.

                  Subpart 151.50--Special Requirements

151.50-1 General.
151.50-5 Cargoes having toxic properties.
151.50-6 Motor fuel antiknock compounds.
151.50-10 Alkylene oxides.
151.50-12 Ethylene oxide.
151.50-13 Propylene oxide.
151.50-20 Inorganic acids.
151.50-21 Sulfuric acid.
151.50-22 Hydrochloric acid.
151.50-23 Phosphoric acid.
151.50-30 Compressed gases.
151.50-31 Chlorine.
151.50-32 Ammonia, anhydrous.
151.50-34 Vinyl chloride (vinyl chloride monomer).
151.50-36 Argon or nitrogen.
151.50-40 Additional requirements for carbon disulfide (carbon 
          bisulfide) and ethyl ether.
151.50-41 Carbon disulfide (carbon bisulfide).
151.50-42 Ethyl ether.
151.50-50 Elemental phosphorus in water.
151.50-55 Sulfur (molten).

[[Page 60]]

151.50-60 Benzene.
151.50-70 Cargoes requiring inhibition or stabilization.
151.50-73 Chemical protective clothing.
151.50-74 Ethylidene norbornene.
151.50-75 Ferric chloride solution.
151.50-76 Hydrochloric acid, spent (NTE 15%).
151.50-77 Fluorosilicic acid (30% or less) (hydrofluorosilicic acid).
151.50-79 Methyl acetylene-propadiene mixture.
151.50-80 Nitric acid (70% or less).
151.50-81 Special operating requirements for heat sensitive cargoes.
151.50-84 Sulfur dioxide.
151.50-86 Alkyl (C7-C9) nitrates.

   Subpart 151.55--Special Requirements for Materials of Construction

151.55-1 General.

          Subpart 151.56--Prohibited Materials of Construction

151.56-1 Prohibited materials.

           Subpart 151.58--Required Materials of Construction

151.58-1 Required materials.

    Authority: 33 U.S.C. 1903; 46 U.S.C. 3703; 49 CFR 1.46.

    Source: CGFR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, unless otherwise 
noted.

    Editorial Note: Nomenclature changes for part 151 appear at CGD 88-
100, 54 FR 40029, Sept. 29, 1989.


<R04>
                         Subpart 151.01--General


<R05>
Sec. 151.01-1  Applicability.

    This part applies to the following:
    (a) Oceangoing, as defined in 33 CFR 151.05(j), non-self-propelled 
United States ships and non-self-propelled foreign ships operating in 
United States waters that carry a bulk cargo that is--
    (1) Listed in Table 151.05;
    (2) Not being carried in a portable tank regulated under subpart 
98.30 or 98.33 of this chapter; and
    (3) Not an NLS or is an NLS cargo that is a Category D listed in 
Sec. 151.12-5 of this part.
    (b) All non-self-propelled United States ships that are not 
oceangoing that carry a bulk cargo that is--
    (1) Listed in Table 151.05, and
    (2) Not being carried in a portable tank regulated under subpart 
98.30 or 98.33 of this chapter.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7776, Mar. 12, 1987, as amended by CGD 84-043, 55 FR 
37413, Sept. 11, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 151.01-2  Incorporation by reference.

    (a) Certain standards and specifications are incorporated by 
reference into this part with the approval of the Director of the 
Federal Register in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a). To enforce any 
edition other than the ones listed in paragraph (b) of this section, 
notice of change must be published in the Federal Register and the 
material made available to the public. All approved material is on file 
at the Office of the Federal Register, 800 North Capitol Street, NW., 
suite 700, Washington, DC, and is available from the sources indicated 
in paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) The standards and specifications approved for incorporation by 
reference in this part and the sections affected, are:

           American Society for Nondestructive Testing (ASNT)

4153 Arlingate Road, Caller num;28518, Columbus, OH 43228-0518
ASNT ``Recommended Practice No. SNT-TC-1A (1988), Personnel 
Qualification and Certification in Nondestructive Testing'' 
                                                          151.04-7(c)(2)

      American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) International

Three Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016-5990
ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code Section V, Nondestructive 
Examination (1986)........................................151.04-7(a)(1)

            American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)

100 Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959.

ASTM D 4986-98, Standard Test Method for Horizontal Burning 
Characteristics of Cellular Polymeric Materials.................151.15-3
ASTM E 84-98, Standard Test Method for Surface Burning Characteristics 
of Building Materials--151.15-3

[CGD 85-061, 54 FR 50965, Dec. 11, 1989, as amended by USCG-1999-6216, 
64 FR 53227, Oct. 1, 1999; USCG-1999-5151, 64 FR 67183, Dec. 1, 1999]

[[Page 61]]


<R05>
Sec. 151.01-3  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 151.01-5  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 151.01-10  Application of vessel inspection regulations.

    (a) The regulations in this part are requirements which may be in 
addition to, supplement, or modify requirements in other subchapters in 
this chapter. When a specific requirement in another part or section in 
another subchapter in this chapter is in conflict with or contrary to 
requirement or intent expressed in this part, the regulations in this 
part shall take precedence.
    (b) Every unmanned tank barge which carries or is intended to carry 
in bulk any liquid or liquefied gas listed in Table 151.05 and has 
flammability or combustibility characteristics as indicated by a fire 
protection requirement in Table 151.05 shall be inspected and 
certificated under the provisions in subchapter D (Tank Vessels) of this 
chapter and the regulations in this part.
    (c) Every unmanned tank barge prior to the carriage in bulk of any 
liquid or liquefied gas listed in Table 151.05 which does not have the 
flammability or combustibility characteristics as indicated by the fire 
protection requirement in Table 151.05 shall be inspected and 
certificated under the applicable provisions of subchapter D or 
subchapter I of this chapter, at the option of the barge owner, in 
addition to the regulations in this part. However, unless the barge 
owner notifies the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection of his option to 
have the barge inspected and certificated under subchapter I at the time 
he submits the application for inspection (Form CG-3752), the unmanned 
tank barge shall be inspected and certificated under the provisions of 
subchapter D of this chapter and the regulations in this part.
    (c-1) Each unmanned tank barge constructed on or after September 6, 
1977, that carries in bulk a cargo listed in Table 151.05 and that is 
certificated under subchapter I of this chapter must meet the loading 
information requirements in Sec. 31.10-32 of this chapter.
    (d) The provisions of subchapter D of this chapter shall apply to 
all unmanned tank barges which carry in bulk any of the liquids or 
liquefied gases listed in Table 30.25-1 of this chapter. The provisions 
of this part shall not apply to such barges unless it is also desired to 
carry one or more of the liquids or liquefied gases listed in Table 
151.05.
    (e) Manned barges which carry or intend to carry in bulk the cargoes 
specified in Table 151.05 will be considered individually by the 
Commandant and may be required to meet the requirements of this 
subchapter and of subchapter D (Tank Vessels) or I (Cargo and 
Miscellaneous Vessels) of this chapter as applicable.

[CGFR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 
151.01-10, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.


<R05>
Sec. 151.01-15  Dangerous cargoes not specifically named.

    (a) Any liquid or liquefied gas, which meets the definitions 
referred to in Sec. 151.01-1 and is not named in Table 151.05 or Table 
30.25-1 of this chapter shall not be transported in bulk in a manned or 
unmanned tank barge without the prior specific approval of the 
Commandant.
    (b) Mixtures or blends of two or more cargoes, one or more of which 
appears in Table 151.05, will be treated as though they were new 
products and specific approval of the Commandant must be obtained prior 
to undertaking their transportation.

[CGFR-70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 81-101, 52 FR 
7777, Mar. 12, 1987; CGD 81-101, 53 FR 28974, Aug. 1, 1988 and 54 FR 
12629, Mar. 28, 1989; CGD 88-100, 54 FR 40029, Sept. 29, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 151.01-20  Use of minimum requirements.

    (a) The minimum requirements governing transportation of any liquid 
or liquefied gas listed in Table 151.05 are set forth in this part when 
such substances are carried in bulk in unmanned tank barges.
    (b) Before any liquid or liquefied gas listed in Table 151.05 may be 
carried in an unmanned tank barge, the certificate of inspection issued 
to such barge

[[Page 62]]

shall be appropriately endorsed to show approval to transport such 
cargo.

[CFGR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 88-100, 54 FR 
40029, Sept. 29, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 151.01-25  Existing barges.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, barges 
certified for, or used within the previous 2 years prior to the 
effective date of this regulation, or barges equivalent to such barges, 
for the transportation of any cargo regulated by this subchapter which 
do not meet the specific requirements herein, may be continued in 
service subject to the following conditions:
    (1) Venting, gauging, and all operating requirements shall be met 
within a 1-year period subsequent to the effective date.
    (2) All other requirements shall be met within a 2-year period 
subsequent to the effective date.
    (b) If an existing barge, which has been designed to carry or has 
regularly been carrying one or more of the cargoes regulated by this 
subchapter, is found to be so arranged, or outfitted that conversion to 
bring it into compliance with any or all of the requirements of this 
subchapter is impractical or impossible, the Commandant, upon 
application, may review the plans of the barge to determine if it is 
suitable and safe for the cargoes to be transported.
    (c) Except for operating and vinyl chloride requirements, barges 
constructed and certificated for the transportation of any cargo for 
which specific regulations existed, in parts 36, 38, 39, 40, and 98 of 
this chapter at the time of their construction or conversion, may 
continue and will be certificated to operate without the requirement 
that they comply with the provisions of subchapter O of this chapter.

[CGFR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 74-167k, 40 FR 
17026, Apr. 16, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 151.01-30  Effective date.

    (a) The regulations in this subchapter are effective on and after 
June 1, 1970. However, amendments, revisions, or additions shall become 
effective ninety (90) days after the date of publication in the Federal 
Register unless the Commandant shall fix a different time.
    (b) The regulations in this subchapter are not retroactive in effect 
unless specifically made so at the time the regulations are issued. 
Changes in specification requirements of articles of equipment, or 
materials used in construction of tank barges, shall not apply to such 
items which have been passed as satisfactory until replacement shall 
become necessary, unless a specific finding is made that such equipment 
or materials used is unsafe or hazardous and has to be removed from tank 
barges.


<R05>
Sec. 151.01-35  Right of appeal.

    Any person directly affected by a decision or action taken under 
this part, by or on behalf of the Coast Guard, may appeal therefrom in 
accordance with subpart 1.03 of this chapter.

[CGD 88-033, 54 FR 50381, Dec. 6, 1989]


<R04>
                       Subpart 151.02--Equivalents


<R05>
Sec. 151.02-1  Conditions under which equivalents may be used.

    (a) Where in this part it is provided that a particular fitting, 
material, appliance, apparatus, or equipment, or type thereof, shall be 
fitted or carried in a vessel, or that any particular provision shall be 
made or arrangement including cargo segregation shall be adopted, the 
Commandant may accept in substitution therefor any other fitting, 
material, apparatus or equipment, or type thereof, or any other 
provision or arrangement. However, the Commandant shall be satisfied by 
suitable evidence that the fitting, material, appliance, apparatus, or 
equipment, or the type thereof, or the provision or arrangement shall be 
at least as effective as that specified in this part.
    (b) In any case where it is shown to the satisfaction of the 
Commandant that the use of any particular equipment, apparatus, or 
arrangement not specifically required by law is unreasonable or 
impracticable, the Commandant may permit the use of alternate equipment 
apparatus, or arrangement to such an extent and upon such

[[Page 63]]

conditions as will insure, to his satisfaction, a degree of safety 
consistent with the minimum standards set forth in this part.


<R05>
Sec. 151.02-5  Design of unmanned barges.

    (a) In order not to inhibit design and application, the Commandant 
may approve vessels of novel design, both new and for conversion, after 
it is shown to his satisfaction that such a vessel is at least as safe 
as any vessel which meets the standards required by this part.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R04>
                       Subpart 151.03--Definitions


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-1  Definitions of terms.

    Certain terms used in the regulations in this subchapter are defined 
in this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-3  Angle of downflooding.

    The angle of heel of the vessel at which any opening in the hull not 
provided with a water tight closure would be immersed.


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-5  Approved.

    This term means approved by the Commandant unless otherwise stated.


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-7  Barge.

    This term means any non-self-propelled vessel designed to carry 
cargo.


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-9  Cargo.

    This term means any liquid, gas or solid having one or more of the 
dangerous properties defined in this subchapter.


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-11  Coastwise.

    This designation refers to all vessels normally navigating the 
waters of any ocean or the Gulf of Mexico 20 nautical miles or less 
offshore.


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-13  Cofferdam.

    This term means a void or empty space separating two or more 
compartments for the purpose of isolation or to prevent the contents of 
one compartment from entering another in the event of the failure of the 
walls of one to retain their tightness.


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-15  Commandant.

    This term means Commandant of the U.S. Coast Guard.


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-17  Compatible.

    Compatible means that a cargo will not react in an unsafe manner 
with other cargo or materials used in construction of the barge. The 
prime considerations are the chemical, physical, or thermal properties 
of the reaction including heat, pressure, toxicity, stability, and 
explosive nature of the reaction and its end products.


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-19  Environment.

    This term refers to the atmosphere within a cargo tank and the 
spaces adjacent to the tank or spaces in which cargo is handled.


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-21  Filling density.

    The ratio, expressed as a percentage, of the weight of cargo that 
may be loaded into a tank compared to the weight of water that the tank 
will hold at 60 <deg>F. The weight of a gallon of water at 60 <deg>F in 
air shall be 8.32828 pounds.


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-23  Flame arrestor.

    Any device or assembly of cellular, tubular, pressure or other type 
used for preventing the passage of flames into enclosed spaces.


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-25  Flame screen.

    A fitted single screen of corrosion-resistant wire of at least 30 by 
30 mesh or two fitted screens, both of corrosion-resistant wire, of at 
least 20 by 20 mesh spaced not less than one-half inch or more than 1\1/
2\ inches apart.


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-27  Gas free.

    Free from dangerous concentrations of flammable or toxic gases.


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-29  Great Lakes.

    A designation for all vessels in Great Lakes service.


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-30  Hazardous material.

    In this part hazardous material means a liquid material or substance 
that is--
    (a) Flammable or combustible;
    (b) Designated a hazardous substance under section 311(b) of the 
Federal

[[Page 64]]

Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1321); or
    (c) Designated a hazardous material under 49 U.S.C. 5103.

    Note: The Environmental Protection Agency designates hazardous 
substances in 40 CFR Table 116.4A. The Coast Guard designates hazardous 
materials that are transported as bulk liquids by water in Sec. 153.40.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7777, Mar. 12, 1987, as amended by CGD 95-028, 62 FR 
51209, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-31  Headquarters.

    The Office of the Commandant, U.S. Coast Guard, Washington, DC 
20593-0001.

[CGFR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 88-070, 53 FR 
34535, Sept. 7, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-33  Lakes, bays, and sounds.

    A designation for all vessels navigating the waters of any of the 
lakes, bays, or sounds other than the waters of the Great Lakes.


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-35  Limiting draft.

    Maximum allowable draft to which a barge may be loaded. Limiting 
draft is a function of hull type and cargo specific gravity. A barge may 
be assigned different limiting drafts for different hull types or within 
one hull type for different specific gravities.


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-36  Liquid.

    In this part liquid includes liquefied and compressed gases.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7777, Mar. 12, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-37  Maximum allowable working pressure.

    The maximum allowable working pressure shall be as defined in 
section VIII of the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code.

[CGFR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 85-061, 54 FR 
50965, Dec. 11, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-38  Nondestructive testing.

    Nondestructive testing includes ultrasonic examination, liquid 
penetrant examination, magnetic particle examination, radiographic 
examination, eddy current, and acoustic emission.

[CGD 85-061, 54 FR 50965, Dec. 11, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-39  Ocean.

    A designation for all vessels normally navigating the waters of any 
ocean or the Gulf of Mexico more than 20 nautical miles offshore.


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-41  Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection (OCMI).

    This term means any person from the civilian or military branch of 
the Coast Guard designated as such by the Commandant and who, under the 
superintendence and direction of the Coast Guard District Commander, is 
in charge of an inspection zone for the performance of duties with 
respect to the enforcement and administration of Subtitle II of Title 
46, U.S. Code, Title 46 and Title 33 U.S. Code, and regulations issued 
under these statutes.

[CGD 95-028, 62 FR 51209, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-43  Pressure.

    Terminology used in this part are: pounds per square inch gauge 
(p.s.i.g.) or pounds per square inch absolute (p.s.i.a.). 14.7 p.s.i.a. 
is equal to 0 p.s.i.g. P.s.i.g. is normally used in reference to design 
or operating requirements.


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-45  Rivers.

    A designation for all vessels whose navigation is restricted to 
rivers and/or canals, exclusively.


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-47  Service.

    The waters upon which a vessel may be operated as endorsed upon the 
certificate of inspection.


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-49  Sounding tube.

    This is an unperforated tube fitted to an ullage hole, secured so as 
to be vapor tight to the underside of the tank top open at the bottom, 
and extending to within 18 inches or less of the bottom of the tank.


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-51  Tank barge.

    A non-self-propelled vessel especially constructed or converted to 
carry bulk liquid cargo in tanks.

[[Page 65]]


<R05>
Sec. 151.03-53  Tankerman.

    The following ratings are established in part 13 of this chapter. 
The terms for the ratings identify persons holding valid merchant 
mariners' documents for service in the ratings issued under that part:
    (a) Tankerman-PIC.
    (b) Tankerman-PIC (Barge).
    (c) Restricted Tankerman-PIC.
    (d) Restricted Tankerman-PIC (Barge).
    (e) Tankerman-Assistant.
    (f) Tankerman-Engineer.

[CGD 79-116, 60 FR 17157, Apr. 4, 1995]


<R05>
Sec.Sec. 151.03-55  [Reserved]


<R04>
              Subpart 151.04--Inspection and Certification


<R05>
Sec. 151.04-1  Certificate of inspection.

    (a) A certificate of inspection is required for every unmanned tank 
barge subject to the requirements in this subchapter. A certificate of 
inspection shall be issued to the barge or to its owners by the Officer 
in Charge, Marine Inspection, if the barge is found to comply with 
applicable inspection laws and the regulations in this chapter.
    (b) The certificate of inspection shall be endorsed with respect to 
the waters over which the barge may be operated.
    (c) The certificate shall be endorsed describing the cargoes by name 
as given in Table 151.05 or as specifically approved by the Commandant. 
No other dangerous cargo as defined in Subpart 151.01-1 shall be 
carried. Certificates shall specify maximum cargo weight (short tons), 
maximum density (pounds per gallon) and any operating limitations and a 
limiting draft.

[CFGR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 88-100, 54 FR 
40029, Sept. 29, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 151.04-2  Inspection required.

    (a) Every unmanned tank barge subject to the regulations in this 
subchapter shall be inspected biennially. More frequent inspections may 
be required, if necessary, by the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, 
to see that the hull, equipment and appliances of the vessel comply with 
the marine inspection laws, and the regulations of this subchapter and 
other subchapters where applicable.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 151.04-3  Initial inspection.

    (a) The initial inspection which may consist of a series of 
inspections during the construction of an unmanned barge shall include a 
complete inspection of the structure, auxiliary machinery, and 
equipment. The inspection shall be such as to insure that the 
arrangement, materials, and scantlings of the hull structure, tanks and 
pressure vessels and their appurtenances comply with applicable 
regulations of this chapter and with the requirements of this part.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 151.04-5  Inspection for certification.

    (a) An inspection for certification is a prerequisite of the 
reissuance of a Certificate of Inspection as provided for in applicable 
regulations of this chapter.
    (b) Unless otherwise specified in table 151.05, cargo tanks are 
internally examined as follows:
    (1) Where the cargo tank is of the gravity type and the structural 
framing is on the internal tank surface, the tank shall be inspected 
internally at the time of inspection for certification.
    (2) Where the cargo tank is of the gravity type and the structural 
framing is on the external tank surface accessible for examination from 
voids, cofferdams, double bottoms, and other similar spaces, tanks shall 
be inspected internally at 4-year intervals.
    (3) If the tank is a pressure-vessel type cargo tank, an internal 
inspection of the tank is conducted within--
    (i) Ten years after the last internal inspection on an unmanned 
barge carrying cargo at temperatures of -67 <deg>F (-55 <deg>C) or 
warmer; or
    (ii) Eight years after the last internal inspection if the tank is a 
pressure type cargo tank carrying cargo at temperatures colder than -67 
<deg>F (-55 <deg>C).
    (4) Internal inspection may be required at more frequent intervals 
as deemed necessary by the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection.
    (c) An external examination of unlagged tanks and the visible parts 
of lagged tanks is made at each biennial

[[Page 66]]

inspection. If the vessel has single skin construction, the underwater 
portion of the tank need not be examined unless deemed necessary by the 
Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection. If an external examination of the 
tank is not possible because of insulation, the owner shall ensure that-
-
    (1) The amount of insulation deemed necessary by the marine 
inspector is removed during each cargo tank internal inspection to allow 
spot external examination of the tanks and insulation; or
    (2) The thickness of the tanks is gauged by a nondestructive means 
accepted by the marine inspector without the removal of insulation.
    (d) If required by the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection the 
owner shall conduct nondestructive testing of each tank designated by 
the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection in accordance with Sec. 151.04-
7.
    (e) If the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection considers a 
hydrostatic test necessary to determine the condition of the tanks, the 
owner shall perform the test at a pressure of 1\1/2\ times the tank's--
    (1) Maximum allowable pressure, as determined by the safety relief 
valve setting; or
    (2) Design pressure, when cargo tanks operate at maximum allowable 
pressures reduced below the design pressure in order to satisfy special 
mechanical stress relief requirements.

    Note: See the ASME Code, Section VIII, Appendix 3 for information on 
design pressure.

    (f) Quick closing valves shall be tested by operating the emergency 
shutoff system from each operating point at the time of each vessel's 
inspection for certification.
    (g) Excess flow valves shall be inspected at the time of inspection 
for certification. The Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, shall 
satisfy himself that the valve is in working condition by visual 
inspection, and if this is impossible, by one of the following means:
    (1) Removing the valve and bench testing ashore; the valve shall 
close at or below its rated closing flow.
    (2) By any other means acceptable to the Officer in Charge, Marine 
Inspection, which will demonstrate that the valve is operable.
    (h) Pressure vaccum relief valves shall be examined to determine 
that the operating mechanism is free and capable of activation.
    (i) Safety relief valves shall be tested by bench testing or other 
suitable means. The valves shall relieve and reseat within the design 
tolerances of the set pressure, or it shall be removed and reset prior 
to being returned to service. This test shall be conducted at the time 
of the inspection for certification.
    (j) Cargo hose stored on board the vessel which is used in 
transferring cargoes listed in Table 151.05 shall be inspected every 2 
years. This inspection shall consist of a visual examination and a 
hydrostatic test of 1\1/2\ times the maximum pressure to which the hose 
will be subjected in service. The date of the most recent inspection and 
the test pressure shall be stenciled or otherwise marked on the hose.
    (k) Cargo piping shall be inspected and tested at the same time as 
the cargo tanks.
    (l) If the tank is a pressure vessel type cargo tank with an 
internal inspection interval of 10 years, and is 30 years old or older, 
determined from the date it was built, the owner shall conduct 
nondestructive testing of each tank in accordance with Sec. 151.04-7, 
during each internal inspection.

[CFGR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 88-100, 54 FR 
40029, Sept. 29, 1989; CGD 85-061, 54 FR 50965, Dec. 11, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 151.04-7  Nondestructive testing.

    (a) Before nondestructive testing may be conducted to meet Sec. 
151.04-5 (d) and (l), the owner shall submit a proposal to the Officer 
in Charge, Marine Inspection that includes--
    (1) The test methods and procedures to be used all of which must 
meet section V of the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code (1986);
    (2) Each location on the tank to be tested; and
    (3) The test method and procedure to be conducted at each location 
on the tank.

[[Page 67]]

    (b) If the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection rejects the 
proposal, the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection informs the owner of 
the reasons why the proposal is rejected.
    (c) If the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection accepts the 
proposal, then the owner shall ensure that--
    (1) The proposal is followed; and
    (2) Nondestructive testing is performed by personnel meeting ASNT 
``Recommended Practice No. SNT-TC-1A (1988), Personnel Qualification and 
Certification in Nondestructive Testing.''
    (d) Within 30 days after completing the nondestructive test, the 
owner shall submit a written report of the results to the Officer in 
Charge, Marine Inspection.

[CGD 85-061, 54 FR 50966, Dec. 11, 1989]


<R04>
  Subpart 151.05--Summary of Minimum Requirements for Specific Cargoes


<R05>
Sec. 151.05-1  Explanation of column headings in Table 151.05.

    (a) Cargo identification/name. This column identifies cargoes by 
name. Words in italics are not part of the cargo name but may be used in 
addition to the cargo name. When one entry references another entry by 
use of the word ``see'' and both names are in roman type, either name 
may be used as the cargo name (e.g., ``Diethyl either see Ethyl 
ether''). However, the referenced entry is preferred.
    (b) Cargo identification/pressure. This column identifies cargo in 
terms of pressure within the tank. Terms used are:
    (1) Pressurized. Cargo carried at a pressure in excess of 10 pounds 
per square inch gauge as measured at the top of the tank (i.e., 
exclusive of static head).
    (2) Atmospheric pressure. Cargo carried at not more than 10 pounds 
per square inch gauge, exclusive of static head.
    (c) Cargo identification/temperature. This column identifies the 
cargo by the temperature of the cargo during transit.
    (1) Ambient temperature. Cargo which is carried at naturally 
occurring temperatures.
    (2) Low temperature. Cargo carried below ambient temperatures when 
the product temperature is below 0 <deg>F.
    (3) Elevated temperature. Cargo carried above ambient temperatures.
    (d) Hull type. This column refers to the flotation features of the 
barge. Terms used are explained and defined in Subpart 151.10 of this 
part.
    (e) Cargo segregation/tanks. This column refers to the separation of 
the cargo from its surroundings. Terms are explained in Sec. 151.13-5 
and in footnotes to Table 151.05 of this part.
    (f) Tanks/type. This column refers to the design requirements for 
cargo tanks and their placement within the hull of the vessel. Terms are 
explained in Sec. 151.15-1.
    (g) Tanks/venting. This column refers to arrangements for preventing 
excess pressure or vacuum within the cargo tank. Terms used are 
explained and defined in Sec. 151.15-5.
    (h) Tanks/gauging devices. This column refers to arrangements 
provided for determining the amount of cargo present in cargo tanks. 
Terms used are explained and defined in Sec. 151.15-10.
    (i) Cargo transfer/piping. This column refers to the classification 
of piping in accordance with Subchapter F of this chapter as discussed 
in Sec. 151.20-1.
    (j) Cargo transfer/control. This column refers to the valving 
requirements for the cargo piping system. These requirements are defined 
in Sec. 151.20-5.
    (k) Environmental control/cargo tanks. This column refers to control 
of the composition of the environment within cargo tanks. Definitions 
and detailed requirements are given in Sec. 151.25-1.
    (l) Environmental control/cargo handling space. This column refers 
to control of the environment in the cargo handling spaces. Definitions 
and detailed requirements are found in Sec. 151.25-2.
    (m) Fire protection. This column specifies whether portable fire 
extinguishers are required on barges carrying the cargo named. 
Requirements for cargoes requiring extinguishers are given in Subpart 
151.30 of this part.
    (n) Special requirements. This column refers to requirements in 
subparts 151.40, 151.50, 151.55, 151.56, and 151.58 of

[[Page 68]]

this part which apply to specific cargoes. The section numbers listed 
omit the preceding part designation, ``151''.
    (o) Electrical hazard class--group. This column lists the electrical 
hazard class and group used for the cargo when determining requirements 
for electrical equipment under subchapter J (Electrical engineering) of 
this chapter.
    (p) Temperature control installations. This column refers to systems 
which are used to control the temperature of the cargo. Definitions and 
requirements which are applicable if such systems are used are given in 
Subpart 151.40 of this part.
    (q) Tank inspection period. This column refers to the maximum period 
in years between internal cargo tank inspections. Applicable 
requirements are given in Sec. 151.04-5.

[CGFR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970; 35 FR 6431, Apr. 22, 1970, as 
amended by CGD 74-275, 40 FR 21958, May 20, 1975; CGD 88-100, 54 FR 
40029, Sept. 29, 19895; CGD 96-041, 61 FR 50731, Sept. 27, 1996; USCG 
2000-7079, 65 FR 67183, Nov. 8, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 151.05-2  Compliance with requirements for tank barges carrying 
benzene and benzene containing cargoes, or butyl acrylate cargoes.

    A tank barge certificated to carry benzene and benzene containing 
cargoes or butyl acrylate cargoes must comply with the gauging 
requirement of Table 151.05 of this part by August 15, 1998. Until that 
date, a tank barge certificated to carry benzene and benzene containing 
cargoes must meet either the gauging requirement of Table 151.05 or the 
restricted or closed gauging requirements in effect on September 29, 
1994; and a tank barge certificated to carry butyl acrylate cargoes must 
meet either the gauging requirements of Table 151.05 or comply with the 
open, restricted, or closed gauging requirements in effect on September 
29, 1994.

[CGD 95-900, 60 FR 34050, June 29, 1995]

[[Page 69]]

     Table 151.05 to Subpart 151.05 of Part 151--Summary of Minimum 
                              Requirements

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Cargo identification\1\                                                         Tanks                       Cargo transfer        Environmental
---------------------------------------------------------             Cargo  -----------------------------------------------------------------        control                                             Electrical              Tank
                                                            Hull     segre-                                                                   ----------------------    Fire     Special requirements in    hazard      Temp.   internal
                                                            type     gation                                       Gauging   Piping                          Cargo    protection      46 CFR Part 151       class and   control  inspect.
              Cargo name                Pressure   Temp.              tank              Type             Vent     device     class    Control    Cargo     handling   required                               group    install.  period--
                                                                                                                                                 tanks      space                                                                 years
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
a.                                            b.      c.        d.     e.     f......................        g.        h.        i.        j.         k.         l.         m.   n......................         o.         p.        q.
--------------------------------------
Acetaldehyde.........................     Press.    Amb.        II       1NA  Ind. Pressure..........        SR    Restr.        II       P-1      Inert     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(h)...............        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Acetic acid..........................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .50-73.................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .55-1(g)...............
--------------------------------------
Acetic anhydride.....................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-73.................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .55-1(g)...............
--------------------------------------
Acetone cyanohydrin..................     Atmos.    Amb.         I     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed         I       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-5..................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                         2 i                                                                                                     .50-70(b)..............
                                                                                                                                                                                 .50-73.................
                                                                                                                                                                                 .50-81.................
--------------------------------------
Acetonitrile.........................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   No.....................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Acrylic acid.........................     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-70(a)..............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-73.................
                                                                                                                                                                                 .50-81.................
                                                                                                                                                                                 .58-1(a)...............
--------------------------------------
Acrylonitrile........................     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(e)...............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-70(a)..............
--------------------------------------
Adiponitrile.........................     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   No.....................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------

[[Page 70]]

 
Alkylbenzenesulfonic acid (greater        Atmos.   Elev.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .50-73.................        I-B         NA         G
 than 4%).                                                             2 i i                                                                                                     .58-1(e)...............
--------------------------------------
Alkyl(C7-C9) nitrates................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .50-81.................         NA         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-86.................
--------------------------------------
Allyl alcohol........................     Atmos.    Amb.         I     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed         I       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-5..................        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-73.................
--------------------------------------
Allyl chloride.......................     Atmos.    Amb.         I     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed         I       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-5..................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Aluminum sulfate solution............     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .58-1(e)...............         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Aminoethylethanolamine...............     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .55-1(b)...............         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Ammonia, anhydrous...................     Press.    Amb.        II       1NA  Ind. Pressure..........     SR250    Restr.        II       P-2         NR     Vent F         No   .50-30.................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                             p.s.i.                                                                  .50-32.................
--------------------------------------
Ammonia, anhydrous...................     Atmos.     Low        II       1NA  Ind. Gravity...........        PV    Restr.      II-L       G-2         NR     Vent F         No   .50-30.................        I-D       .40-         8
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-32.................               1(b)(1)
--------------------------------------
Ammonium bisulfite solution (70% or       Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N         No   .50-73.................         NA         NA         G
 less).                                                                  2 i                                                                                                     .56-1(a), (b), (c).....
--------------------------------------

[[Page 71]]

 
Ammonium hydroxide (28% or less NH 3)     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F         No   .56-1(a), (b), (c),            I-D         NA         G
                                                                         2 i                                                                                                      (f), (g).
--------------------------------------
Aniline..............................     Atmos.    Amb.         I     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed         I       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-5..................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-73.................
--------------------------------------
Anthracene oil (Coal tar fraction)...     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   No.....................        I-D         NA         G
                                                   Elev.               2 i i
--------------------------------------
Argon, liquefied.....................     Press.     Low       III       1NA  Ind. Pressure..........        SR    Restr.      II-L       P-1         NR     Vent F         No   .40-1(a)...............         NA   .40-1(a)         G
                                                                         2 i                                                                                                     .50-30.................
                                                                                                                                                                                 .50-36.................
--------------------------------------
Benzene..............................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-60.................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Benzene hydrocarbon mixtures              Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-60.................        I-D         NA         G
 (containing Acetylenes) (having 10%                                   2 i i                                                                                                     .56-1(b), (d), (f),
 Benzene or more).                                                                                                                                                                (g),.
--------------------------------------
Benzene hydrocarbon mixtures (having      Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-60.................        I-D         NA         G
 10% Benzene or more).                                                 2 i i
--------------------------------------
Benzene, Toluene, Xylene mixtures         Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-60.................        I-D         NA         G
 (having 10% Benzene or more).                                         2 i i
--------------------------------------
Butadiene............................     Press.    Amb.        II       1NA  Ind. Pressure..........        SR    Restr.        II       P-2         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-70(a)..............        I-B         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-73.................
--------------------------------------

[[Page 72]]

 
Butadiene, Butylene mixtures              Press.    Amb.        II       1NA  Ind. Pressure..........        SR    Restr.        II       P-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-30.................        I-B         NA         G
 (containing Acetylenes).                                              2 i i                                                                                                     .50-70(a)..............
                                                                                                                                                                                 .50-73.................
                                                                                                                                                                                 .56-1(b), (d), (f), (g)
--------------------------------------
Butyl acrylate (all isomers).........     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-70(a)..............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-81(a), (b).........
--------------------------------------
Butylamine (all isomers).............     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Ind. Gravity...........        PV    Closed        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(c)...............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Butyl methacrylate...................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-70(a)..............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-81(a), (b).........
--------------------------------------
Butyraldehyde (all isomers)..........     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(h)...............        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Camphor oil (light)..................     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   No.....................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Carbolic oil.........................     Atmos.    Amb.         I     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed         I       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-5..................         NA         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-73.................
--------------------------------------

[[Page 73]]

 
Carbon dioxide, liquefied............     Press.     Low       III       1NA  Ind. Pressure..........        SR    Restr.       I-L       P-1         NR     Vent F         No   .50-30.................         NA       .40-         G
                                                                         2 i                                                                                                                                           1(b)(1)
--------------------------------------
Carbon disulfide.....................     Atmos.    Amb.        II       1NA  Ind. Gravity...........        PV    Restr.        II       G-1      Inert     Vent F        Yes   .50-40.................        I-A         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-41.................
--------------------------------------
Carbon tetrachloride.................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N         No   No.....................         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Cashew nut shell oil (untreated).....     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-2         NR     Vent N        Yes   .50-73.................         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Caustic potash solution..............     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR         NR         No   .50-73.................         NA         NA         G
                                                   Elev.                 2 i                                                                                                     .55-1(j)...............
--------------------------------------
Caustic soda solution................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR         NR         No   .50-73.................         NA         NA         G
                                                   Elev.                 2 i                                                                                                     .55-1(j)...............
--------------------------------------
Chlorine.............................     Press.    Amb.         I       1NA  Ind. Pressure..........     SR300  Indirect         I       P-2         NR     Vent F         No   .50-30.................         NA         NA         3
                                                                       2 i i                             p.s.i.                                                                  .50-31.................
--------------------------------------
Chlorobenzene........................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   No.....................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Chloroform...........................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent F         No   No.....................         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Chlorohydrins (crude)................     Atmos.    Amb.         I     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed         I       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-5..................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
o-Chloronitrobenzene.................     Atmos.    Amb.         I     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed         I       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-5..................         NA         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-73.................
--------------------------------------
Chlorosulfonic acid..................     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N         No   .50-20.................        I-B         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-21.................
                                                                                                                                                                                 .50-73.................
--------------------------------------

[[Page 74]]

 
Coal tar naphtha solvent.............     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-73.................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Coal tar pitch (molten)..............     Atmos.   Elev.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-73.................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Creosote.............................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   No.....................         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Cresols (all isomers)................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   No.....................         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Cresols with less than 5% Phenol, see
 Cresols (all isomers).
--------------------------------------
Cresols with 5% or more Phenol, see
 Phenol.
--------------------------------------
Cresylate spent caustic..............     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N         No   .50-73.................         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i                                                                                                     .55-1(b)...............
--------------------------------------
Cresylic acid, sodium salt solution,
 see Cresylate spent caustic.
--------------------------------------
Crotonaldehyde.......................     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(h)...............        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------

[[Page 75]]

 
Cyclohexanone........................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .56-1(a), (b)..........        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Cyclohexanone, Cyclohexanol mixture..     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .56-1(b)...............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Cyclohexylamine......................     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .56-1(a), (b), (c), (g)        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Cyclopentadiene, Styrene, Benzene         Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-60.................        I-D         NA         G
 mixture.                                                              2 i i                                                                                                     .56-1(b)...............
--------------------------------------
iso-Decyl acrylate...................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .50-70(a)..............         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i                                                                                                     .50-81(a), (b).........
                                                                                                                                                                                 .55-1(c)...............
--------------------------------------
Dichlorobenzene (all isomers)........     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .56-1(a), (b)..........        I-D         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Dichlorodifluoromethane..............     Press.    Amb.       III       1NA  Ind. Pressure..........        SR    Restr.        II       P-1         NR         NR         No   No.....................         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
1,1-Dichloroethane...................     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   No.....................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
2,2'-Dichloroethyl ether.............     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(f)...............        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Dichloromethane......................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F         No   No.....................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------

[[Page 76]]

 
2,4-Dichlorophenoxy acetic acid,          Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N         No   .56-1(a), (b), (c), (g)         NA         NA         G
 diethanolamine salt solution.                                           2 i
--------------------------------------
2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid,           Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F         No   .56-1(a), (b), (c), (g)         NA         NA         G
 dimethylamine salt solution.                      Elev.                 2 i
--------------------------------------
2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid,           Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N         No   .56-1(a), (b), (c), (g)         NA         NA         G
 triisopropanolamine salt solution.                                      2 i
--------------------------------------
1,1-Dichloropropane..................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   No.....................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
1,2-Dichloropropane..................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   No.....................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
1,3-Dichloropropane..................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   No.....................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
1,3-Dichloropropene..................     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   No.....................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Dichloropropene, Dichloropropane          Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   No.....................        I-D         NA         G
 mixtures.                                                             2 i i
--------------------------------------

[[Page 77]]

 
2,2-Dichloropropionic acid...........     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1        Dry     Vent F        Yes   .50-73.................         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i                                                                                                     .58-1(e)...............
--------------------------------------
Diethanolamine.......................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .55-1(c)...............         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Diethylamine.........................     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(c)...............        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Diethylenetriamine...................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .55-1(c)...............         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Diethyl ether, see Ethyl ether.......
--------------------------------------
Diisobutylamine......................     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(c)...............        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Diisopropanolamine...................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .55-1(c)...............         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Diisopropylamine.....................     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(c)...............        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
N,N-Dimethylacetamide................     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .56-1(b)...............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Dimethylamine........................     Press.    Amb.        II       1NA  Ind. Pressure..........        SR    Restr.        II       P-2         NR     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(c)...............        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Dimethylethanolamine.................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .56-1(b), (c)..........        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Dimethylformamide....................     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(e)...............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------

[[Page 78]]

 
1,4-Dioxane..........................     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed        II       G-1      Inert     Vent F        Yes   No.....................        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Diphenylmethane diisocyanate.........     Atmos.   Elev.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed         I       G-1      Inert     Vent F        Yes   .50-5..................         NA        Yes         G
                                                                         2 i                                                                         Dry                         .56-1(a), (b)..........
--------------------------------------
Di-n-propylamine.....................     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(c)...............        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Dodecyl- dimethyl- amine,                 Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .56-1(b)...............         NA         NA         G
 Tetradecyldimethylamine mixture.                                        2 i
--------------------------------------
Dodecyl phenol.......................     Atmos.    Amb.         I     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .50-73.................        I-D         NA         2
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Epichlorohydrin......................     Atmos.    Amb.         I     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed         I       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-5..................        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Ethanolamine.........................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .55-1(c)...............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Ethyl acrylate.......................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-70(a)..............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-81(a), (b).........
--------------------------------------
Ethylamine solution (72% or less)....     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(b)...............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------

[[Page 79]]

 
N-Ethylbutylamine....................     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(b)...............        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Ethyl chloride.......................     Press.    Amb.        II       1NA  Ind. Pressure..........        SR    Restr.        II       P-2         NR     Vent F        Yes   No.....................        I-D         NA         8
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
N-Ethylcyclohexylamine...............     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(b)...............        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Ethylene chlorohydrin................     Atmos.    Amb.         I     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed         I       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-5..................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-73.................
--------------------------------------
Ethylene cyanohydrin.................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   No.....................         NA         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Ethylenediamine......................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(c)...............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Ethylene dibromide...................     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed        II       G-1         NR     Vent F         No   No.....................         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Ethylene dichloride..................     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   No.....................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Ethylene glycol monoalkyl ethers.....     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   No.....................        I-C         NA         G
Including:...........................                                    2 i
2-Ethoxyethanol......................
Ethylene glycol butyl ether..........
Ethylene glycol tert-butyl ether.....
Ethylene glycol ethyl ether..........
Ethylene glycol methyl ether.........
Ethylene glycol n-propyl ether.......
Ethylene glycol isopropyl ether......
--------------------------------------

[[Page 80]]

 
Ethylene glycol hexyl ether..........     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   No.....................         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Ethylene glycol propyl ether.........     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   No.....................         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Ethylene oxide.......................     Press.    Amb.         I       1NA  Ind. Pressure..........        SR    Restr.        II       P-2      Inert     Vent F        Yes   .50-10.................        I-B   .40-1(c)         4
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-12.................
--------------------------------------
Ethyl ether..........................     Atmos.    Amb.        II       1NA  Ind. Gravity...........        PV    Closed        II       G-1      Inert     Vent F        Yes   .50-40.................        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-42.................
--------------------------------------
2-Ethylhexyl acrylate................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .50-70(a)..............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-81(a), (b).........
--------------------------------------
Ethylidene norbornene................     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-5..................         NA         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-74.................
--------------------------------------
Ethyl methacrylate...................     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-70(a)..............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
2-Ethyl-3-propylacrolein.............     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   No.....................        I-C         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Ferric chloride solutions............     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N         No   .50-20.................        I-B         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-75.................
--------------------------------------

[[Page 81]]

 
Fluorosilicic acid (30% or less).....     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Ind. Gravity...........        PV    Closed        II       G-1         NR     Vent F         No   .50-20.................        I-B         NA         4
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-22.................
                                                                                                                                                                                 .50-73.................
                                                                                                                                                                                 .50-77.................
--------------------------------------
Formaldehyde solution (37% to 50%)...     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F         No   .55-1(h)...............        I-B         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Formic acid..........................     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-73.................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                         2 i                                                                                                     .55-1(i)...............
--------------------------------------
Furfural.............................     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(h)...............        I-C         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Glutaraldehyde solution (50% or less)     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N         No   No.....................         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Glyoxylic acid solution (50% or less)     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .50-73.................         NA         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-81.................
                                                                                                                                                                                 .58-1(e)...............
--------------------------------------
Hexamethylenediamine solution........     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(c)...............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Hexamethyleneimine...................     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .56-1(b), (c)..........        I-C         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Hydrochloric acid....................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1NA  Ind. Gravity...........      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent F         No   .50-20.................        I-B         NA         4
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-22.................
                                                                                                                                                                                 .50-73.................
--------------------------------------
Hydrofluorosilicic acid (25% or
 less), see Fluorosilicic acid (30%
 or less).
--------------------------------------

[[Page 82]]

 
2-Hydroxyethyl acrylate..............     Atmos.    Amb.         I     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed         I       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-5..................         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i                                                                                                     .50-70(a)..............
                                                                                                                                                                                 .50-73.................
                                                                                                                                                                                 .50-81(a), (b).........
--------------------------------------
Isoprene.............................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-70(a)..............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-81(a), (b).........
--------------------------------------
Kraft pulping liquors (free alkali        Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR         NR         No   .50-73.................         NA         NA         G
 content 3% or more) (including:                                         2 i                                                                                                     .56-1(a), (c), (g).....
 Black, Green, or White liquor).
--------------------------------------
Mesityl oxide........................     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   No.....................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Methylacetylene, Propadiene mixture..     Press.    Amb.       III      1 NA  Ind. Pressure..........        SR    Restr.        II       P-2         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-79.................        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Methyl acrylate......................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-70(a)..............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-81(a), (b).........
--------------------------------------

[[Page 83]]

 
Methylamine solution (42% or less)...     Atmos.    Amb.        II       1NA  Ind. Gravity...........        PV    Closed        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .56-1(a), (b), (c), (g)        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Methyl bromide.......................     Press.    Amb.         I       1NA  Ind. Pressure..........        SR    Closed         I       P-2         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-5..................        I-D         NA         2
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Methyl chloride......................     Press.    Amb.        II       1NA  Ind. Pressure..........        SR    Restr.        II       P-2         NR     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(c)...............        I-D         NA         8
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Methylcyclopentadiene dimer..........     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   No.....................        I-B         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Methyl diethanolamine................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .56-1(b), (c)..........        I-C         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
2-Methyl-5-ethylpyridine.............     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .55-1(e)...............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Methyl methacrylate..................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-70(a)..............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-81(a), (b).........
--------------------------------------
2-Methylpyridine.....................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(c)...............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
alpha-Methylstyrene..................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-70(a)..............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-81(a), (b).........
--------------------------------------
Monochloro- difluoromethane..........     Press.    Amb.       III       1NA  Ind. Pressure..........        SR    Restr.         I       P-1         NR         NR         No   No.....................         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Morpholine...........................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .55-1(c)...............        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------

[[Page 84]]

 
Motor fuel anti-knock compounds           Atmos.    Amb.         I     1 i i  Ind. Gravity...........        PV    Closed         I       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-6..................        I-D         NA     .50-6
 (containing lead alkyls).                                             2 i i                                                                                                     .50-73.................
--------------------------------------
Nitric acid (70% or less)............     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F         No   .50-20.................        I-B         NA         4
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-73.................
                                                                                                                                                                                 .50-80.................
--------------------------------------
Nitrobenzene.........................     Atmos.    Amb.         I     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed         I       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-5..................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-73.................
--------------------------------------
Nitrogen, liquefied..................     Press.     Low       III       1NA  Ind. Pressure..........        SR    Restr.      II-L       P-1         NR     Vent F         No   .40-1(a)...............         NA   .40-1(a)         G
                                                                         2 i                                                                                                     .50-30.................
                                                                                                                                                                                 .50-36.................
--------------------------------------
1- or 2-Nitropropane.................     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-81.................        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
o-Nitrotoluene.......................     Atmos.    Amb.         I     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed         I       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-5..................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-73.................
--------------------------------------
Octyl nitrates (all isomers), see
 Alkyl(C7-C9) nitrates.
--------------------------------------
Oleum................................     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N         No   .50-20.................        I-B         NA         4
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-21.................
                                                                                                                                                                                 .50-73.................
--------------------------------------
Pentachloroethane....................     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F         No   No.....................         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------

[[Page 85]]

 
1,3-Pentadiene.......................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-70(a)..............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-81.................
--------------------------------------
Perchloroethylene....................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F         No   No.....................         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Phenol...............................     Atmos.    Amb.         I     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed         I       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-5..................        I-D         NA         2
                                                                         2 i                                                                                                     .50-73.................
--------------------------------------
Phosphoric acid......................     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N         No   .50-20.................        I-B         NA         4
                                                                         2 i                                                                                                     .50-23.................
                                                                                                                                                                                 .50-73.................
--------------------------------------
Phosphorus, white (elemental)........     Atmos.   Elev.         I     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed         I       G-1      Water     Vent F        Yes   .50-50.................         NA         NA       4-8
                                                                       2 i i                                                                         Pad
--------------------------------------
Phthalic anhydride (molten)..........     Atmos.   Elev.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   No.....................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Polyethylene polyamines..............     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .55-1(e)...............         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Polymethylene polyphenyl isocyanate..     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed        II       G-1        Dry     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(e)...............         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Potassium hydroxide solution, see
 Caustic potash solution.
--------------------------------------
iso-Propanolamine....................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .55-1(c)...............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Propanolamine (iso-, n-).............     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .56-1(b), (c)..........        I-D         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Propionic acid.......................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .50-73.................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .55-1(g)...............
--------------------------------------

[[Page 86]]

 
iso-Propylamine......................     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(c)...............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Propylene oxide......................     Press.    Amb.        II       1NA  Ind. Pressure..........        SR    Restr.        II       P-1      Inert     Vent F        Yes   .50-10.................        I-B         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-13.................
--------------------------------------
iso-Propyl ether.....................     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1      Inert     Vent F        Yes   .50-70(a)..............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Pyridine.............................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(e)...............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Sodium aluminate solution (45% or         Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR         NR         No   .50-73.................         NA         NA         G
 less).                                            Elev.                 2 i                                                                                                     .56-1(a), (b), (c).....
--------------------------------------
Sodium chlorate solution (50% or          Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N         No   .50-73.................         NA         NA         G
 less).                                                                  2 i
--------------------------------------
Sodium dichromate solution (70% or        Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......      Open    Closed        II       G-1         NR     Vent N         No   .50-5(d)...............         NA         NA         G
 less).                                                                2 i i                                                                                                     .50-73.................
                                                                                                                                                                                 .56-1(b), (c)..........
--------------------------------------
Sodium hydroxide solution, see
 Caustic soda solution.
--------------------------------------

[[Page 87]]

 
Sodium hypochlorite solution (20% or      Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F         No   .50-73.................         NA         NA         G
 less).                                                                2 i i                                                                                                     .56-1(a), (b)..........
--------------------------------------
Sodium sulfide, hydrosulfide              Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N         No   .50-73.................         NA         NA         G
 solutions (H2S 15ppm or less).                                          2 i                                                                                                     .55-1(b)...............
--------------------------------------
Sodium sulfide, hydrosulfide              Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F         No   .50-73.................         NA         NA         G
 solutions (H2S greater than 15ppm                                       2 i                                                                                                     .55-1(b)...............
 but less than 200ppm).
--------------------------------------
Sodium sulfide, hydrosulfide              Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed        II       G-1         NR     Vent F         No   .50-73.................         NA         NA         G
 solutions (H2S greater than 200ppm).                                    2 i                                                                                                     .55-1(b)...............
--------------------------------------
Sodium thiocyanate solution (56% or       Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .58-1(a)...............         NA         NA         G
 less).                                                                  2 i
--------------------------------------
Styrene monomer......................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .50-70(a)..............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-81(a), (b).........
--------------------------------------
Sulfur (molten)......................     Atmos.   Elev.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1     Vent N     Vent N        Yes   .50-55.................        I-C       .40-         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                                                           1(f)(1)
--------------------------------------
Sulfur dioxide.......................     Press.    Amb.         I       1NA  Ind. Pressure..........        SR    Closed  ........       P-2         NR     Vent F         No   .50-30.................         NA         NA         2
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-84.................
                                                                                                                                                                                 .55-1(j)...............
--------------------------------------
Sulfuric acid........................     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N         No   .50-20.................        I-B         NA         4
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-21.................
                                                                                                                                                                                 .50-73.................
--------------------------------------
Sulfuric acid, spent.................     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N         No   .50-20.................        I-B         NA         4
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-21.................
                                                                                                                                                                                 .50-73.................
--------------------------------------

[[Page 88]]

 
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane............     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F         No   No.....................         NA         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Tetraethylenepentamine...............     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .55-1(c)...............        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Tetrahydrofuran......................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-70(b)..............        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Toluenediamine.......................     Atmos.   Elev.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-73.................         NA         NA         G
                                                                         2 i                                                                                                     .56-1(a), (b), (c), (g)
--------------------------------------
Toluene diisocyanate.................     Atmos.    Amb.         I     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed         I       G-1        Dry     Vent F        Yes   .50-5..................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                         N 2                         .55-1(e)...............
--------------------------------------
o-Toluidine..........................     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Closed        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-5..................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-73.................
--------------------------------------
1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene...............     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   No.....................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
1,1,2-Trichloroethane................     Atmos.    Amb.       III     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F         No   .50-73.................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                         2 i                                                                                                     .56-1(a)...............
--------------------------------------
Trichloroethylene....................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F         No   No.....................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------

[[Page 89]]

 
1,2,3-Trichloropropane...............     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-73.................        I-D         NA         G
                                                                         2 i                                                                                                     .56-1(a)...............
--------------------------------------
Triethanolamine......................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .55-1(b)...............        I-C         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Triethylamine........................     Atmos.    Amb.        II     1 i i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(e)...............        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Triethylenetetramine.................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent N        Yes   .55-1(b)...............        I-C         NA         G
                                                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Triphenylborane (10% or less),            Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR         NR         No   .56-1(a), (b), (c).....         NA         NA         G
 Caustic soda solution.                                                  2 i
--------------------------------------
Trisodium phosphate solution.........     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR         NR         No   .50-73.................         NA         NA         G
                                                   Elev.                 2 i                                                                                                     .56-1(a), (c)..........
--------------------------------------
Urea, Ammonium nitrate solution           Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F         No   .56-1(b)...............        I-D         NA         G
 (containing more than 2% NH 3).                                         2 i
--------------------------------------
Valeraldehyde (all isomers)..........     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1      Inert     Vent F        Yes   No.....................        I-C         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i
--------------------------------------
Vanillan black liquor (free alkali        Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......      Open      Open        II       G-1         NR         NR         No   .50-73.................         NA         NA         G
 content 3% or more).                                                    2 i                                                                                                     .56-1(a), (c), (g).....
--------------------------------------
Vinyl acetate........................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV      Open        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-70(a)..............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-81(a), (b).........
--------------------------------------

[[Page 90]]

 
Vinyl chloride.......................     Press.    Amb.        II       1NA  Ind. Pressure..........        SR    Closed        II       P-2         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-30.................        I-D         NA         8
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-34.................
--------------------------------------
Vinyl chloride.......................     Atmos.     Low        II       1NA  Ind. Gravity...........        PV    Closed      II-L       G-2         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-30.................        I-D       .40-         8
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-34.................               1(b)(1)
--------------------------------------
Vinylidene chloride..................     Atmos.    Amb.        II       1NA  Ind. Gravity...........        PV    Closed        II       P-2     Padded     Vent F        Yes   .55-1(f)...............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-70(a)..............
                                                                                                                                                                                 .50-81(a), (b).........
--------------------------------------
Vinyltoluene.........................     Atmos.    Amb.       III       1 i  Integral Gravity.......        PV    Restr.        II       G-1         NR     Vent F        Yes   .50-70(a)..............        I-D         NA         G
                                                                       2 i i                                                                                                     .50-81.................
                                                                                                                                                                                 .56-1(a), (b), (c), (g)
--------------------------------------
For requirements see these sections    .........  ......    .10- 1    .13- 5  .15- 1.................     .15-5   .15- 10    .20- 1    .20- 5      .25-1      .25-2        .30   .......................    111.105        .40   .04- 5
 in Part 151:.                                                                                                                                                                                                (Sub-
                                                                                                                                                                                                          chapter J)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
See Table 2 of Part 153 for additional cargoes permitted to be carried by tankbarge.
Terms and symbols:
Segregation--Tank--
 Line 1--Segregation of cargo from surrounding waters:
 i=Skin of vessel (single skin) only required. Cargo tank wall can be vessel's hull.
 i i=Double skin required. Cargo tank wall cannot be vessel's hull.
 Line 2--Segregation of cargo space from machinery spaces and other spaces which have or could have a source of ignition:
 i=Single bulkhead only required. Tank wall can be sole separating medium.
 i i=Double bulkhead required. Cofferdam, empty tank, pumproom, tank with Grade E Liquid (if compatible with cargo) is satisfactory.
Internal tank inspection--
 G--Indicates cargo is subject to general provisions of 151.04-5(b).
 Specific numbers in this column are changes from the general provisions.
Abbreviations used:
Tank type: Ind=Independent.

[[Page 91]]

 
Vent:
 PV=Pressure vacuum valve.
 SR=Safety relief.
Gauging device: Restr.=Restricted.
General usage:
 NR=No requirement.
 NA=Not applicable.
1. The provisions contained in 46 CFR Part 197, subpart C, apply to liquid cargoes containing 0.5% or more benzene by volume.


[USCG 2000-7079, 65 FR 67183, Nov. 8, 2000]

[[Page 92]]


<R04>
          Subpart 151.10--Barge Hull Construction Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 151.10-1  Barge hull classifications.

    (a) Each barge constructed or converted in conformance with this 
subpart shall be assigned a hull type number.
    (1) Effective dates for certain requirements:
    (i) Barges constructed or converted between July 1, 1964, and June 
1, 1970, in accordance with the construction requirements of Sec.Sec. 
32.63 and 98.03 of this chapter are considered to comply with the basic 
provisions of this subpart and will retain the hull type classification 
for the service for which they were originally approved. Changes in 
product endorsement will not be considered a change in service, except 
when a change to a product of higher specific gravity necessitates a 
reevaluation of the intact and damage stability requirements in subpart 
E of part 172 of this chapter.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (b) For this purpose the barge hull types shall be defined as 
follows:
    (1) Type I barge hull. Barge hulls classed as Type I are those 
designed to carry products which require the maximum preventive measures 
to preclude the uncontrolled release of the cargo. These barges are 
required to meet:
    (i) Standards of intact stability and a modified two compartment 
standard of subdivision and damage stability, as specified in subpart E 
of part 172 of this chapter; and
    (ii) Hull structural requirements, including an assumed grounding 
condition.
    (2) Type I-S (special) barge hulls. Type I-S (special) barge hulls 
are those constructed or converted for the carriage of chlorine in bulk 
prior to July 1, 1964, and modified to higher stability standards prior 
to July 1, 1968, but not meeting the requirements for full Type I 
classification.
    (3) Type II barge hull. Barge hulls classed as Type II are those 
designed to carry products which require significant preventive measures 
to preclude the uncontrolled release of the cargo. These barges are 
required to meet:
    (i) Standards of intact stability and a modified one compartment 
standard of subdivision and damage stability, as specified in subpart E 
of part 172 of this chapter; and
    (ii) Hull structural requirements, including an assumed grounding 
condition.
    (4) Type III barge hull. Barge hulls classed as Type III are those 
designed to carry products of sufficient hazard to require a moderate 
degree of control. These barges are required to meet:
    (i) Standards of intact stability as specified in subpart E of part 
172 of this chapter; and
    (ii) Hull structural requirements.

[CGFR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 79-023, 48 FR 
51008, Nov. 4, 1983; CGD 88-100, 54 FR 40040, Sept. 29, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 151.10-5  Subdivision and stability.

    Each barge must meet the applicable requirements in subchapter S of 
this chapter.

[CGD 70-023, 48 FR 51009, Nov. 4, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 151.10-15  Certificate endorsement.

    (a)-(b) [Reserved]
    (c) Certificate endorsement. The following information shall be 
submitted, and upon approval of calculations shall form part of the 
endorsement on the Certificate of Inspection:
    (1) Limiting draft for each hull type service for which approval is 
requested.
    (2) Maximum density (lb./gal.) and maximum cargo weight (tons) for 
each tank for which approval is requested. Their weights will normally 
reflect uniform loading except that for trim purposes the individual 
tank cargo weight may exceed the uniform loading tank cargo weight, 
corresponding to the barge fresh water deadweight at the limiting draft, 
by 5 percent. Where a greater degree of nonuniform loading is desired, 
longitudinal strength calculations shall be submitted.

[CGFR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 79-023, 48 FR 
51009, Nov. 4, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 151.10-20  Hull construction.

    (a) Construction features. (1) Each barge hull shall be constructed 
with a suitable bow form (length, shape, and height of headlog) to 
protect against diving at the maximum speed at which the barge is 
designed to be towed. In

[[Page 93]]

any integrated tow, only the lead barge need comply with this 
requirement.
    (2) All ``open hopper'' type barges shall be provided with coamings 
around the hopper space and a 36-inch minimum height plowshare 
breakwater on the forward rake. The plowshare breakwater may be omitted, 
if it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Commandant that 
sufficient protection is achieved without it. Coamings shall have a 
minimum height of 36 inches forward and may be graduated to a minimum 
height of 24 inches at midlength and 18 inches thereafter. All hopper 
barges constructed with a weathertight rain shield over the hopper space 
are exempt from these requirements, except that they shall be provided 
with an 18-inch minimum coaming all around the hopper.
    (3) All ``open hopper'' type barges modified for the carriage of 
chlorine in bulk shall be provided with 36-inch minimum height coamings 
around the hopper.
    (4) All barges in ocean or coastwise service shall be provided with 
a structural deck and hatches in accordance with the applicable 
provisions of subchapter E of this chapter and the scantling 
requirements of the American Bureau of Shipping.
    (b) Hull structural requirements. (1) All Types I, II, and III 
barges shall comply with the basic structural requirements of the 
American Bureau of Shipping for barges of the ordinary types and the 
applicable supplementary requirements of this section.
    (2) Types I and II barges in inland service: A grounding condition 
shall be assumed where the forward rake bulkhead rests upon a pinnacle 
at the water surface. The maximum hull and tank bending moment and tank 
saddle reactions (if applicable) shall be determined. The hull bending 
stress shall not exceed the applicable limits of paragraphs (b)(2) (i), 
(ii), or (iii) of this section. The maximum tank bending moment and 
saddle reaction shall be used in the tank design calculations required 
by Sec. 151.15-2(b)(3).
    (i) Independent tanks supported by only two saddles do not 
contribute to the strength and stiffness of the barge hull. In such 
case, the hull stress shall not exceed either 50 percent of the minimum 
ultimate tensile strength of the material or 70 percent of the yield 
strength when specified, whichever is greater.
    (ii) Independent tanks supported by three or more saddles contribute 
to the strength and stiffness of the hull. In such case, the hull stress 
shall not exceed the percentage stress values prescribed in Sec. 151.10-
20(b)(2)(i), multiplied by the quantity

(1.5-SWT/UTS),

where SWT is the stress calculated without including the effect of the 
tanks, and UTS is the minimum ultimate tensile strength of the material. 
The value SWT, however, shall in no case be more than 75 percent of UTS.

    (iii) Integral tanks may be considered as contributing to the 
strength and stiffness of the barge hull. The hull stresses for integral 
tank barges shall not exceed the percentage stress values prescribed in 
paragraph (b)(2)(i), of this section.
    (3) Types I and II barges in ocean service:
    (i) Independent tank barges with tanks supported by three or more 
saddles shall be subjected to a 0.6L\0.6\ trochoidal wave hogsag 
analysis to determine the maximum hull and tank bending moments and tank 
saddle reactions.
    (ii) All independent tank barges, regardless of the number of saddle 
supports shall be subject to a still water bending analysis to determine 
the hull bending moment. For those barges with independent tanks 
supported by three or more saddles, this analysis shall consider tank-
hull interaction so as to determine tank bending moments and saddle 
reactions.
    (iii) The still water tank bending moments and saddle reactions 
shall be superimposed upon those obtained by simultaneous application of 
the following dynamic loadings:
    (a) Rolling 30<deg> each side (120<deg> full cycle) in 10 seconds.
    (b) Pitching 6<deg> half amplitude (24<deg> full cycle) in 7 
seconds.
    (c) Heaving L/80 half amplitude (L/20 full cycle) in 8 seconds.
    (iv) The hull structure and saddle support system shall be analyzed, 
using the maximum hull bending moments and saddle reactions obtained 
from the

[[Page 94]]

foregoing. Bending stress shall not exceed 60 percent of the yield 
strength or 42 percent of the minimum tensile strength of the material, 
whichever is less. Critical buckling strength shall be at least 75 
percent greater than calculated buckling stresses. The maximum tank 
bending moments and saddle reactions shall be used in the tank design 
calculations required by Sec. 151.15-3(b)(8).


<R04>
  Subpart 151.12--Equipment and Operating Requirements for Control of 
                  Pollution From Category D NLS Cargoes

    Source: CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7777, Mar. 12, 1987, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R05>
Sec. 151.12-5  Equipment for Category D NLS.

    The Coast Guard endorses the Certificate of Inspection and for ships 
making foreign voyages issues the endorsed NLS Certificate required by 
Sec. 151.12-10 for an oceangoing non-self-propelled ship to carry as 
bulk cargo the following Category D NLSs if the ship meets the 
requirements of this part and the requirements applying to ships that 
carry Category D NLS cargoes in Sec.Sec. 153.470, 153.486, and 153.490 
of this chapter:

Acetic acid
Acrylic acid
Adiponitrile
Aminoethylethanolamine
Ammonium bisulfite solution
Butyl methacrylate
Caustic soda solution
Coal tar pitch
Cyclohexanone
Cyclohexanone, Cychexanol mixture
Dichloromethane
2,2-Dichloropropionic acid
Diethylenetriamine
N,N-Dimethylacetamide
Dimethylethanolamine
Dimethylformamide
1,4-Dioxane
Ethanolamine
N-Ethylcyclohexylamine
Ethylene cyanohydrin
Ethylene glycol monoalkyl ethers
Ethyl methacrylate
Formic acid
Glutaraldehyde solution
Glyoxylic acid solution (50% or less)
Hydrochloric acid
Mesityl oxide
Methyl methacrylate
Morpholine
1- or 2-Nitropropane
Phosphoric acid
Polyethylene polyamines
Polymethylene polyphenyl isocyanate
Propionic acid
iso-Propyl ether
Pyridine
Tetraethylenepentamine
Tetrahydrofuran
Triethanolamine
Triethylenetetramine

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7777, Mar. 12, 1989, as amended by CGD 88-100, 54 FR 
40040, Sept. 29, 1989; CGD 92-100, 59 FR 17028, Apr. 11, 1994; CGD 94-
900, 59 FR 45139, Aug. 31, 1994; CGD 94-902, 60 FR 34043, June 29, 1995; 
USCG 2000 -7079, 65 FR 67196, Nov. 8, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 151.12-10  Operation of oceangoing non-self-propelled ships Carrying 
Category D NLS.

    (a) An oceangoing non-self-propelled ship may not carry in a cargo 
tank a Category D NLS cargo listed under Sec. 151.12-5 unless the ship 
has on board a Certificate of Inspection and for ships making foreign 
voyages an NLS Certificate endorsed under that section to allow the 
cargo tank to carry the NLS cargo.
    (b) The person in charge of an oceangoing non-self-propelled ship 
that carries a Category D NLS listed under Sec. 151.12-5 shall ensure 
that the ship is operated as prescribed for the operation of oceangoing 
ships carrying Category D NLSs in Sec.Sec. 153.901, 153.909, 153.1100, 
153.1102, 153.1104, 153.1106, 153.1124, 153.1126, 153.1128, 153.1130 and 
153.1132 of this chapter.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7777, Mar. 12, 1987, as amended by CGD 81-101, 53 FR 
28974, Aug. 1, 1988 and 54 FR 12629, Mar. 28, 1989]


<R04>
                    Subpart 151.13--Cargo Segregation


<R05>
Sec. 151.13-1  General.

    This subpart prescribes the requirements for cargo segregation for 
cargo tanks. These requirements are based on considerations of cargo 
reactivity, stability, and contamination of the surroundings and other 
cargoes.

[CGD 88-100. 54 FR 40029, Sept. 29, 1989, as amended by CGD 96-041, 61 
FR 50731, Sept. 27, 1996]

[[Page 95]]


<R05>
Sec. 151.13-5  Cargo segregation--tanks.

    (a) The configurations listed in this paragraph refer to the 
separation of the cargo from its surroundings and list the various 
degrees of segregation required. Paragraphs and (2) of this section 
explain the symbols used in lines 1 and 2, in order, under the tank 
segregation column of Table 151.05.
    (1) Segregation of cargo from surrounding waters (Line 1 of Table 
151.05).

 i=Skin of vessel (single skin) only required. Cargo tank wall can be 
    vessel's hull.
ii=Double skin required. Cargo tank wall cannot be vessel's hull.
NA=Nonapplicable for this case. Independent tanks already have such 
    segregation built in through design.

    (2) Segregation of cargo space from machinery spaces and other 
spaces which have or could have a source of ignition (Line 2 of Table 
151.05).

 i=Single bulkhead only required. Tank wall can be sole separating 
    medium.
ii=Double bulkhead, required. Cofferdam, empty tank, pumproom, tank with 
    Grade E Liquid (if compatible with cargo) is satisfactory.

    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) If a cofferdam is required for segregation purposes and a 
secondary barrier is required for low temperature protection by Sec. 
151.15-3(d)(4), the void space between the primary and secondary 
barriers shall not be acceptable in lieu of the required cofferdam.

[CGFR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 75-59, 45 FR 
70273, Oct. 23, 19805; CGD 96-041, 61 FR 50731, Sept. 27, 1996]


<R04>
                          Subpart 151.15--Tanks


<R05>
Sec. 151.15-1  Tank types.

    This section lists the definitions of the various tank types 
required for cargo containment by Table 151.05.
    (a) Integral. A cargo containment envelope which forms a part of the 
vessel's hull in which it is built, and may be stressed in the same 
manner and by the same loads which stress the contiguous hull structure. 
An integral tank is essential to the structural completeness of its 
vessel's hull.
    (b) Independent. A cargo containment envelope which is not a 
contiguous part of the hull structure. An independent tank is built and 
installed so as to eliminate, wherever possible (or, in any event, to 
minimize) its stressing as a result of stressing or motion of the 
adjacent hull structure. In general, therefore, motion of parts of the 
tank relative to the adjacent hull structure is possible. An independent 
tank is not essential to the structural completeness of its carrying 
vessel's hull.
    (c) Gravity. Tanks having a design pressure (as described in Part 54 
of this chapter) not greater than 10 pounds per square inch gauge and of 
prismatic shape or other geometry where stress analysis is neither 
readily nor completely determinate. (Integral tanks are of the gravity 
type.)
    (d) Pressure. Independent tanks whose design pressure (as described 
in Part 54 of this chapter) is above 10 pounds per square inch gauge and 
fabricated in accordance with part 54, of this chapter. Independent 
gravity tanks which are of normal pressure vessel configuration (i.e., 
bodies of revolution, in which the stresses are readily determinate) 
shall be classed as pressure vessel type tanks even though their maximum 
allowable working pressure is less than 10 pounds per square inch gauge. 
Pressure vessel tanks shall be of Classes I, I-L, II, II-L, or III, as 
defined in subchapter F of this chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 151.15-3  Construction.

    This section lists the requirements for construction of the types of 
cargo tanks defined in Sec. 151.15-1.
    (a) Gravity type tanks. Gravity type cargo tanks vented at a 
pressure of 4 pounds per square inch gauge or less shall be constructed 
and tested as required by standards established by the American Bureau 
of Shipping or other recognized classification society. Gravity type 
tanks vented at a pressure exceeding 4 but not exceeding 10 pounds per 
square inch gauge will be given special consideration by the Commandant.
    (b) Pressure vessel type tanks. Pressure vessel type tanks shall be 
designed and tested in accordance with the requirements of Part 54 of 
this chapter.

[[Page 96]]

    (1) Uninsulated cargo tanks, where the cargo is transported, at or 
near ambient temperatures, shall be designed for a pressure not less 
than the vapor pressure of the cargo at 115 <deg>F. The design shall 
also be based on the minimum internal pressure (maximum vacuum), plus 
the maximum external static head to which the tank may be subjected.
    (2) When cargo tanks, in which the cargo is transported at or near 
ambient temperature, are insulated with an insulation material of a 
thickness to provide a thermal conductance of not more than 0.075 B.t.u. 
per square foot per degree Fahrenheit differential in temperature per 
hour, the tanks shall be designed for a pressure of not less than the 
vapor pressure of the cargo at 105 <deg>F. The insulation shall also 
meet the requirements of paragraph (f) of this section.
    (3) Cargo tanks in which the temperature is maintained below the 
normal atmospheric temperature by refrigeration or other acceptable 
means shall be designed for a pressure of not less than 110 percent of 
the vapor pressure corresponding to the temperature of the liquid at 
which the system is maintained, or the pressure corresponding to the 
greatest dynamic and static loads expected to be encountered in service. 
For mechanically stressed relieved cargo tanks, additional factors 
relating design pressure and maximum allowable pressure shall be as 
specified by the Commandant. The material of the tank shall meet the 
material requirements specified in part 54 of this chapter for the 
service temperature, and this temperature shall be permanently marked on 
the tank as prescribed in Sec. 54.10-20 of this chapter.
    (4) The maximum allowable temperature of the cargo is defined as the 
boiling temperature of the liquid at a pressure equal to the setting of 
the relief valve.
    (5) The service temperature is the minimum temperature of a product 
at which it may be contained, loaded and/or transported. However, the 
service temperature shall in no case be taken higher than given by the 
following formula.

t<INF>z</INF>=t<INF>w</INF>-0.25(t<INF>w</INF>-t<INF>B</INF>)

where:
t<INF>z</INF>=Service temperature.
t<INF>w</INF>=Boiling temperature of gas at normal working pressure of 
container but not higher than +32 <deg>F.
t<INF>B</INF>=Boiling temperature of gas at atmospheric pressure.


Under normal circumstances, only temperatures due to refrigerated 
service will be considered in determining the service temperature. 
Refrigerated service for purposes of this paragraph is defined as 
service where the temperature is controlled in the process rather than 
being caused by atmospheric conditions.
    (6) Heat transmission studies, where required, shall assume the 
minimum ambient temperatures of 0 <deg>F still air and 32 <deg>F still 
water, and maximum ambient temperatures of 115 <deg>F still air and 90 
<deg>F still water.
    (7) Where applicable, the design of the cargo tanks shall 
investigate the thermal stresses induced in the tanks at the service 
temperature.
    (8) Calculations showing the stress level in the tanks under dynamic 
loading conditions for ocean service barges (see Sec. 151.10-20(b)(4)) 
and grounding conditions for inland service barges (see Sec. 151.10-20-
(b)(2)) shall be submitted to the Commandant for approval. These 
calculations shall take into account the local stresses due to the 
interaction between the barge hull and the tanks.
    (c) High density cargo. Cargoes with a specific gravity greater than 
that for which the scantlings of the tank are designed may be carried 
provided that:
    (1) The maximum cargo weight (tons) in a specific tank does not 
exceed the maximum cargo weight (tons) endorsed on the certificate of 
inspection.
    (2) The scantlings of the tank are sufficient to prevent rupture 
under a full head of the higher density cargo. Scantlings meeting 
ordinary bulkhead requirements for the full head will satisfy this 
requirement.
    (d) Arrangements--(1) Collision protection. (i) Tanks containing 
cargoes which are required to be carried in Type I hulls by Table 151.05 
shall be located a minimum of 4 feet inboard from the side shell and box 
end of the vessel. Tanks containing cargoes which are required to be 
carried in Type II

[[Page 97]]

hulls by Table 151.05 shall be located a minimum of 3 feet inboard from 
the side shell and box end of the vessel.
    (ii) All independent cargo tanks installed on Type I or Type II 
barge hulls shall be protected with suitable collision chocks or 
collision straps. A longitudinal collision load of one and one half 
times the combined weight of the tank and the cargo shall be assumed. 
All other independent cargo tanks shall be provided with suitable 
collision chocks or collision straps assuming a longitudinal collision 
load equal to the combined weight of the tank and the cargo. The design 
bearing stress shall not exceed 2 times the yield strength or 1.5 times 
the minimum ultimate strength, whichever is less.
    (iii) Tanks containing cargoes, which are required to be carried in 
Type I or Type II hulls by Table 151.05, shall be located a minimum of 
25 feet from the head log at the bow. Box barges and trail barges need 
not comply with this requirement.
    (2) Inspection clearances. The distance between tanks or between a 
tank and the vessel's structure shall be such as to provide adequate 
access for inspection and maintenance of all tank surfaces and hull 
structure; but shall not normally be less than 15 inches except in way 
of web frames or similar major structural members where the minimum 
clearance shall be equal to the flange or faceplate width.
    (3) Access openings. Each tank shall be provided with at least a 
15"x18" diameter manhole, fitted with a cover located above the maximum 
liquid level as close as possible to the top of the tank. Where access 
trunks are fitted to tanks, the diameter of the trunks shall be at least 
30 inches.
    (4) Low temperature protection. (i) When low temperature cargoes are 
to be carried in gravity type tanks at a temperature lower than that for 
which the hull steel is adequate, a secondary barrier designed to 
contain leaked cargo temporarily shall be provided. The design of the 
cargo containment system shall be such that under normal service 
conditions, or upon failure of the primary tank, the hull structure 
shall not be cooled down to a temperature which is unsafe for the 
materials involved. The secondary barrier and structural components of 
the hull which may be exposed to low temperatures shall meet the 
material requirements (i.e., chemistry and physical properties) 
specified in part 54 of this chapter for the service temperature 
involved. Heat transmission studies and tests may be required to 
demonstrate that the structural material temperatures in the hull are 
acceptable.
    (ii) The design shall take into consideration the thermal stresses 
induced in the cargo tank at the service temperature during loading.
    (iii) Where necessary, devices for spray loading or other methods of 
precooling or cooling during loading shall be included in the design.
    (iv) Pressure-vessel type tanks shall be radiographed in accordance 
with the requirements of part 54 of this chapter. For gravity type 
tanks, all weld intersections or crossings in joints of primary tank 
shells shall be radiographed for a distance of 10 thicknesses from the 
intersection. All other welding in the primary tank and in the secondary 
barrier, shall be spot radiographed in accordance with the requirements 
specified in part 54 of this chapter for Class II-L pressure vessels.
    (v) For nonpressure vessel type containment systems, access shall be 
arranged to permit inspection one side each of the primary tank and 
secondary barrier, under normal shipyard conditions. Containment systems 
which, because of their peculiar design, cannot be visually inspected to 
this degree, may be specially considered provided an equivalent degree 
of safety is attained.
    (e) Installation of cargo tanks. (1) Cargo tanks shall be supported 
on foundations of steel or other suitable material and securely anchored 
in place to prevent the tanks from shifting when subjected to external 
forces. Each tank shall be supported so as to prevent the concentration 
of excessive loads on the supporting portions of the shell or head.
    (2) Foundations, and stays where required, shall be designed for 
support and constraint of the weight of the full tank, and the dynamic 
loads imposed thereon. Thermal movement shall also be considered.

[[Page 98]]

    (3) Foundations and stays shall be suitable for the temperatures 
they will experience at design conditions.
    (4) Cargo tanks may be installed ``on deck,'' ``under deck,'' or 
with the tanks protruding through the deck. All tanks shall be installed 
with the manhole openings located in the open above the weather deck. 
Provided an equivalent degree of safety is attained, the Commandant may 
approve cargo tanks installed with manhole openings located below the 
weather deck. Where a portion of the tank extends above the weather 
deck, provision shall be made to maintain the weathertightness of the 
deck, except that the weathertightness of the upper deck need not be 
maintained on:
    (i) Vessels operating on restricted routes which are sufficiently 
protected; or,
    (ii) Open hopper type barges of acceptable design.
    (5) No welding shall be performed on tanks which require and have 
been stress relieved unless authorized by the Commandant.
    (f) Materials. (1) Materials used in the construction of cargo tanks 
shall be suitable for the intended application and shall be in 
accordance with the applicable requirements of part 54 of this chapter. 
For cargoes carried at low temperatures, the tank supports and 
foundations, and portions of the hull which may be exposed to low 
temperature, shall also meet the applicable requirements of that part.
    (2) When required, cargo tanks shall be lined with rubber or other 
material acceptable to the Commandant. The interior surfaces of the 
cargo tanks shall be made smooth, welds chipped or ground smooth, and 
the surfaces thoroughly cleaned before the lining is applied. The lining 
material shall be resistive to attack by the cargo, not less elastic 
than the metal of the tank proper, and nonporous when tested after 
application. It shall be of substantially uniform thickness. The lining 
shall be directly bonded to the tank plating, or attached by other 
satisfactory means acceptable to the Commandant.
    (g) Insulation. (1) Insulation, when provided, shall be compatible 
with the cargo and the tank materials.
    (2) Insulation in a location exposed to possible high temperature or 
source of ignition shall be one of the following:
    (i) Incombustible, complying with the requirements of Subpart 
164.009 of Part 164 of this chapter; or
    (ii) Fire retardant, having a flame spread rating of 50 or less as 
determined by ASTM Specification E 84 (incorporated by reference, see 
Sec. 151.01-2) (Tunnel Test); or,
    (iii) Nonburning or ``self-extinguishing'' as determined by ASTM 
Specification D 4986, ``Horizontal Burning Characteristics of Cellular 
Polymeric Materials'' (incorporated by reference, see Sec. 151.01-2) and 
covered by a steel jacket having a minimum thickness of 18 gauge (0.0428 
inches) (U.S. Standard Gauge) or an equivalent means of protection 
acceptable to the Commandant.
    (3) Insulation in a location protected against high temperature or 
source of ignition need satisfy no requirement for combustibility.
    (4) Insulation shall be impervious to water vapor, or have a vapor-
proof coating of a fire-retardant material acceptable to the Commandant. 
Unless the vapor barrier is inherently weather resistant, tanks exposed 
to the weather shall be fitted with a removable sheet metal jacket of 
not less than 18 gauge over the vapor-proof coating and flashed around 
all openings so as to be weathertight. Insulation which is not exposed 
to the weather when installed on tanks carrying cargoes above ambient 
temperatures need not be impervious to water vapor nor be covered with a 
vapor-proof coating.
    (5) Insulation shall be adequately protected in areas of possible 
mechanical damage.
    (h) Fire exposure protection. Tanks which are provided with fire 
exposure protection of one of the following categories may be allowed a 
reduction in the size of relief valves.
    (1) Approved incombustible insulation meeting the requirements of 
subpart 164.007 of part 164 of this chapter which is secured to the tank 
with steel bands.
    (2) Located in a hold or protected by a self-supporting steel jacket 
or cover (such as a hopper cover) of at least 10 gauge (0.1345) for 
insulation.

[[Page 99]]

    (i) Tanks not protected against fire exposure as described in this 
paragraph shall not be permitted a reduction in size of relief valves.

[CFGR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 88-100, 54 FR 
40040, Sept. 29, 1989; USCG-1999-5151, 64 FR 67183, Dec. 1, 1999; USCG-
2000-7790, 65 FR 58463, Sept. 29, 2000]

Sec. 151.15-5  Venting.

    This section contains definitions and requirements for the various 
methods of venting specified in Table 151.05. In addition to the 
requirement that all vents must penetrate into tanks at the top of the 
vapor space, the following methods of venting and the applicable 
restrictions are listed:
    (a) Open venting. A venting system which offers no restriction 
(except pipe losses and flame screen, where used) to the movement of 
liquid or vapor to or from the cargo tank (via the vent) under normal 
operating conditions. The total cross-sectional area of the vents shall 
not be less than the total cross-sectional area of the filling pipe or 
pipes. Ullage openings may be counted as part of the required cross-
sectional area: Provided, That each cargo tank has at least one 
permanent vent. The minimum size of a cargo tank vent shall be not less 
than 2\1/2\ inches. The outlet end of the vent shall terminate in a 
gooseneck bend and shall be located at a reasonable height above the 
weather deck, clear of all obstructions. No shut-off valve or frangible 
disk shall be fitted in the vent lines except that a float check valve 
may be installed so as to exclude the entry of water into the tank 
(i.e., to prevent downflooding). An open venting system may be fitted 
with a flame screen.
    (b) Pressure-vacuum venting. A normally closed venting system fitted 
with a device to automatically limit the pressure or vacuum in the tank 
to design limits. Pressure-vacuum relief valves shall comply with the 
requirements of subpart 162.017 of this chapter. The required capacity 
of the venting system shall be in accordance with part 54 of this 
chapter.
    (c) Safety relief venting. A closed venting system fitted with a 
device to automatically limit the pressure in the tank to below its 
maximum allowable working pressure. The maximum safety relief valve 
setting shall not exceed the maximum allowable working pressure of the 
tank. For cargoes carried at ambient temperatures, the minimum safety 
relief valve setting shall correspond to the saturated vapor pressure of 
the cargo at 105 <deg>F if carried in an insulated tank, or 115 <deg>F 
if carried in an uninsulated tank. For cargoes carried below ambient 
temperature, the safety relief valve setting shall be selected to 
provide a suitable margin between normal operating pressure of the tank 
and the opening pressure of the valve but in no case shall it exceed the 
maximum allowable working pressure of the tank. The safety relief valves 
shall be of a type approved under subparts 162.001 or 162.018 of 
subchapter Q of this chapter. The required capacity of the safety relief 
valves shall be in accordance with the requirements of part 54 of this 
chapter.
    (d) Rupture disks. (1) When required by the nature of the cargo, 
rupture disks may be installed in lieu of or in addition to other 
pressure limiting devices in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 
54.15-13 of this chapter.
    (2) When a pressure-vacuum relief valve or safety relief valve 
normally protected by a rupture disk or breaking pin device is exposed 
to the cargo due to breakage of the disk, the valve shall be reinspected 
before being returned to service.

Sec. 151.15-6  Venting piping.

    (a) The back pressure in the relief valve discharge lines shall be 
taken into account when determining the flow capacity of the relief 
valve to be used. The back pressure in the discharge line shall be 
limited to 10 percent of the valve operating pressure or a compensating-
type valve shall be used. Suitable provision shall be made for draining 
condensate which may accumulate in the vent piping.
    (b) [Reserved]

Sec. 151.15-10  Cargo gauging devices.

    This section contains definitions and requirements for types of 
gauging devices specified in Table 151.05.
    (a) Open gauging. A gauging method which uses an opening in the 
cargo tank and which may expose the gauge

[[Page 100]]

user to the cargo and its vapors. Examples of this type are gauge hatch, 
ullage hole.
    (b) Restricted. A gauging device which penetrates the cargo tank and 
which, in operation, causes or permits the release to the atmosphere of 
small quantities of cargo vapor or liquid. The amount of cargo released 
is controlled by the small diameter of the tank penetration opening and 
by a locally operated valve or similar closure device in that opening. 
When not in use, this type gauging device is closed to maintain the 
complete integrity of cargo containment. Examples of this type are 
rotary tube, fixed tube, slip tube, sounding tube. (See Sec.Sec. 151.03-
43 and 151.15-10(g).)
    (c) Closed. A gauging device which penetrates the cargo tank, but 
which is part of a closed system maintaining the complete integrity of 
cargo containment. This device is designed and installed so as not to 
release cargo liquid or vapor in any amount to the atmosphere. Examples 
of this type are automatic float, continuous tape (magnetic coupled), 
sight glass (protected), electronic probe, magnetic, differential 
pressure cell.
    (d) Isolated or indirect. A gauging method or device which is 
isolated from the tank (no penetration of the tank shell) and which may 
employ an indirect measurement to obtain the desired quantity. Examples 
of this type are weighing of cargo, sonic depth gauge (without 
penetration of tank shell), pipe flow meter.
    (e) All gauging devices and related fixtures which form a part of 
the cargo containment barrier shall be of suitable material and shall be 
designed for the pressure and temperature of the cargo in accordance 
with the requirements of Subchapter F of this chapter.
    (f) Use of restricted gauging devices. (1) When required in Table 
151.05, cargoes carried under pressure shall have restricted gauging 
devices designed so that the maximum bleed valve opening is not larger 
than 0.055;inch; diameter, unless provided with an excess flow valve. 
Sounding tubes are prohibited for use with cargoes having a vapor 
pressure in excess of 14.7 p.s.i.a. at 115 <deg>F, if carried in an 
uninsulated tank, or at 105 <deg>F, if carried in an insulated tank.
    (2) When utilizing a sounding tube, the cargo tank vent system shall 
be designed to prevent the discharge of cargo through the sounding tube 
due to pressure build up in the cargo tank vapor space. (See Sec. 
151.03-43) When cargoes carried at atmospheric pressure are required to 
have a restricted gauging device, open gauges may be provided in 
addition to restricted gauges for this type of cargo. However, open 
gauges may not be used while cargo transfer operations are actually 
being performed.
    (g) Fixed tube gauges are not acceptable as primary means of 
gauging. They may be used as a check on the calibration of other gauging 
devices.
    (h) For pressure-vessel type tanks, each automatic float, continuous 
reading tape or similar type gauge not mounted directly on the tank or 
dome shall be fitted with a shutoff device located as close to the tank 
as practicable. When an automatic float gauging device, which gauges the 
entire height of the tank, is used, a fixed tube gauge set in the range 
of 85 percent to 90 percent of the water capacity of the tank shall be 
provided in addition as a means of checking the accuracy of the 
automatic float gauge, or other alternate means acceptable to the 
Commandant may be used.
    (i) Gauge glasses of the columnar type are prohibited.
    (j) Flat sight glasses may be used in the design of automatic float 
continuous reading tape gauges. However such glasses shall be made of 
high strength material, suitable for the operating temperatures, of not 
less than one-half inch in thickness and adequately protected by a metal 
cover.

                     Subpart 151.20--Cargo Transfer

Sec. 151.20-1  Piping--general.

    (a) Cargo piping systems shall be arranged and fabricated in 
accordance with this section and Subchapter F. The class of piping 
system required for a specific cargo shall be as listed in Table 151.05 
as a minimum; however, a higher class may be required when the actual 
service temperature or pressure

[[Page 101]]

so dictates. See Table 56.04-2 of this chapter.
    (b) Piping system components shall be suitable for use with the 
cargoes for which the barge is certificated, and shall be of materials 
listed in Subchapter F of this chapter, or such other material as the 
Commandant may specifically approve. All piping materials shall be 
tested in accordance with the requirements of Subchapter F of this 
chapter. The valve seat material, packing, gaskets, and all other 
material which comes into contact with the cargo shall be resistant to 
the chemical action of the cargoes for which the barge is certificated.
    (c) Cargo piping systems, when subject to corrosive attack of the 
cargo, and when serving cargo tanks which are required by this 
subchapter to be lined or coated, shall be constructed of, lined or 
coated with corrosion-resistant material. Vent systems shall be 
similarly constructed, lined, or coated up to and including the vent 
control device.
    (d) All piping systems components shall have a pressure rating at 
operating temperature (according to the applicable American National 
Standards Institute, Inc., pressure/temperature relations) not less than 
the maximum pressure to which the system may be subjected. Piping which 
is not protected by a relief valve, or which can be isolated from its 
relief valve, shall be designed for the greatest of:
    (1) The cargo vapor pressure at 115 <deg>F.
    (2) The maximum allowable working pressure of the cargo tank.
    (3) The pressure of the associated pump or compressor relief valve.
    (4) The total discharge head of the associated pump or compressor 
where a discharge relief valve is not used.

The escape from cargo piping system relief valves shall be run to 
venting system or to a suitable recovery system. Provisions shall be 
made for pressure relief of all piping, valves, fittings, etc., in which 
excessive pressure build-up may occur because of an increase in product 
temperature.
    (e) Provisions shall be made by the use of offsets, loops, bends, 
expansion joints, etc., to protect the piping and tank from excessive 
stress due to thermal movement and/or movements of the tank and hull 
structure. Expansion joints shall be held to a minimum and where used 
shall be subject to individual approval by the Commandant.
    (f) Low temperature piping shall be isolated from the hull 
structure. Where necessary, arrangements to provide for the protection 
of the hull structure from leaks in low temperature systems in way of 
pumps, flanges, etc., shall be provided.
    (g) Connections to tanks shall be protected against mechanical 
damage and tampering. Underdeck cargo piping shall not be installed 
between the outboard side of cargo containment spaces and the skin of 
the barge, unless provision is made to maintain the minimum inspection 
and collision protection clearances (where required) between the piping 
and the skin. Cargo piping which is external to tanks, and is installed 
below the weather deck shall be joined by welding, except for flanged 
connections to shutoff valves and expansion joints.
    (h) Piping shall enter independent cargo tanks above the 
weatherdeck, either through or as close to the tank dome as possible.
    (i) Horizontal runs of cargo piping on integral tank barges may be 
run above or below the weatherdeck. When run below the weatherdeck, the 
following are applicable:
    (1) Horizontal runs located entirely within integral cargo tanks 
shall be fitted with a stop valve, located inside the tank that is being 
serviced and operable from the weatherdeck. There shall be cargo 
compatibility in the event of a piping failure.
    (2) Horizontal runs of cargo piping installed in pipe tunnels may 
penetrate gravity type tanks below the weatherdeck: Provided, That each 
penetration is fitted with a stop valve operable from the weatherdeck. 
If the tunnel is directly accessible from the weatherdeck without 
penetrating the cargo tank, the stop valve shall be located on the 
tunnel side. If the tunnel is not accessible from the weatherdeck, the 
valve shall be located on the tank side of the penetration.

[[Page 102]]

    (3) The tunnel shall comply with all tank requirements for 
construction, location, ventilation, and electrical hazard. There shall 
be cargo compatibility in the event of a piping failure.
    (4) The tunnel shall have no other openings except to the 
weatherdeck or a cargo pumproom.

Sec. 151.20-5  Cargo system valving requirements.

    For the purpose of adequately controlling the cargo, both under 
normal operating and casualty conditions, every cargo piping system 
shall be provided with one of the following sets of control valves and 
meet the requirements listed below. Cargo tanks, whether gravity or 
pressure vessel type, for cargoes having a saturated vapor pressure of 
10 pounds per square inch gauge or less at 115 <deg>F (105 <deg>F if the 
tank is insulated) shall be provided with a valving system designated as 
Gravity-1. Cargo tanks, whether gravity or pressure vessel type, for 
cargoes which are carried below ambient temperature and whose vapor 
pressure is maintained at 10 pounds per square inch gauge or below shall 
be provided with a valving system designated as Gravity-2. Cargo tanks 
for cargoes which have vapor pressures above 10 p.s.i.g. at 115 <deg>F 
(105 <deg>F if tank is insulated) shall be provided with a valving 
system designated as Pressure-1. Cargo tanks for cargoes which have 
vapor pressures above 10 pounds per square inch gauge at 115 <deg>F (105 
<deg>F if tank is insulated) and which require greater protection due to 
their hazardous characteristics shall be provided with a valving system 
designated as Pressure-2. The requirements of paragraphs (a) through (d) 
of this section for stop valves or excess flow valves to be fitted at 
tank penetrations are not applicable to nozzles at which pressure vacuum 
or safety relief valves are fitted.
    (a) Gravity-1 (G-1). (1) One manually operated stop valve shall be 
installed on each tank filling and discharge line, located near the tank 
penetration.
    (2) One stop valve or blind flange shall be installed at each cargo 
hose connection. When a cargo hose connection is in use, it shall be 
provided with a stop valve; which may be part of the vessel's equipment 
or may be part of the shore facility and attached to the barge end of 
the loading hose. When a cargo hose connection is not in use, it may be 
secured with a blind flange.
    (3) If individual deepwell pumps are used to discharge the contents 
of each cargo tank, and the pumps are provided with a remote shutdown 
device, a stop valve at the tank is not required on the tank discharge 
line.
    (b) Gravity-2 (G-2). (1) One manually operated stop valve shall be 
installed on each tank penetration, located as close as possible to the 
tank.
    (2) One remote operated, quick closing shut-off valve shall be 
installed at each cargo hose connection.
    (3) A remote shutdown device shall be installed for all cargo 
handling machinery.
    (c) Pressure-1 (P-1). (1) One manually operated stop valve and one 
excess flow valve shall be installed on each tank penetration, located 
as close as possible to the tank.
    (2) One manually operated stop valve shall be installed at each 
cargo hose connection, when in use.
    (d) Pressure-2 (P-2). (1) One manually operated stop valve and one 
excess flow valve shall be installed at each tank penetration, located 
as close as possible to the tank.
    (2) One remote operated quick closing shutoff valve shall be 
installed at each cargo hose connection when in use.
    (3) No tank penetration shall be less than 1 inch diameter.
    (e) Cargo tank penetrations which are connections for gauging or 
measuring devices need not be equipped with excess flow or remote 
operated quick closing valves provided that the opening is constructed 
so that the outward flow of tank contents shall not exceed that passed 
by a No. 54 drill size (0.055-inch diameter).
    (f) The control system for any required quick closing shutoff valves 
shall be such that the valves may be operated from at least two remote 
locations on the vessel; if means of fire protection is required by 
Table 151.05, the control system shall also be provided with fusible 
elements designed to melt between 208 <deg>F and 220 <deg>F, which will 
cause the quick closing shut off valves to close in case of fire. Quick

[[Page 103]]

closing shut off valves shall be of the fail-closed (closed on loss of 
power) type and be capable of local manual operation. Quick closing shut 
off valves shall operate from full open to full closed under all service 
conditions in not more than 10 seconds, without causing excessive 
pressure surges.
    (g) Excess flow valves, where required, shall close automatically at 
the rated closing flow of vapor or liquid as tested and specified by the 
manufacturer. The piping, including fittings, valves, and appurtenances 
protected by an excess flow valve, shall have a greater capacity than 
the rated closing flow of the excess flow valve. Excess flow valves may 
be designed with a bypass not to exceed 0.040-inch diameter opening to 
allow equalization of pressure, after an operating shutdown.
    (h) Suitable means shall be provided to relieve the pressure and 
remove liquid contents from cargo lines and hoses to the cargo tank or 
other safe location prior to effecting disconnections.

Sec. 151.20-10  Cargo system instrumentation.

    (a) Each tank operated at other than ambient temperature shall be 
provided with at least one remote reading temperature sensor located in 
the liquid phase of the cargo. The temperature gauge shall be located at 
the cargo handling control station or another approved location.
    (b) Where required, each tank equipped with safety relief valves 
shall be fitted with a pressure gauge which shall be located at the 
cargo handling control station or at another approved location.

Sec. 151.20-15  Cargo hose if carried on the barge.

    (a) Liquid and vapor line hose used for cargo transfer shall be of 
suitable material resistant to the action of the cargo. Hose shall be 
suitable for the temperatures to which it may be subjected and shall be 
acceptable to the Commandant.
    (b) Hose subject to tank pressure, or the discharge pressure of 
pumps or vapor compressors, shall be designed for a bursting pressure of 
not less than 5 times the maximum safety relief valve setting of the 
tank, pump, or compressor, whichever determines the maximum pressure to 
which the hose may be subjected in service.
    (c) Each new type of cargo hose, complete with end fittings, shall 
be prototype tested to a pressure not less than five times its specified 
maximum working pressure. The hose temperature during this prototype 
test shall duplicate the intended extreme service temperature. 
Thereafter, each new length of cargo hose produced shall be 
hydrostatically tested at ambient temperature to a pressure not less 
than twice its maximum working pressure nor more than two-fifths its 
bursting pressure. The hose shall be marked with its maximum working 
pressure, and if used in other than ambient temperature service, its 
maximum or minimum temperature.

Sec. 151.20-20  Cargo transfer methods.

    (a) Cargo transfer may be accomplished by means of gravity, pumping, 
vapor or gas pressurization, or fluid displacement unless otherwise 
provided in Subpart 151.50 of this part.
    (b) Vapor or gas pressurization may be used only in transferring 
cargo from pressure vessel type cargo tanks. The pressurizing vapor or 
gas lines shall be provided with safety relief device in the lines set 
to open at a pressure no greater than 90 percent of the set pressure of 
the cargo tank safety relief valve. The pressurizing line shall be 
fitted with a stop valve at the tank, and a check valve to prevent the 
accidental release of cargo through the pressure line.
    (c) Fluid displacement is permitted with either gravity or pressure 
vessel type cargo tanks. The displacing fluid shall enter the tank under 
low relative pressure. The fluid entry line shall be fitted with a 
safety relief valve set to lift at a pressure no higher than 80 percent 
of the cargo tank safety relief valve setting.
    (d) When cargo vapors are flammable, combustible or toxic, cargo 
filling lines entering the top of the tank shall lead to a point at or 
near the bottom. Spray filling lines, discharging near the top of the 
tank, may be fitted in lieu of, or in addition to, the above cargo 
filling lines.

[[Page 104]]

                  Subpart 151.25--Environmental Control

Sec. 151.25-1  Cargo tank.

    When carrying certain commodities regulated by this subchapter, one 
of the following types of cargo protection may be required, within the 
main cargo tank, and in some cases, in the space between the primary and 
secondary barriers.
    (a) Inerted. All vapor spaces within the cargo tank are filled and 
maintained with a gas or vapor which will not support combustion and 
which will not react with the cargo.
    (b) Padded. All vapor spaces within the cargo tanks are filled and 
maintained with a liquid, gas (other than air), or vapor which will not 
react with the cargo.
    (c) Ventilated (forced). Vapor space above the liquid surface in the 
tank is continuously swept with air by means of blowers or other 
mechanical devices requiring power.
    (d) Ventilated (natural). Vapor space above the liquid surface in 
the tank is continuously swept with atmospheric air without the use of 
blowers or other mechanical devices requiring power (e.g., ``chimney-
effect'' ventilation).
    (e) Dry. All vapor space within the cargo tank is filled and 
maintained with a gas or vapor containing no more than 100 ppm water.

[CFGR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 88-100, 54 FR 
40040, Sept. 29, 1989]

Sec. 151.25-2  Cargo handling space.

    Pump rooms, compressor rooms, refrigeration rooms, heating rooms, 
instrument rooms or other closed spaces regularly entered by operating 
personnel, in which work is performed on the cargo or in which the cargo 
movement is locally controlled, may be required to be fitted with one of 
the following types of ventilation:
    (a) Forced ventilation. The forced ventilation system shall be 
designed to insure sufficient air movement through these spaces to avoid 
the accumulation of toxic or flammable vapors and to insure sufficient 
oxygen to support life, and, in any event, the ventilation system shall 
have a minimum capacity sufficient to permit a change of air every 3 
minutes.
    (b) Natural ventilation. The natural ventilation system shall be 
designed to insure sufficient air movement to avoid the accumulation of 
toxic or flammable vapors and to insure sufficient oxygen to support 
life.

               Subpart 151.30--Portable Fire Extinguishers

Sec. 151.30-1  Type.

    When required by Table 151.05, approved portable fire extinguishers 
shall be installed in accordance with Subpart 34.50 of this chapter. The 
fire extinguishing media shall be dry chemical or other suitable agent 
for all locations.

      Subpart 151.40--Temperature or Pressure Control Installations

Sec. 151.40-1  Definitions.

    This section defines the various methods by which the cargo may be 
heated or cooled.
    (a) Boiloff. Cargo pressure and temperatures are maintained by 
permitting the cargo to boil naturally and the cargo vapor thus 
generated removed from the tank by venting.
    (b) External cargo cooling--(1) Cargo vapor compression. A 
refrigeration system in which the cargo vapors generated within the tank 
are withdrawn, compressed, and the lower energy vapor or its condensate 
returned to the tank.
    (2) External heat exchange. A refrigeration system in which the 
cargo vapor or liquid is cooled outside the cargo tanks by being passed 
through a heat exchanger. Refrigeration is not accomplished by direct 
compression of the cargo.
    (c) Internal heat exchange. A refrigeration system in which a 
cooling fluid is passed through heat transfer coils immersed in the 
cargo tank liquid or vapor phases.
    (d) Tank refrigeration. A refrigeration system in which the cooling 
fluid is passed around the cargo tank exterior in order to remove heat 
from the tank or its surroundings.

[[Page 105]]

    (e) No refrigeration. A system that allows the liquefied gas to warm 
up and increase in pressure. The insulation and tank design pressure 
shall be adequate to provide for a suitable margin for the operating 
time and temperatures involved.
    (f) Tank heating. (1) A system in which the cargo is heated by means 
of steam or other heat transfer fluid running through coils within or 
around the tank. The cargo itself does not leave the tank.
    (2) A recirculating system in which the cargo leaves the tank, is 
pumped through a heater and then returned to the tank.

Sec. 151.40-2  Materials.

    Materials used in the construction of temperature or pressure 
control systems shall be suitable for the intended application and meet 
the requirements of Subchapter F and the Special Requirements section of 
this subchapter.

Sec. 151.40-5  Construction.

    Construction of machinery or equipment, such as heat exchangers, 
condensers, piping, etc., associated with temperature or pressure 
control systems shall meet the requirements of Subchapter F of this 
chapter. The electrical portions of these installations shall meet the 
requirements of Subchapter J of this chapter.

Sec. 151.40-10  Operational requirements.

    Control systems, required by Table 151.05 shall be provided with an 
audible or visual high cargo temperature or high cargo pressure alarm 
which is discernible at the towboat. The alarm shall operate when either 
the pressure or the temperature exceeds the operating limits of the 
system. The alarm may monitor either pressure or temperature, but must 
be independent of the control system.

Sec. 151.40-11  Refrigeration systems.

    (a) Boiloff systems. The venting of cargo boiloff to atmosphere 
shall not be used as a primary means of temperature or pressure control 
unless specifically authorized by the Commandant.
    (b) Vapor compression, tank refrigeration, and secondary 
refrigeration systems: The required cooling capacity of refrigeration 
systems shall be sufficient to maintain the cargo at design operating 
conditions with ambient temperature of 115 <deg>F still air and 90 
<deg>F still water. The number and arrangement of compressors shall be 
such that the required cooling capacity of the system is maintained with 
one compressor inoperative. Portions of the system other than the 
compressors need not have standby capacity.

                       Subpart 151.45--Operations

Sec. 151.45-1  General.

    (a) Barges certificated as tank barges (Subchapter D of this 
chapter) or cargo barges (Subchapter I of this chapter) for the carriage 
of cargoes regulated by this subchapter shall meet all applicable 
requirements for operations in the appropriate subchapter; in addition, 
requirements prescribed in this subpart shall apply to either type of 
certification.
    (b) [Reserved]

Sec. 151.45-2  Special operating requirements.

    (a) The requirements of this section shall apply to all barges 
carrying in bulk any cargoes regulated by this subchapter; however, the 
provisions of this section are not applicable to such barges when empty 
and gas-freed.
    (b) When it is necessary to operate box or square-end barges as lead 
barges of tows, the person in charge of the towing vessel shall control 
the speed to insure protection against diving and swamping of such 
barges, having due regard to their design and freeboard, and to the 
operating conditions.
    (c) No cargo tank hatch, ullage hole, or tank cleaning openings 
shall be opened or remain open except under the supervision of the 
person in charge, except when the tank is gas free.
    (d) Barges, when tendered to the carrier for transportation, shall 
have all bilges and void spaces (except those used for ballasting) 
substantially free of water. Periodic inspections and necessary pumping 
shall be carried out to insure maintenance of such water-free condition 
in order to minimize the free surface effects, both in longitudinal and 
transverse directions. Except when

[[Page 106]]

otherwise considered necessary for inspection or pumping, all hatch 
covers and other hull closure devices for void spaces and hull 
compartments other than cargo spaces shall be closed and secured at all 
times.
    (e) Cargo signs and cards. (1) Warning signs shall be displayed on 
the vessel, port and starboard, facing outboard without obstructions, at 
all times except when the vessel is gas free. The warning sign shall be 
rectangular and a minimum of 3 feet wide and 2 feet high. It shall be of 
sufficient size to accommodate the required alerting information, which 
shall be shown in black block style letters and numerals (characters) at 
least 3 inches high on a white background. The minimum spacing between 
adjacent words and lines of characters shall be 2 inches. The minimum 
spacing between adjacent characters shall be one-half inch. All 
characters shall have a minimum stroke width of one-half inch and shall 
be a minimum of 2 inches wide, except for the letters ``M'' and ``W'', 
which shall be a minimum of 3 inches wide, and except for the letter 
``I'' and the Numeral ``1'', which may be \1/2\-inch wide. The signs 
shall have a 2-inch minimum white border clear of characters. The signs 
shall be maintained legible. The alerting information shall include the 
following:

                                 Warning

                             Dangerous Cargo

    (This sign may be covered or removed when Subchapter O commodities 
are not being carried.)

                               No Visitors

                               No Smoking

    (This sign may be removed or covered when the commodity is not 
flammable or combustible.)

                             No Open Lights

    (This sign may be removed or covered when the commodity is not 
flammable or combustible.)

    (2)(i) Names and locations of all cargoes will be displayed in a 
readily discernible manner on all barges carrying one or more 
commodities regulated by this subchapter. This may be an individual sign 
at or on each tank or by a single sign similar to the following example:

 
                            Tank No.                              Cargo
 
IP.............................................................   /xxxx/
IS.............................................................   /xxxx/
2P.............................................................   /xxxx/
2S.............................................................   /xxxx/
 


These signs may be printed, handwritten, permanent or changeable, but be 
visible and readable at all times. These signs should be as readable, as 
those specified in paragraph (e)(1) of this section. Cargoes regulated 
by other subchapters will be included whenever carried simultaneously 
with commodities regulated by this subchapter.
    (ii) When the dangerous cargo barge is carrying only a single 
product, the Warning Sign required by paragraph (e)(1) of this section 
can be considered as meeting the requirements for the cargo location 
sign. The name of the commodity shall be added to the Warning Sign.
    (3) A cargo information card for each cargo regulated by this 
subchapter shall be carried on the bridge or in the pilot house of the 
towing vessel, readily available for use by the person in charge of the 
watch. This information card shall also be carried aboard the barge, 
mounted near the Warning Sign required by paragraph (e)(1) of this 
section, in such position as to be easily read by a man standing on the 
deck of the barge. The minimum card size shall be 7"x9\1/2\". The card 
shall have legible printing on one side only. The card shall be 
laminated in clear plastic or otherwise made weatherproof. The following 
data shall be listed:
    (i) Cargo identification and characteristics. Identification of the 
cargo, as listed in Table 151.05, its appearance and odor. A statement 
of the hazards involved and instructions for the safe handling of the 
cargo and, as applicable, the need for special cargo environments.
    (ii) Emergency procedures. Precautions to be observed in the event 
of spills, leaks, or equipment or machinery breakdown and/or 
uncontrolled release of the cargo into the waterway or atmosphere. 
Precautions to be observed in the event of exposure of personnel to 
toxic cargoes.

[[Page 107]]

    (iii) Firefighting procedures. Precautions to be observed in the 
event of a fire occurring on or adjacent to the barge, and enumeration 
of firefighting media suitable for use in case of a cargo fire.
    (f) Surveillance. During the time the cargo tanks contain any amount 
of liquid or gaseous dangerous cargoes requiring Type I or Type II barge 
hulls, the barge shall be under surveillance, as set forth in this 
paragraph:
    (1) The licensed operator, person in command, and mate of a vessel 
towing a tank barge that need not be manned, and each of them, shall be 
responsible for monitoring the security and integrity of the tank barge 
and for ensuring adherence to proper safety precautions. These 
responsibilities include, but are not limited to--
    (i) Ensuring that every tank barge added to the tow has all tank 
openings properly secured; has its freeing-ports and scuppers, if any, 
unobstructed; meets any loadline or freeboard requirements; and neither 
leaks cargo into the water, voids, or cofferdams nor leaks water into 
the tanks, voids, or cofferdams;
    (ii) Ensuring that every tank barge in the tow is properly secured 
within the tow;
    (iii) Ensuring that periodic checks are made of every tank barge in 
the tow for leakage of cargo into the water, voids, or cofferdams and 
for leakage of water into the tanks, voids, or cofferdams;
    (iv) Knowing the cargo of every tank barge in the tow, all hazards 
associated with the cargo, and what to do on discovery of a leak;
    (v) Ensuring that the crew of the vessel know the cargo of every 
tank barge in the tow, all hazards associated with the cargo, and what 
to do on discovery of a leak;
    (vi) Reporting to the Coast Guard any leaks from a tank barge in the 
tow into the water, as required by 33 CFR 151.15; and
    (vii) Ensuring that the crew of the vessel and other personnel in 
the vicinity of the tank barges in the tow follow the proper safety 
precautions for tank vessels, and that no activity takes place in the 
vicinity of the barges that could create a hazard.
    (2) A towing vessel engaged in transporting such unmanned barges 
shall not leave them unattended. When a barge is moored, but not gas 
free, it shall be under the care of a watchman who may be a member of 
the complement of the towing vessel, or a terminal employee, or other 
person. This person shall be responsible for the security of the barge 
and for keeping unauthorized persons off the barge. Such person shall be 
provided with, read, and have in his possession for ready reference the 
information cards required by paragraph (e) of this section.
    (g) All cargo hatches shall be closed, dogged down, or otherwise 
tightly secured.

[CFGR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 88-100, 54 FR 
40040, Sept. 29, 1989; CGD 79-116, 60 FR 17158, Apr. 4, 1995]

Sec. 151.45-3  Manning.

    Except as provided for in this section, barges need not be manned 
unless in the judgment of the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, such 
manning is necessary for the protection of life and property and for 
safe operation of the vessel. Vessels requiring manning for safe 
operation shall be subject to additional requirements as determined by 
the Commandant. Towing vessels, while towing barges which are not 
required to be manned, shall be provided with and have on board the 
information card required by Sec. 151.45-2(e)(3). This card shall be in 
the possession of the master or person in charge.

Sec. 151.45-4  Cargo-handling.

    (a) On a United States tank barge subject to inspection--
    (1) The owner and operator of the vessel, and his or her agent, and 
each of them, shall ensure that no transfer of liquid cargo in bulk or 
cleaning of a cargo tank takes place unless under the supervision of a 
qualified person designated as the person in charge of the transfer or 
the cleaning under Subpart C of 33 CFR part 155.
    (2) The person in charge of the transfer shall ensure that enough 
qualified personnel are on duty to safely transfer liquid cargo in bulk 
or to safely clean cargo tanks.
    (b) Closing of sea and ballast valves. All sea and ballast valves 
are to be

[[Page 108]]

properly aligned and lashed, or sealed in their correct position prior 
to beginning cargo transfer operations. Under no circumstances shall 
such valves be secured by locks.
    (c) Connecting for cargo transfer. (1) Movement of the vessel shall 
be considered when making the cargo connections to insure safe cargo 
transfer. Suitable material shall be used in joints and in couplings 
when making connections to insure that they are tight. Under no 
circumstances shall less than three bolts be used in a bolted flanged 
coupling.
    (2) When cargo connections are supported by the vessel's tackle, the 
person in charge of the transfer operations shall inspect the vessel to 
insure that sufficient tackles are used.
    (3) Pans or buckets shall be placed under cargo hose connections.
    (4) Cargo transfer operations for any cargo requiring a PV or safety 
relief venting device in Table 151.05 shall be performed with cargo 
hatch covers closed.
    (d) Inspection prior to transfer of cargo. Prior to the transfer of 
cargo, the person in charge of the transfer operation shall inspect the 
barge and other cargo equipment to assure himself that the following 
conditions exist:
    (1) The Certificate of Inspection is endorsed for the products to be 
loaded. Loading restrictions, if any, should be noted.
    (2) Warning signs are displayed as required.
    (3) Cargo information cards for the product are aboard.
    (4) No repair work in way of cargo space is being carried out.
    (5) Cargo connections and hatch covers conform with the provisions 
of paragraph (c) of this section and cargo valves are properly set.
    (6) All connections for cargo transfer have been made to the 
vessel's fixed pipeline system.
    (7) In transferring flammable or combustible cargoes, there are no 
fires or open flames present on the deck, or in any compartment which is 
located on, facing, open or adjacent to the part of the deck on which 
cargo connections have been made.
    (8) The shore terminal or other tank vessel concerned has reported 
itself in readiness for transfer of cargo.
    (9) All sea valves are properly set and those connected to the cargo 
piping are closed.
    (10) When transferring flammable or combustible cargoes that a 
determination was made as to whether or not boiler and/or galley fires 
can be maintained with reasonable safety.
    (e) Duties of the person in charge during transfer operations. The 
person in charge of the transfer operations shall control the operations 
as follows:
    (1) Supervise the operation of the cargo system valves.
    (2) Start transfer of cargo slowly.
    (3) Observe cargo connections and hose for leakage.
    (4) Observe operating pressure on cargo systems.
    (5) Comply with loading limitations placed on the vessel by the 
Certificate of Inspection, if, any, for the purpose of not overloading 
individual tanks or the vessel.
    (6) Observe the loading rate for the purpose of avoiding overflow of 
the tanks.
    (f) Cargo transfer operations shall not be started or, if started, 
shall be discontinued under the following conditions:
    (1) During severe electrical storms.
    (2) If a fire occurs on the barge, the wharf or in the immediate 
vicinity.
    (3) If potentially dangerous leakage occurs.
    (g) No vessel shall come alongside or remain alongside a barge in 
way of its cargo tanks while it is transferring cargo unless the 
conditions then prevailing are mutually acceptable to the persons in 
charge of cargo handling.
    (h) Auxiliary steam, air, fuel, or electric current. When 
discharging cargo from one or more barges, the towing vessel may furnish 
steam, air, fuel, or electric current for pumps on barges or dock, but 
in no case shall the cargo pass through or over the towing vessel.
    (i) Termination of transfer operations. When transfer operations are 
completed, the valves on cargo connections on the vessel shall be 
closed. The cargo connections shall be drained of cargo.
    (j) Transfer of other cargo or stores on a barge. (1) Packaged 
goods, freight,

[[Page 109]]

and ship's stores shall not be loaded or discharged during the loading 
of flammable cargoes except by permission of the person in charge of the 
transfer operation. Explosives shall not be loaded or carried on any 
barge containing products regulated by this subchapter.
    (2) Where package and general cargo is carried directly over bulk 
cargo tanks, it shall be properly dunnaged to prevent chafing of metal 
parts and securely lashed or stowed.
    (k) Transportation of other cargo or stores on barges. Barges may be 
permitted to transport deck cargoes directly over bulk cargo spaces when 
the nature of such deck cargoes and the methods of loading and unloading 
same do not create an undue hazard. Such barges shall have their decks 
properly dunnaged to prevent chafing between the steel parts of the 
vessel and the deck cargo.
    (l) Deck construction must be adequate to support the intended load. 
Provisions for carrying deck cargo shall be endorsed on the Certificate 
of Inspection by the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection.
    (m) Emergencies. In case of emergencies, nothing in the regulations 
in this subchapter shall be construed as preventing the person in charge 
of transfer operations from pursuing the most effective action in his 
judgment for rectifying the conditions causing the emergency.

[CGFR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970; 35 FR 6431, Apr. 22, 1970, as 
amended by CGD 75-59, 45 FR 70273, Oct. 23, 1980; CGD 81-059, 54 FR 151, 
Jan. 4, 1989; CGD 79-116, 60 FR 17158, Apr. 4, 1995]

Sec. 151.45-5  Open hopper barges.

    (a) All open hopper barges not constructed or modified in 
conformance with the provisions of Subpart 151.10 of this part when 
carrying in bulk any cargoes regulated by this subchapter shall meet the 
provisions of this section. However, the provisions of this section are 
not applicable to such barges when empty (not necessarily cleaned or 
gas-freed).
    (1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, no such open 
hopper type barge shall be placed as lead barge in any tow. These barges 
shall be placed in protected positions within the tow so that the danger 
from diving or swamping will be minimized. Where, due to operating 
conditions, compliance with this paragraph is impossible, the provisions 
of paragraph (a)(3) of this section apply. The person in charge of the 
towing vessel shall be responsible for compliance with this paragraph.
    (2) No such open hopper type barge shall be moved from a loading 
facility unless all void spaces and bilges are substantially free of 
water. Periodic inspections and necessary pumping shall be carried out 
to insure the maintenance of such water-free conditions, in order to 
minimize the free surface effect in both the longitudinal and transverse 
directions. Except when considered necessary for inspection or pumping, 
all hatch covers and other hull closure devices for void spaces and hull 
compartments shall be closed and secured at all times. In the case of 
unmanned barges, the person in charge of the towing vessel shall be 
deemed to be in charge of the barge, and all requirements to be carried 
out on the barge shall be carried out by or under the direction of this 
person.
    (3) When an open hopper type barge is in an exposed position, such 
that protection from swamping provided by adjoining barges cannot be 
obtained from the location within the tow, it shall be the 
responsibility of the person in charge of the towing vessel to control 
speed so as to insure protection against diving and swamping of the 
barge, having regard to its design and freeboard, and other operating 
conditions.
    (b) To show that special operating requirements apply to a specific 
open hopper type barge, additional placards or signs shall be displayed 
in at least four different locations on the barge when the cargoes 
subject to this part are carried in any form in the cargo tanks. The 
placards or signs shall be posted on the barge approximately amidships 
on each side and near the centerline fore and aft facing outboard. 
Racks, or other suitable means for mounting such placards or signs, 
shall be so arranged as to provide clear visibility and shall be 
protected from becoming readily damaged or obscured. The placards or 
signs shall be at least

[[Page 110]]

equal in dimensions to the DOT standard tank car ``Dangerous'' placard 
(10\3/4\ inches square or larger) and shall display a circle (10 inches 
in diameter or larger) with alternating quadrants of white and red, and 
so mounted that the red quadrants are centered on the vertical axis. The 
shipper and/or owner of the barge shall be responsible for the 
installation of the required placards or signs, including maintenance of 
them while such barge is in temporary storage with cargo aboard. The 
person in charge of the towing vessel shall be responsible for the 
continued maintenance of the placards or signs while such barge is in 
transit.

Sec. 151.45-6  Maximum amount of cargo.

    (a) Tanks carrying liquids or liquefied gases at ambient 
temperatures regulated by this subchapter shall be limited in the amount 
of cargo loaded to that which will avoid the tank being liquid full at 
105 <deg>F if insulated, or 115 <deg>F if uninsulated. If specific 
filling densities are designated in Subpart 151.50 of this part, they 
shall take precedence over that noted above.
    (b) Refrigerated and semirefrigerated tanks shall be filled so that 
there is an outage of at least 2 percent of the volume of the tank at 
the temperature corresponding to the vapor pressure of the cargo at the 
safety relief valve setting. A reduction in the required outage may be 
permitted by the Commandant when warranted by special design 
considerations. Normally, then, the maximum volume to which a tank may 
be loaded is:

VL=0.98d<INF>r</INF>V/dL

where:

VL=Maximum volume to which tank may be loaded.
V =Volume of tank.
d<INF>r</INF>=Density of cargo at the temperature required for a cargo 
vapor pressure equal to the relief valve setting.
dL=Density of cargo at the loading temperature and pressure.

Sec. 151.45-7  Shipping papers.

    Each barge carrying dangerous cargo shall have on board a bill of 
lading, manifest, or shipping document giving the name of shipper, 
location of the loading point, and the kind, grade, and approximate 
quantity by compartment of each cargo in the barge. Such manifest or 
bills of lading may be made out by the shipper, master of the towing 
vessel, owner, or agent of the owner. However, in the case of unmanned 
barges the master of the towing vessel shall either have a copy of the 
shipping papers for each barge in his tow or he shall make an entry in 
the towing vessel's log book giving the name of the shipper, location 
where the barge was loaded, and the kind, grade, and quantity of cargo 
by compartment in the barge. The barge shall not be delayed in order to 
secure the exact quantities of cargo.

Sec. 151.45-8  Illness, alcohol, drugs.

    A person who is under the influence of liquor or other stimulants, 
or is so ill as to render him unfit to perform service shall not be 
permitted to perform any duties on the barge.

Sec. 151.45-9  Signals.

    While fast to a dock, a vessel during transfer of bulk cargo shall 
display a red flag by day or a red light by night, which signal shall be 
so placed that it will be visible on all sides. When at anchor, a vessel 
during transfer of bulk cargo shall display a red flag by day, placed so 
that it will be visible on all sides. This flag may be metallic.

                  Subpart 151.50--Special Requirements

    Editorial Note: Nomenclature changes to Subpart 151.50 appear at 60 
FR 50465, Sept. 29, 1995 and at 61 FR 50732, Sept. 27, 1996.

Sec. 151.50-1  General.

    Special requirements found in this subpart pertain to specific 
cargoes and to similar groups of cargoes. These requirements are in 
addition to and take precedence over any other requirements found in 
these regulations.

Sec. 151.50-5  Cargoes having toxic properties.

    When table 151.05 refers to this section, the following apply:
    (a) [Reserved]
    (b) Independent tanks shall be designed and tested for a head of at 
least 8 feet above the top of the tank using the specific gravity of the 
product to

[[Page 111]]

be carried. In addition, tank design calculations shall demonstrate that 
the tank can withstand, without rupture, a single loading to the highest 
level to which the product may rise, if that exceeds 8 feet. In general, 
plate less than five-sixteenths inch in thickness shall not be used in 
the fabrication of independent tanks unless otherwise approved.
    (c)(1) Cargo tanks transporting liquids having a Reid vapor pressure 
exceeding 14 pounds per square inch absolute or vented at a gauge 
pressure exceeding 4 pounds per square inch, or where air or water 
pressure is used to discharge the cargo, shall be fabricated as arc-
welded unfired pressure vessels.
    (2) Unfired pressure vessel cargo tanks shall be designed for a 
pressure not less than the vapor pressure, in pounds per square inch 
gauge, of the lading at 115 <deg>F, or the maximum air or water pressure 
used to discharge the cargo, whichever is greater, but in no case shall 
the design pressure of such tanks be less than 30 pounds per square inch 
gauge.
    (d) Piping. (1) The pumps and piping used for cargo transfer shall 
be independent of all other piping.
    (2) Where multiple cargoes are carried, and the cargo piping 
conveying cargoes covered under this section are led through cargo tanks 
containing other products, the piping shall be encased in a tunnel.
    (3) Where cargo lines handling other products, or bilge and ballast 
piping are led through tanks containing cargoes covered by this section, 
the piping shall be enclosed in a tunnel.
    (e) Gravity type cargo tanks shall be fitted with an approved 
pressure-vacuum relief valve of not less than 2\1/2\-inch size, which 
shall be set at a pressure of not less than 3 pounds per square inch 
gauge, but not in excess of the design pressure of the tank.
    (f) The discharge fittings from each safety relief or pressure 
vacuum relief valve shall be directed in such a manner as to not impinge 
on another tank, piping or any other equipment which would increase the 
fire hazard should burning products be discharged from the safety or 
pressure vacuum relief valve as a result of a fire or other casualty. In 
addition, the discharges shall be directed away from areas where it is 
likely that persons might be working and as remote as practicable from 
ventilation inlets and ignition sources. A common discharge header may 
be employed if desired. The area near the discharge fittings shall be 
clearly marked as a hazardous area.
    (g) A means shall be provided for either the reclamation or safe 
venting of vapors during the loading and unloading operations. For this 
purpose the safety relief or pressure vacuum relief valve shall be 
provided with a valved bypass to a vapor return line shore connection 
which shall be used whenever vapor return shore facilities are 
available. In the event vapors must be vented to the atmosphere, a vent 
riser shall extend at least 12 feet above the highest level accessible 
to personnel. The vent riser may be collapsible for ease of stowage when 
not in use. Vapor return lines or vent risers for tanks carrying the 
same class product may be connected to a common header system if 
desired. Tanks carrying cargoes covered by this section shall be vented 
independent of tanks carrying other products.
    (h) The pump room ventilation outlet duct exhausts shall terminate 
at a distance of at least 6 feet above the enclosed space or pump room 
and at least 6 feet from any entrance to the interior part of the 
vessel. The discharge end of the exhaust ducts shall be located so as to 
preclude the possibility of recirculating contaminated air through the 
pump room, or other spaces where personnel may be present.

[CGFR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 88-100, 54 FR 
40040, Sept. 29, 1989]

Sec. 151.50-6  Motor fuel antiknock compounds.

    When transporting motor fuel antiknock compounds containing 
tetraethyl lead and tetramethyl lead the requirements listed in this 
section shall be observed.
    (a) Tanks used for these cargoes shall not be used for the 
transportation of any other cargo except those commodities to be used in 
the manufacture of tetraethyl lead and tetramethyl lead.
    (b) Pump rooms shall be equipped with forced ventilation with 
complete

[[Page 112]]

air change every 2 minutes. Air analysis shall be run for lead content 
to determine if the atmosphere is satisfactory prior to personnel 
entering the pump room.
    (c) Entry into cargo tanks used for the transportation of these 
cargoes is not permitted.
    (d) No internal tank inspection is required. If it is desired to 
internally inspect tanks used for these cargoes, the Commandant must be 
notified in advance before such inspection is made.
    (e) The provisions of Sec. 151.50-5 shall also be met as a 
requirement for shipping antiknock compounds containing tetraethyl lead 
and tetramethyl lead.

Sec. 151.50-10  Alkylene oxides.

    (a) For the purpose of this part, alkylene oxides are considered to 
be ethylene oxide and propylene oxide.
    (b) Alkylene oxides transported under the provisions of this part 
shall be acetylene free.
    (c)(1) No other product may be transported in tanks certified for an 
alkylene oxide except that the Commandant may approve subsequent 
transportation of other products and return to alkylene oxide service if 
tanks, piping and auxiliary equipment are adequately cleaned to the 
satisfaction of the Marine Inspector.
    (2) Unless authorized by the Commandant, no other kind of cargo 
except methane, ethane, propane, butane and pentane shall be on board a 
tank vessel certificated for the carriage of an alkylene oxide at the 
same time an alkylene oxide in either the liquid or vapor state is 
present in any cargo tank. Alkylene oxide tanks shall not be installed 
in tanks intended for any other cargo.
    (d) All valves, flanges, fittings, and accessory equipment shall be 
of a type suitable for use with the alkylene oxides and shall be made of 
steel or stainless steel, or other materials acceptable to the 
Commandant. Impurities of copper, magnesium and other acetylide-forming 
metals shall be kept to a minimum. The chemical composition of all 
material used shall be submitted to the Commandant for approval prior to 
fabrication. Disks or disk faces, seats and other wearing parts of 
valves shall be made of stainless steel containing not less than 11 
percent chromium. Mercury, silver, aluminum, magnesium, copper, and 
their alloys shall not be used for any valves, gauges, thermometers, or 
any similar devices. Gaskets shall be constructed of spirally wound 
stainless steel with ``Teflon'' or other suitable material. All packing 
and gaskets shall be constructed of materials which do not react 
spontaneously with or lower the autoignition temperature of the alkylene 
oxides.
    (e) The pressure rating of valves, fittings, and accessories shall 
be not less than the maximum pressure for which the cargo tank is 
designed, or the shutoff head of the cargo pump, whichever is greater, 
but in no case less than 150 pounds per square inch. Welded fittings 
manufactured in accordance with A.N.S.I. Standards shall be used 
wherever possible, and the number of pipe joints shall be held to a 
minimum. Threaded joints in the cargo liquid and vapor lines are 
prohibited.
    (f) The thermometer shall terminate in the liquid space and shall be 
attached to the shell by welding with the end of the fitting being 
provided with a gastight screwed plug or bolted cover.
    (g) Automatic float continuous reading tape gauge, and similar 
types, shall be fitted with a shutoff valve located as close to the tank 
as practicable, which shall be designed to close automatically in the 
event of fracture of the external gauge piping. An auxiliary gauging 
device shall always be used in conjunction with an automatic gauging 
device.
    (h) Filling and discharge piping shall extend to within 4 inches of 
the bottom of the tank or sump pit if one is provided.
    (i) Venting. (1) The discharge fittings from each safety relief or 
pressure vacuum relief valve shall be directed in such a manner as to 
not impinge on another tank, piping or any other equipment which would 
increase the fire hazard should burning products be discharged from the 
safety or pressure vacuum relief valve as a result of a fire or other 
casualty. In addition, the discharges shall be directed away from areas 
where it is likely that persons might be working and as remote as 
practicable from ventilation inlets and

[[Page 113]]

ignition sources. A common discharge header may be employed if desired. 
The area near the discharge fittings shall be clearly marked as a 
hazardous area.
    (2) A means shall be provided for either the reclamation or safe 
venting of vapors during the loading and unloading operations. For this 
purpose, the safety relief or pressure vacuum relief valve shall be 
provided with a valved bypass to a vapor return line shore connection 
which shall be used whenever vapor return shore facilities are 
available. In the event vapors must be vented to the atmosphere, a vent 
riser shall be connected to the vapor return line and extend at least 12 
feet above the highest level accessible to personnel. The vent riser may 
be collapsible for ease of stowage when not in use. The vent riser shall 
not be connected to a safety relief or pressure vacuum valve. Vapor 
return lines or vent risers for tanks carrying the same class product 
may be connected to a common header system if desired. Tanks carrying 
alkylene oxides shall be vented independent of tanks carrying other 
products.
    (3) The outlet of each vent riser shall be fitted with acceptable 
corrosion-resistant flame screen of suitable material or a flame 
arrester suitable for use with alkylene oxide.
    (j) Ventilation. (1) All enclosed spaces within the hull shall be 
vented or ventilated in accordance with the provisions of this 
subchapter except as otherwise provided for in this subpart.
    (2) The enclosed spaces in which the cargo tanks are located shall 
be inerted by injection of a suitable inert gas or shall be well 
ventilated.
    (3) The enclosed spaces in which the cargo tanks are located, if an 
inerting system is not installed, shall be fitted with forced 
ventilation of such capacity to provide a complete change of air every 
three minutes and arranged in such a manner that any vapors lost into 
the space will be removed. The ventilation system shall be in operation 
at all times cargo is being loaded or discharged. No electrical 
equipment shall be fitted within the spaces or within ten feet of the 
ventilation exhaust from these spaces.
    (4) All ventilation machinery shall be of nonsparking construction 
and shall not provide a source of vapor ignition.
    (5) Each vent shall be fitted with a flame screen of corrosion 
resistant wire which is suitable for use with the alkylene oxide.
    (k)(1) Flexible metal hose fabricated of stainless steel or other 
acceptable material, resistant to the action of the alkylene oxide, 
shall be fitted to the liquid and vapor lines during cargo transfer.
    (2) The hose shall be marked with the maximum pressure guaranteed by 
the manufacturer, and with his certification with the words ``Certified 
for _____ Oxide.''
    (3) Cargo hose intended for alkylene oxide service shall not be used 
for any other products except those which are compatible with the 
alkylene oxide.
    (l) Vessel shall be electrically bonded to the shore piping prior to 
connecting the cargo hose. This electrical bonding shall be maintained 
until after the cargo hose has been disconnected and any spillage has 
been removed.
    (m) Cargo shall be discharged by pumping or by displacement with 
nitrogen or other acceptable inert gas. In no case shall air be allowed 
to enter the system. During loading and unloading operations, the vapor 
shall not be discharged to the atmosphere. Provisions shall be made to 
return all displaced vapor to the loading facility. The loading rate and 
the pressure applied to the tank to discharge the cargo shall be so 
limited to prevent opening the safety relief valves.
    (n) During cargo transfer, a water hose with pressure to the nozzle, 
when atmospheric temperatures permit, shall be connected to a water 
supply for immediate use during filling and discharge operations and any 
spillage of alkylene oxide shall be immediately washed away. This 
requirement can be met by facilities provided from shore.
    (o) Prior to disconnecting shore lines, the pressure in the liquid 
and vapor lines shall be relieved through suitable valves installed at 
the loading header. The liquid and vapor discharged from these lines 
shall not be discharged to atmosphere.
    (p) The safety relief valves shall be tested by liquid, gas, or 
vapor pressure

[[Page 114]]

at least once every 2 years to determine the accuracy of adjustment and, 
if necessary, shall be reset. Alkylene oxides shall not be used as the 
testing medium.
    (q) The special requirements for ethylene oxide contained in Sec. 
151.50-12 and for propylene oxide contained in Sec. 151.50-13 shall also 
be observed.

[CGFR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 85-061, 54 FR 
50966, Dec. 11, 1989]

Sec. 151.50-12  Ethylene oxide.

    (a)(1) Ethylene oxide shall be carried in fixed, independent, 
pressure vessel type cargo tanks, designed, constructed, arranged and, 
if necessary, equipped with machinery to maintain the cargo temperature 
below 90 <deg>F except as otherwise provided for in paragraph (a)(3) of 
this section.
    (2) Ethylene oxide shall be loaded at a temperature below 70 <deg>F.
    (3) When ethylene oxide is to be transported at or near atmospheric 
pressure, the Commandant may permit the use of alternate methods of 
storage which are consistent with the minimum requirements of this 
subpart.
    (b)(1) All cargo tanks shall be constructed of a carbon steel or 
stainless steel acceptable to the Commandant. Impurities of copper, 
magnesium and other acetylide-forming metals shall be kept to a minimum. 
The chemical composition of all steel used shall be submitted to the 
Commandant for approval prior to fabrication. Aluminum, copper and other 
acetylide-forming metals, such as silver, mercury, magnesium, and their 
alloys shall not be used as materials of construction for tanks or 
equipment used in handling ethylene oxide.
    (2) Cargo tanks shall meet the requirements of Class I pressure 
vessels.
    (3) Cargo tanks shall be designed for the maximum pressure of vapor 
or gas used in discharging the cargo but in no case shall the design 
pressure of such tanks be less than 75 pounds per square inch gauge. The 
tank shell and heads shall not be less than \5/16\-inch thick.
    (c)(1) Cargo tanks shall be located below deck in holds or enclosed 
spaces with the domes or trunks extended above the weather deck and 
terminating in the open. Provisions shall be made to maintain the 
watertightness of the deck by means of watertight seals around such 
domes or trunks. The holds or enclosed spaces, in which the ethylene 
oxide tanks are located, shall not be used for any other purpose. 
However, in open hopper type barges of a suitable design approved for 
such service, the weatherdeck may not be required to be watertight.
    (2) All cargo tanks shall be installed with the manhole openings and 
all tank connections located above the weatherdeck in the open.
    (3) Tanks shall be electrically bonded to the hull.
    (4) No welding of any kind shall be done on cargo tanks or 
supporting structure unless authorized by the Commandant.
    (d) All cargo tanks, piping, valves, fittings, and similar equipment 
which may contain ethylene oxide in either the liquid or vapor phase, 
including the vent risers, shall be insulated. Flanges need not be 
covered, but if covered, a small opening shall be left at the bottom of 
the flange cover to detect leaks. Insulation shall be of an approved 
incombustible material suitable for use with ethylene oxide, which does 
not significantly lower the autoignition temperature and which does not 
react spontaneously with ethylene oxide. The insulation shall be of such 
thickness as to provide a thermal conductance of not more than 0.075 
B.t.u. per square foot per degree Fahrenheit differential in temperature 
per hour.
    (e)(1) When cooling systems are installed to maintain the 
temperature of the liquid below 90 <deg>F, at least two complete cooling 
plants, automatically regulated by temperature variations within the 
tanks shall be provided; each to be complete with the necessary 
auxiliaries for proper operation. The control system shall also be 
capable of being manually operated. An alarm shall be provided to 
indicate malfunctioning of the temperature controls. The capacity of 
each cooling system shall be sufficient to maintain the temperature of 
the liquid cargo at or below the design temperature of the system.
    (2) An alternate arrangement may consist of three cooling plants, 
any two of which shall be sufficient to maintain the temperature of the 
liquid cargo at

[[Page 115]]

or below the design temperature of the system.
    (3) Cooling systems requiring compression of ethylene oxide are 
prohibited.
    (f) In addition to the shutoff valve required, all tank connections 
larger than one-half inch inside pipe size, except safety relief valves 
and liquid level gauging devices, shall be fitted with either internal 
back pressure check valves or internal excess flow valves in conjunction 
with a quick closing stop valve operable from at least two remote 
locations. The quick closing stop valve shall be of the ``fail safe'' 
type acceptable to the Commandant and shall be equipped with a fusible 
plug designed to melt between 208 <deg>F and 220 <deg>F, which will 
cause the quick closing valve to close automatically in case of fire. 
The quick closing valve shall be located as close to the tank as 
possible.
    (g) Piping systems intended for ethylene oxide service shall not be 
used for any other product and shall be completely separate from all 
other systems. The piping system shall be designed so that no cross 
connections may be made either through accident or design.
    (h) Each safety relief valve shall be set to start to discharge at 
not less than 75 pounds per square inch gauge, nor more than the design 
pressure of the tank.
    (i) The filling density shall not exceed 83 percent.
    (j)(1) The cargo shall be shipped under a suitable protective 
inerting gas system, such as nitrogen. When nitrogen gas is used, the 
gas inerting system shall be so designed that the vapor space above the 
liquid cargo will be filled and maintained with a gas mixture of not 
less than 45 percent nitrogen. Other gases proposed for inerting use may 
be given consideration by the Commandant. Original charging only of 
protective inerting gas at the loading facility is not considered 
adequate. A sufficient amount of spare inerting gas as approved by the 
Commandant shall be provided on the vessel in order to maintain the 
proper concentration of the gas in the event of normal leakage or other 
losses.
    (2) Any inerting gas selected should be at least 98 percent pure and 
free of reactive materials, such as ammonia, hydrogen sulfide, sulfur 
compounds, and acetylene.
    (k) Prior to loading, a sample from the cargo tank will be taken to 
insure that the pad gas will meet the requirements of paragraph (j) of 
this section and that the oxygen content of the vapor space will be not 
more than 2 percent maximum. If necessary, a sample will be taken after 
loading to insure the vapor space meets this requirement.
    (l) The cargo piping shall be inspected and tested at least once in 
each 2 calendar years.
    (m) In those cases where the cargo transfer hose used is not part of 
the barge's equipment, the person in charge of the transfer operation 
shall determine that the provisions of Sec. 151.50-10(k) have been met 
before using this hose. A certificate of test, supplied by the transfer 
facility, will be considered as adequate for this determination.
    (n) The provisions of Sec. 151.50-10 shall be complied with as a 
requirement for shipping ethylene oxide.
    (o) A hydrostatic test of 1\1/2\ times the design pressure shall be 
made on the cargo tanks at least once in each 4 years at the time the 
internal examination is made and at such other times as considered 
necessary by the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection.

[CGFR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 85-061, 54 FR 
50966, Dec. 11, 1989]

Sec. 151.50-13  Propylene oxide.

    (a)(1) Pressure vessel cargo tanks shall meet the requirements of 
Class II pressure vessels.
    (2) Cargo tanks shall be designed for the maximum pressure expected 
to be encountered during loading, storing and discharging the cargo but 
in no case shall the design pressure of pressure vessel tanks be less 
than thirty (30) pounds per square inch gauge. The tank shell and heads 
shall not be less than \5/16\-inch thick.
    (b) When propylene oxide is carried on board a vessel, piping 
systems in propylene oxide service shall not be used for any other 
product and shall be

[[Page 116]]

completely separate from all other systems. The piping system shall be 
designed so that no cross connection may be made through inadvertence.
    (c) Each safety relief valve shall be set to start to discharge at 
not less than 30 pounds per square inch gauge, nor more than the design 
pressure of the tank.
    (d) Filling density shall not exceed 80 percent.
    (e)(1) The cargo shall be shipped under a suitable protective 
padding, such as nitrogen gas. Other gases proposed for use as padding 
may be given consideration by the Commandant. Original charging only of 
protective gas padding at the loading facility is not considered 
adequate. A sufficient amount of spare padding gas as approved by the 
Commandant shall be provided on the vessel in order to maintain the 
proper concentration of the gas in the event of normal leakage or other 
losses.
    (2) Any padding gas selected should be at least 98 percent pure and 
free of reactive materials.
    (f) Prior to loading, a sample from the cargo tank will be taken to 
insure that the pad gas will meet the requirements of paragraph (e) of 
this section and that the oxygen content of the vapor space will be not 
more than 2 percent maximum. If necessary, a sample will be taken after 
loading to insure the vapor space meets this requirement.
    (g) The cargo piping shall be subjected to a hydrostatic test of 
1\1/2\ times the maximum pressure to which they may be subjected in 
service.
    (h) The Commandant may permit the transportation of propylene oxide 
in other than pressure vessel type tanks if it is shown to his 
satisfaction that a degree of safety is obtained consistent with the 
minimum requirements of this subpart.
    (i) The provisions of Sec. 151.50-10 shall be complied with as a 
requirement for shipping propylene oxide.

Sec. 151.50-20  Inorganic acids.

    (a)(1) Gravity type cargo tanks shall be designed and tested to meet 
the rules of the American Bureau of Shipping for a head of water at 
least 8 feet above the tank top or the highest level the lading may 
rise, whichever is the greater. The plate thickness of any part of the 
tank shall not be less than three-eighths inch.
    (2) Gravity tank vents. (i) The outlet end of the gravity tank vent 
shall terminate above the weatherdeck, clear of all obstructions and 
away from any source of ignition.
    (ii) The gravity tank vent shall terminate in a gooseneck bend and 
shall be fitted with a single flame screen or two fitted flame screens 
as described in Sec. 151.03-25. No shutoff valve or frangible disk shall 
be fitted in the vent lines.
    (b)(1) Pressure vessel type cargo tanks shall be independent of the 
vessel's structure and shall be designed for the maximum pressure to 
which they may be subjected when compressed air is used to discharge the 
cargo, but in no case shall the design pressure be less than that 
indicated as follows:

Fluorosilicic Acid--50 pounds per square inch gauge.
Hydrochloric Acid--50 pounds per square inch gauge.
Hydrofluorosilicic Acid, see Fluorosilicic Acid.
Phosphoric Acid--30 pounds per square inch gauge.
Sulfuric Acid--50 pounds per square inch gauge.

    (2) Pressure vessel type cargo tanks shall be of welded construction 
meeting the requirements for Class II or Class III given in Part 54 of 
this chapter.
    (3) When compressed air is used to discharge the cargo, the tank 
shall be fitted with a vent led to the atmosphere in which a rupture 
disk shall be installed. The rupture disk shall be designed to burst at 
a pressure not exceeding the design pressure of the tank. An auxiliary 
vent to relieve the pressure or vacuum in the tank during the cargo 
transfer operation may be led from the vent line between the tank and 
the rupture disk. A shutoff valve may be fitted in the auxiliary vent.
    (c) Openings in tanks are prohibited below deck, except for access 
openings used for inspection and maintenance of tanks, or unless 
otherwise specifically approved by the Commandant. Openings shall be 
fitted with bolted cover plates and acid-resistant gaskets.

[[Page 117]]

    (d) Where special arrangements are approved by the Commandant to 
permit a pump suction to be led from the bottom of the tank, the filling 
and discharge lines shall be fitted with shutoff valves located above 
the weatherdeck or operable therefrom.
    (e) The outage shall not be less than 1 percent.
    (f) All enclosed compartments containing cargo tanks and all 
machinery spaces containing cargo pumps shall be fitted with effective 
means of ventilation.
    (g) A separator shall be fitted in compressed air lines to the tank 
when air pressure is used to discharge the cargo.
    (h) Only installed electric or portable battery lights shall be used 
during the cargo transfer operations. Smoking is prohibited and the 
person in charge of cargo transfer shall post No Smoking signs during 
cargo transfer operations.
    (i) Tanks approved for the transportation of acid cargoes subject to 
this section shall not be used for the transportation of any other 
commodity, except upon authorization by the Commandant (G-MSO).
    (j) Each cargo tank shall be subjected to an internal examination at 
least once in every 4 years. If cargo tank lining is required and the 
lining of the cargo tank has deteriorated in service or is not in place, 
the Marine Inspector may require the tank to be tested by such 
nondestructive means as he may consider necessary to determine its 
condition.
    (k) The special requirements for fluorosilicic acid in Sec. 151.50-
77, for hydrochloric acid in Sec. 151.50-22, for hydrofluorosilicic 
acid, see fluorosilicic acid, for phosphoric acid in Sec. 151.50-23, and 
for sulfuric acid in Sec. 151.50-21 also apply to the carriage of those 
acids.

[CGFR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by GGD 80-001, 46 FR 
63279, Dec. 31, 1981; CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 4781, Feb. 3, 1983; CGD 88-100, 
54 FR 40040, Sept. 29, 1989; CGD 92-100, 59 FR 17028, Apr. 11, 1994]

Sec. 151.50-21  Sulfuric acid.

    (a) How sulfuric acid may be carried. (1) Sulfuric acid of 
concentration of 77.5 percent (1.7019 specific gravity) (59.8<deg> 
Baume) or greater concentrations with or without an inhibitor, provided 
the corrosive effect on steel measured at 100 <deg>F is not greater than 
that of 66<deg> Baume commercial sulfuric acid, may be transported in 
unlined gravity type cargo tanks or unlined pressure vessel type cargo 
tanks.
    (2) Sulfuric acid of concentration of 65.25 percent (1.559 specific 
gravity) (52<deg> Baume) or greater concentrations, provided the 
corrosive effect on steel measured at 100 <deg>F is not greater than 
that of 52<deg> Baume commercial sulfuric acid, may be transported in 
unlined pressure vessel type cargo tanks independent of the vessel's 
structure.
    (3) Sulfuric acid of concentration not to exceed 65.25 percent 
(1.559 specific gravity) (52<deg> Baume) may be transported in gravity 
type cargo tanks or pressure-vessel type cargo tanks which are lined 
with lead or other equally suitable acid-resistant material acceptable 
to the Commandant.
    (4) Sulfuric acid of concentration not to exceed 51 percent (1.408 
specific gravity) (42<deg> Baume) and spent sulfuric acid resulting from 
the use of sulfuric acid in industrial processes may be transported in 
gravity type cargo tanks which are lined with rubber or other equally 
suitable acid-resistant material acceptable to the Commandant. See Sec. 
151.15-3(f)(2).
    (5) Spent or sludge sulfuric acid resulting from the use of sulfuric 
acid in industrial processes may be transported in unlined gravity type 
cargo tanks or unlined pressure vessel type cargo tanks, provided the 
corrosive effect on steel is not greater than that of commercial 
sulfuric acid as prescribed in paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
    (b) Heating coils will be the only acceptable means of liquefying 
frozen or congealed sulfuric acid.
    (c) During cargo transfer, a water hose shall be connected to a 
water supply ready for immediate use and any leakage or spillage of acid 
shall be immediately washed down. This requirement can be met by 
facilities provided from shore.
    (d) The requirements of Sec. 151.50-20 are also applicable to the 
shipment of sulfuric acid.

Sec. 151.50-22  Hydrochloric acid.

    (a) Hydrochloric acid shall be carried in gravity or pressure type 
cargo tanks which are independent of the vessel's

[[Page 118]]

structure provided such tanks are lined with rubber or other equally 
suitable material acceptable to the Commandant. See Sec. 151.15-3(f)(2).
    (b) Notwithstanding the provisions of Sec. 151.50-20(b)(3), 
compressed air may be used to discharge hydrochloric acid from gravity 
type cargo tanks only if the tanks are of cylindrical shape with dished 
heads, provided the air pressure does not exceed the design pressure of 
the tank but in no case shall it exceed 10 pounds per square inch gauge. 
Such tanks shall be fitted with pressure relief devices and need not be 
vented to the atmosphere as required by Sec. 151.50-20(b)(3).
    (c) During cargo transfer, a water hose shall be connected to a 
water supply and be ready for immediate use. Any leakage or spillage of 
acid shall be immediately washed down. This requirement can be met by 
facilities provided from shore.
    (d) Spent hydrochloric acid or hydrochloric acid adulterated by 
other chemicals, inhibitors, oils, solvents, water, etc., shall not be 
transported in bulk except upon authorization by the Commandant (G-MSO).
    (e) The requirements of Sec. 151.50-20 are also applicable to the 
shipment of hydrochloric acid.

[CFGR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 88-100, 54 FR 
40040, Sept. 29, 1989]

Sec. 151.50-23  Phosphoric acid.

    (a) The term phosphoric acid as used in this subpart shall include, 
in addition to phosphoric acid, aqueous solutions of phosphoric acid, 
and super phosphoric acid.
    (b) Phosphoric acid may be carried in either gravity or pressure 
type cargo tanks. The tanks shall be rubber-lined, or lined or clad with 
other suitable material acceptable to the Commandant, or shall be 
fabricated of a phosphoric acid resistant stainless steel. See Sec. 
151.15-3(f)(2).
    (c) The vessel's shell plating shall not be used as any part of the 
boundaries of gravity type cargo tanks.
    (d) Cargo piping, including valves, fittings, and flanges where 
exposed to the acid, shall be rubber-lined, or lined, coated or clad 
with other corrosion-resistant material, or shall be fabricated of a 
phosphoric acid resistant stainless steel. Vent piping, including 
flanges and fittings, shall be similarly protected at least to the 
height of the flangible disk if such is installed.
    (e) Phosphoric acid adulterated by other chemicals, inhibitors, 
oils, solvents, etc., shall not be transported in bulk cargo tanks 
except upon authorization by the Commandant (G-MSO).
    (f) The requirements of Sec. 151.50-20 are also applicable to the 
shipment of phosphoric acid.

[CGFR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4781, Feb. 3, 1983]

Sec. 151.50-30  Compressed gases.

    (a) All tank inlet and outlet connections, except safety relief 
valves, liquid level gauging devices, and pressure gauges shall be 
marked to designate whether they terminate in the vapor or liquid space. 
Labels, when used, shall be of corrosion-resistant materials and may be 
attached to valves.
    (b) Venting. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (b)(2) of this 
section each safety relief valve installed on a cargo tank shall be 
connected to a branch vent of a venting system which shall be 
constructed so that the discharge of gas will be directed vertically 
upward to a point at least 10 feet above the weatherdeck or the top of 
any tank or house located above the weatherdeck.
    (2) Safety valves on cargo tanks in barges may be connected to 
individual or common risers which shall extend to a reasonable height 
above the deck. Where the escape of vapors from the venting system may 
interfere with towing operations, the installation shall be acceptable 
to the Commandant, and the arrangement shall be such as to minimize the 
hazard of escaping vapors. Arrangements specially provided for venting 
cargo tanks forming part of the hull on unmanned barges will be given 
special consideration by the Commandant.
    (3) The capacity of branch vents or vent headers shall depend upon 
the number of cargo tanks connected to such branch or header as provided 
in Table 151.50-30(b)(3).

[[Page 119]]



     Table 151.50-30(b)(3)--Capacity of Branch Vents or Vent Headers
 
                                                                Percent
                                                                of total
                    Number of cargo tanks                        valve
                                                               discharge
 
1 or 2.......................................................        100
3............................................................         90
4............................................................         80
5............................................................         70
6 or more....................................................         60
 

    (4) Return bends and restrictive pipe fittings are prohibited. Vents 
and headers shall be so installed as to minimize stresses on safety 
relief valves and their mounting nozzles.
    (5) When vent discharge risers are installed, they shall be so 
located as to protect against physical damage and be fitted with loose 
raincaps.
    (6) When vent discharge risers are installed and their installation 
in accordance with the provisions of this paragraph results in 
restrictions in the operation of the barge due to navigation clearances, 
the vents may be designed so as to be collapsible when passing under 
such low clearance obstacles.
    (c) Repairs involving welding or burning. (1) Repairs involving 
welding or burning shall not be undertaken on the cargo tanks or piping 
while cargo in either the liquid or vapor state is present therein.
    (2) Repairs involving welding or burning on parts of the barge other 
than cargo tanks or piping may be undertaken provided positive pressure 
is maintained in the tanks or the tanks have been vented or washed 
internally.
    (d) Respiratory equipment. (1) At least one approved self-contained 
breathing apparatus shall be available in a readily accessible location 
off the barge at all times during the cargo transfer operations. This 
equipment shall not be considered to be part of the barge equipment, and 
the barge shall not be required to carry this equipment en route.
    (2) The approved self-contained breathing apparatus, masks, and all 
respiratory protective devices shall be of types suitable for starting 
and operating at the temperatures encountered, and shall be maintained 
in good operating condition.
    (3) Personnel involved in the cargo transfer operations shall be 
adequately trained in the use of the respiratory equipment.
    (e) Filling densities and container design pressure. For compressed 
gases transported at or near ambient temperatures, the maximum filling 
densities and minimum design pressure of container as indicated in Table 
151.50-30(e) shall apply. Deviations from the tabulated values shall be 
submitted to the Commandant for approval. Where cargo is to be carried 
at temperatures below ambient, the tank shall be designed in accordance 
with Sec. 151.15-3(b)(3) and the maximum amount of cargo shall be in 
accordance with Sec. 151.45-6(b).

                      Table 151.50-30(e)--Filling Densities and Container Design Pressures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Maximum permitted        Minimum design
                                                                      filling density        pressure of tank
                                                                    (percent by weight,     (pounds per square
                           Kind of gas                              see Sec. 151.03-21)         inch gauge)
                                                                 -----------------------------------------------
                                                                  Uninsulated  Insulated  Uninsulated  Insulated
                                                                     tanks       tanks       tanks       tanks
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ammonia, anhydrous..............................................         57          58         250         215
Chlorine........................................................        125         125         300         300
Dichlorodi fluoromethane........................................        123         125         147         127
Dimethylamine...................................................         61          62          46          36
Methyl chloride.................................................         85          87         131         112
Monochlorodi-fluoromethane......................................        110         113         243         211
Vinyl chloride..................................................         86          87          81          67
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (f) The shell and head thickness of liquefied compressed cargo tanks 
shall not be less than five-sixteenths inch.
    (g) The special requirements for ammonia (anhydrous) in Sec. 151.50-
32, for argon in Sec. 151.50-36, for chlorine in Sec. 151.50-31, for 
nitrogen in Sec. 151.50-36,

[[Page 120]]

and for vinyl chloride in Sec. 151.50-34 also apply to the carriage of 
those gases.

[CFGR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 88-100, 54 FR 
40040, Sept. 29, 1989]

Sec. 151.50-31  Chlorine.

    (a) Chlorine barges. Subparts 98.03 and 98.20 of Part 98 of this 
chapter have been revoked. However, chlorine barges that were certified 
in accordance with the requirements of subpart 98.20 of part 98 of this 
chapter and having hulls modified, if necessary, to comply with Sec.Sec. 
98.03-5(c) and 98.03-25(c) of this chapter, shall be considered as 
complying with this part.
    (b) Design and construction of cargo tanks. (1) The cargo tanks 
shall meet the requirements of Class I pressure vessels.
    (2) Tanks shall be designed for a pressure of not less than 300 
pounds per square inch gauge. For the maximum allowable working pressure 
of tanks in service, see paragraph (q) of this section.
    (3) Each tank shall be provided with one or more 24-inch inside 
diameter manhole, fitted with a cover located above the maximum liquid 
level and as close as possible to the top of the tank. There shall be no 
other openings in the tank.
    (c) Tanks may be installed ``on deck'' or ``under deck'' with the 
tank protruding above deck. If a portion of the tank extends above the 
weatherdeck, provision shall be made to maintain the weathertightness on 
the deck. All tanks shall be installed with the manhole opening located 
above the weatherdeck. Hopper type barges operating on protected inland 
waters may have tanks located in the hopper space.
    (d) All valves, flanges, fittings and accessary equipment shall be 
of a type suitable for use with chlorine and shall be made of metal, 
corrosion-resistant to chlorine in either the gas or liquid phase. Cast 
or malleable iron shall not be used. Valves, flanges, and flanged joints 
shall be 300 pounds A.N.S.I. standard minimum with tongue and groove or 
raised face. Joints shall be fitted with sheet lead or other suitable 
gasket material. Welded fittings shall be used wherever possible and the 
number of pipe joints held to a minimum. Threaded joints in cargo lines 
and vapor lines shall not be used in sizes above 1 inch internal 
diameter. Welded ``hammerlock'' unions or other unions approved by the 
Commandant may be used at terminal points of fixed barge piping.
    (e) Each tank shall be provided with liquid and vapor connections 
fitted with manually operated shutoff valves and with safety relief 
valves. All valves shall be bolted to the cover or covers specified in 
paragraph (b)(3) of this section and shall be protected against 
mechanical damage by a suitable protective metal housing. A drain 
connection shall be provided from the protective housing.
    (f) All liquid and vapor connections, except safety relief valves, 
shall be fitted with automatic excess flow valves, which shall be 
located on the inside of the tank. Bypass openings are not permitted in 
excess flow valves.
    (g) Chlorine barge cargo piping shall not be fitted with the 
nonreturn valves specified by Sec. 151.20-20(b).
    (h) Liquid level gauging devices of any type are prohibited on 
chlorine tanks.
    (i) A pressure gauge shall be attached to the vapor shutoff valve or 
vapor line so as to indicate the pressure in the tank at all times 
during loading and unloading.
    (j) Piping including connections between tank valves and fixed barge 
piping, shall be of a thickness of not less than Schedule 80.
    (k) In multiple tank installations the tanks shall not be 
interconnected by piping or manifolds which may contain liquid chlorine. 
Manifolding of vapor lines of individual tanks into a common header for 
connection to shore is permitted. More than one cargo tank may be filled 
or discharged at a time, provided each tank is filled from or discharged 
to shore tanks through separate lines.
    (l) Connections between fixed barge piping and shore piping shall be 
fabricated from one of the following:
    (1) Schedule 80 seamless pipe, having flexible metallic joints.
    (2) Corrosion-resistant metallic pipe (equivalent to Schedule 80) 
not subject to deterioration by chlorine, having flexible metallic 
joints.

[[Page 121]]

    (3) Flexible metallic hose acceptable to the Commandant. If 
paragraphs (k)(1) or (2) of this section are used, the flexible metallic 
joints shall meet the requirements for cargo hose. See Sec. 151.04-5(h).
    (m) Safety relief valves shall discharge into the protective housing 
surrounding the valves. Suitable provisions shall be made to vent the 
housing. The arrangement shall be such as to minimize the hazard of 
escaping vapors.
    (n) Cargo transfer operations. (1) The amount of chlorine loaded 
into each cargo tank shall be determined by weight. Draft marks shall 
not be used as a means of weighing. Any chlorine vapors vented during 
the filling operation shall be disregarded when calculating the maximum 
amount of chlorine to be loaded into the cargo tanks.
    (2) Prior to the start of filling operations, care shall be 
exercised to insure that the cargo tanks are empty, dry, and free from 
foreign matter.
    (3) After the filling operation is completed, the vapor in each 
cargo tank shall be analyzed to determine the percentage of gaseous 
chlorine in the vapor space. If it should contain less than 80 percent 
chlorine by volume, vapors shall be withdrawn through the vent or vapor 
line until the vapor in the cargo tanks contains at least 80 percent 
chlorine by volume.
    (4) After filling connections are removed, upon completion of the 
loading of a cargo tank, all connections at the tank shall be tested for 
leakage of chlorine by the aqua ammonia method.
    (5) The chlorine in the cargo tanks shall be discharged by the 
pressure differential method. If the vapor pressure of the chlorine is 
not sufficient to force the liquid out of the tank, compressed air, or 
other nonreactive gas, may be used to secure the desired rate of 
discharge, provided the air or gas is oil-free and thoroughly dried by 
passing it over activated aluminum oxide, silica gel, or other 
acceptable drying agent, and provided the supply pressure is limited to 
75 percent of maximum allowable pressure of chlorine tanks.
    (6) After completion of cargo transfer, any liquid chlorine in the 
cargo piping shall be removed and cargo transfer piping shall be 
disconnected at the cargo tanks. After disconnecting the cargo piping, 
both ends of the line shall be closed and all inlet and outlet valves on 
the tank shall be plugged or fitted with blind flanges.
    (o) During cargo transfer, every person on the barge shall carry on 
his person a respiratory protective device which will protect the wearer 
against chlorine vapors and will provide respiratory protection for 
emergency escape from a contaminated area resulting from cargo leakage. 
This respiratory protective equipment shall be of such size and weight 
that the person wearing it will not be restricted in movement or in the 
wearing of a lifesaving device.
    (p) During each internal inspection, each cargo tank must be tested 
hydrostatically to 1\1/2\ times the maximum allowable pressure as 
determined by the safety relief valve setting.
    (q) During each internal inspection, each cargo tank excess flow 
valve and safety relief valve must be inspected and tested in accordance 
with paragraphs (g) and (i) of Sec. 151.04-5 of this chapter.
    (r) When periodic inspection indicates that a cargo tank has 
deteriorated in service, the maximum allowable pressure shall be 
recalculated, using the minimum thickness found by actual measurement. 
The recalculated maximum allowable pressure shall be not less than 275 
pounds per square inch gauge. If the recalculated maximum allowable 
pressure is less than 275 pounds per square inch gauge, the cargo tanks 
shall be withdrawn from service.
    (s) The following substances shall not be carried as stores on board 
barges transporting chlorine in bulk: hydrogen, methane, liquefied 
petroleum gases, coal gas, acetylene, ammonia, turpentine, compounds 
containing metallic powders, finely divided metals or finely divided 
organic materials.
    (t) The requirements of Sec. 151.50-30 for compressed gases are also 
applicable to the shipment of chlorine.

[CGFR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 85-061, 54 FR 
50966, Dec. 11, 1989; CGD 85-061, 55 FR 41918, Oct. 16, 1990]

[[Page 122]]

Sec. 151.50-32  Ammonia, anhydrous.

    (a) The anhydrous ammonia tanks may be installed in the bulk liquid 
cargo tanks provided the liquid surrounding the enclosed anhydrous 
ammonia tanks complies with the following chemical and physical 
properties:
    (1) Boiling point above 125 <deg>F atmospheric pressure.
    (2) Inert to ammonia at 100 <deg>F at atmospheric pressure.
    (3) Noncorrosive in the liquid and vapor phase to the ammonia tanks 
and piping.
    (b) Copper, copper alloys, and copper bearing alloys shall not be 
used as materials of construction for tanks, pipelines, valves, 
fittings, and other items of equipment that may come in contact with 
anhydrous ammonia liquid or vapor.
    (c) Valves, flanges and pipe fittings shall be of the tongue and 
groove or raised-face type, fitted with suitable gasket material. Welded 
fittings shall be used wherever possible and the number of pipe joints 
shall be held to a minimum. Threaded joints are not permitted for pipe 
diameters exceeding 2 inches. Brazed joints are prohibited.
    (d) All enclosed spaces containing cargo tanks fitted with bottom 
outlet connections shall be provided with mechanical ventilation of 
sufficient capacity to assure a change of air every 3 minutes.
    (e) Each cargo tank shall be electrically grounded to the hull.
    (f) When transferring cargo, a hose shall be connected to a water 
supply so that if leakage of anhydrous ammonia occurs the vapor may be 
dispersed by the use of water fog. This requirement can be met by 
facilities provided from shore.
    (g) During cargo transfer operations, every person on the vessel 
shall carry on his person or have close at hand at all times a canister 
mask approved for ammonia or each person shall carry on his person a 
respiratory protective device which will protect the wearer against 
ammonia vapors and will provide respiratory protection for emergency 
escape from a contaminated area resulting from cargo leakage. This 
respiratory protective equipment shall be of such size and weight that 
the person wearing it will not be restricted in movement or in the 
wearing of a lifesaving device.
    (h) [Reserved]
    (i) The requirements of Sec. 151.50-30 for compressed gases are also 
applicable to the shipment of anhydrous ammonia.

[CGFR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 85-061, 54 FR 
50966, Dec. 11, 1989]

Sec. 151.50-34  Vinyl chloride (vinyl chloride monomer).

    (a) Copper, aluminum, magnesium, mercury, silver, and their alloys 
shall not be used as materials of construction for tanks, pipelines, 
valves, fittings, and other items of equipment that may come in contact 
with vinyl chloride liquid or vapor.
    (b) Valves, flanges, and pipe fittings shall be of the tongue and 
groove or raised-face type, fitted with suitable gasket material. Welded 
fittings shall be used wherever possible and the number of pipe joints 
shall be held to a minimum. Threaded joints are not permitted for pipe 
diameters exceeding 2 inches. Brazed joints are prohibited.
    (c) Each cargo tank shall be electrically grounded to the hull.
    (d) The vessel shall be electrically bonded to the shore piping 
prior to connecting the cargo hose. This electrical bonding shall be 
maintained until after the cargo hose has been disconnected and any 
spillage has been removed.
    (e) To the extent he deems it necessary, the Officer in Charge, 
Marine Inspection, may require that sufficient insulation shall be 
removed from insulated tanks at least once in each 8 calendar years to 
permit spot external examination of the tanks and insulation in 
accordance with Sec. 151.04-5(c).
    (f) The requirements of Sec. 151.50-30 for compressed gases are also 
applicable to the shipment of vinyl chloride.
    (g) The person in charge of cargo transfer shall ensure that:
    (1) Cargo vapors are returned to the cargo tank or shore disposition 
for reclamation or destruction during cargo transfer operations;
    (2) Continuous monitoring for vinyl chloride vapor leaks is 
conducted aboard a tank barge undergoing vinyl chloride transfer 
operations. Fixed or

[[Page 123]]

portable instrumentation may be utilized to ensure that personnel are 
not exposed to vinyl chloride vapor concentrations in excess of 1 ppm 
averaged over any eight hour period of 5 ppm averaged over any period 
not exceeding 15 minutes. The method of monitoring and measurement shall 
have an accuracy (with a confidence level of 95 percent) of not less 
than plus or minus 50 percent from 0.25 through 0.5 ppm, plus or minus 
35 percent from over 0.5 ppm through 1.0 ppm, and plus or minus 25 
percent over 1.0 ppm;
    (3) Cargo transfer operation is discontinued or corrective action is 
initiated by the person in charge to minimize exposure to personnel 
whenever a vinyl chloride vapor concentration in excess of 1 ppm is 
detected. If the vinyl chloride vapor concentration exceeds 5 ppm for 
over 15 minutes, action to reduce the leak can be continued only if the 
respiratory protection requirements of 29 CFR 1910.1017 are met by all 
personnel in the area of the leak;
    (4) Those portions of cargo lines which will be open to the 
atmosphere after piping is disconnected are free of vinyl chloride 
liquid and that the vinyl chloride vapor concentration in the area of 
the cargo piping disconnect points is not greater than 5 ppm;
    (5) Any restricted gauge fitted on a tank containing vinyl chloride 
is effectively out of service by locking or sealing the device so that 
it cannot be used; and
    (6) A restricted gauge is not to be used as a ``check'' on the 
required closed gauge, nor as a means or sampling.
    (h) The words ``CANCER--SUSPECT AGENT'' must be added to the warning 
signs required by 46 CFR 151.45-2(e).
    (i) Signs bearing the legend:

                   cancer--suspect agent in this area

                      protective equipment required

                        authorized personnel only

must be posted whenever hazardous operations, such as tank cleaning, are 
in progress.
    (j) A tank barge undergoing cargo transfer operations must be 
designated a ``regulated area'' having access limited to authorized 
persons and requiring a daily roster of authorized persons who may board 
the barge.
    (k) Employees engaged in hazardous operations, such as tank 
cleaning, must be provided, and be required to wear and use respiratory 
protection in accordance with the provisions of 29 CFR 1910.1017 and 
protective garments, provided clean and dry for each use, to prevent 
skin contact with liquid vinyl chloride.

[CGFR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 74-167R, 40 FR 
17026, Apr. 16, 1975; CGD 88-100, 54 FR 40040, Sept. 29, 1989]

Sec. 151.50-36  Argon or nitrogen.

    (a) A cargo tank that contains argon or nitrogen and that has a 
maximum allowable working pressure of 172 kPa (25 psig) or greater must 
have one of the following arrangements:
    (1) A refrigeration system that keeps the tank pressure below the 
safety relief valve operating pressure when ambient temperatures are 46 
<deg>C (115 <deg>F) air and 32 <deg>C (90 <deg>F) water.
    (2) A relief valve or pressure control valve that maintains the tank 
pressure below the setting of the tank's required safety relief valve in 
ambient temperatures of 46 <deg>C (115 <deg>F) air and 32 <deg>C (90 
<deg>F) water.
    (b) A cargo tank with a maximum allowable working pressure of less 
than 172 kPa (25 psig) is approved by the Commandant (G-MSO) on a case 
by case basis.
    (c) Section 151.50-30 also applies to the carriage of argon or 
nitrogen.

[CGD 88-100, 54 FR 40040, Sept. 29, 1989]

Sec. 151.50-40  Additional requirements for carbon disulfide (carbon 
          bisulfide) and ethyl ether.

    (a) The provisions of this section are applicable if specifically 
referenced in the Special Requirements column of Table 151.05.
    (b) Cargo tanks shall be electrically bonded to the hull of the 
vessel. A vessel shall be electrically bonded to the shore piping prior 
to connecting the cargo hose. This electrical bonding shall be 
maintained until after the cargo hose has been disconnected and any 
spillage has been removed.
    (c) Pumps may be used for discharging cargo: Provided, That they are

[[Page 124]]

the vertical submerged type designed to avoid liquid pressure against 
the shaft gland and are suitable for use with the cargo.
    (d) Provisions shall be made to maintain an inert gas padding in the 
cargo tank during loading, unloading and during transit.
    (e) Provisions shall be made to prevent any leakage being washed 
into the waterways at the loading and unloading points.
    (f) The special requirements of Sec. 151.50-41 for carbon disulfide 
(carbon bisulfide) and Sec. 151.50-42 for ethyl ether shall also be 
observed.

[CFGR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 88-100, 54 FR 
40029, Sept. 29, 1989]

Sec. 151.50-41  Carbon disulfide (carbon bisulfide).

    (a) All openings shall be in the top of the tank.
    (b) Loading lines shall terminate near the bottom of the tank.
    (c) A standard ullage opening shall be provided for secondary and 
emergency sounding.
    (d) If a cargo discharge pump is used, it shall be inserted through 
a cylindrical well extending from the tank top to a point near the tank 
bottom. A blanket of water shall be formed in this well before 
attempting pump removal.
    (e) Water or inert gas displacement may be used for discharging 
cargo provided the cargo system is designed for the expected pressure 
and temperature. This method for discharging may be used with pressure 
type tanks only.
    (f) Adequate natural ventilation shall be provided for the voids 
around the cargo tanks while the vessel is under way. During loading and 
unloading, forced ventilation shall be used. The forced ventilation 
shall be of sufficient capacity to provide a complete change of air 
within each void space every 5 minutes. The ventilating fan shall be of 
nonsparking construction.
    (g) Because of its low ignition temperature and the close clearances 
required to arrest its flame propagation, carbon disulfide (carbon 
bisulfide) requires safeguards beyond those required for any electrical 
hazard groups.
    (h) The requirements of Sec. 151.50-40 are also applicable to the 
shipment of carbon disulfide (carbon bisulfide).

[CFGR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 88-100, 54 FR 
40040, Sept. 29, 1989]

Sec. 151.50-42  Ethyl ether.

    (a)(1) Gravity tanks shall be designed and tested to meet the rules 
of the American Bureau of Shipping for a head of water at least 8 feet 
above the tank top or the highest level the lading may rise, whichever 
is greater. All openings shall be in the top of the tank.
    (2) Pressure vessel type tanks shall be designed for the maximum 
pressure to which they may be subjected when pressure is used to 
discharge the cargo, but in no case shall the design pressure be less 
than 50 pounds per square inch gauge. All openings shall be in the top 
of the tank.
    (b) Adequate natural ventilation shall be provided for the voids 
around the cargo tanks while the vessel is underway. If a power 
ventilation system is installed, all blowers shall be of nonsparking 
construction. Power driven ventilation equipment shall not be located in 
the void spaces surrounding the cargo tanks.
    (c) Pressure relief valve settings shall not be less than 3 pounds 
per square inch gauge for gravity tanks. For pressure vessels, the 
relief valve setting shall not exceed the design pressure of the tank.
    (d) Inert gas displacement may be used for discharging cargo from 
pressure vessel tanks provided the cargo system is designed for the 
expected pressure and the discharge pressure does not exceed 50 pounds 
per square inch gauge or the design pressure of the tank, whichever is 
less.
    (e) No electrical equipment except for approved lighting fixtures 
shall be installed in enclosed spaces adjacent to the cargo tanks. 
Lighting fixtures must be approved for use in Class I, Group C, 
hazardous locations. The installation of electrical equipment on the 
weather deck shall comply with the requirements of part 111, subpart 
111.105 of this chapter.

[[Page 125]]

    (f) Copper, silver, mercury and magnesium or other acetylide forming 
metals and their alloys shall not be used as materials of construction 
for tanks, pipelines, valves, fittings and other items of equipment that 
may come in contact with the cargo vapor or liquid.
    (g) Precautions shall be taken to prevent the contamination of ethyl 
ether by strong oxidizing agents.
    (h) The requirements of Sec. 151.50-40 are also applicable to the 
shipment of ethyl ether.

[CFGR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 88-100, 54 FR 
40040, Sept. 29, 1989]

Sec. 151.50-50  Elemental phosphorus in water.

    (a) Tanks shall be designed and tested for a head equivalent to the 
design lading of phosphorus and its water blanket extended to 8 feet 
above the tank top. In addition, tank design calculations shall 
demonstrate that the tank can withstand, without rupture, a single 
loading to the highest level to which the water blanket may rise, if 
that exceeds 8 feet. Tanks shall not be less than \5/16\-inch thick.
    (b) When a water displacement method of discharge is used, pressure 
vessel type cargo tanks, designed and tested in accordance with 
Subchapter F of this chapter shall be employed. Such tanks shall be 
designed for the maximum pressure to which they may be subjected when 
water pressure is used to discharge the cargo.
    (c) Each cargo tank shall be fitted with an approved pressure vacuum 
relief valve set to discharge at a pressure not exceeding 2 pounds per 
square inch. When transferring cargo, the vent discharge shall lead 
overboard above the waterline. When pressure vessel type tanks are used, 
each tank shall be fitted with a relief valve of suitable size.
    (d) Sufficient outage shall be provided to prevent the tank from 
being liquid full at any time, but in no case shall the outage be less 
than 1 percent. When pressure vessel type tanks are used, outage need 
not be provided.
    (e) The use of compressed air to discharge cargo is prohibited.
    (f) Cargo shall be loaded at a temperature not exceeding 140 <deg>F, 
and then cooled until the water above the cargo has a temperature not 
exceeding 105 <deg>F prior to the movement of the vessel. Upon 
presentation of satisfactory proof that procedures followed will provide 
adequate safety in transportation and handling, the Commandant may 
authorize movement of the vessel following cooling of the water above 
the cargo to a temperature exceeding 105 <deg>F.
    (g) Coils in which steam or hot water is circulated to heat the 
cargo so that it may be pumped shall be located outside the cargo tanks.
    (h) A fixed ballast piping system (including a power driven pump of 
ample capacity), or other means acceptable to the Commandant shall be 
installed so that any void space surrounding the tanks may be flooded.
    (i) All openings shall be in the top of the tank and shall be fitted 
with bolted cover plates and gaskets resistant to the attack of 
phosphorus pentoxide.
    (j) All enclosed compartments containing cargo tanks shall be 
provided with effective means of ventilation.
    (k) Cargo lines shall be traced with steam piping and secured 
thereto by lagging to prevent solidification of cargo during transfer 
operations.
    (l) During cargo transfer, a water hose shall be connected to a 
water supply ready for immediate use, and any spillage of phosphorus 
shall be immediately washed down. This requirement can be met by 
facilities provided from shore.
    (m) At least two fresh air masks or self-contained breathing 
apparatus shall be stowed on board the vessel at all times for use of 
personnel entering the tanks or adjacent spaces.
    (n) Authorization from the Commandant (G-MSO) shall be obtained to 
transport lading other than phosphorus in the cargo tanks or to have on 
board any other cargo when phosphorus is laden in the tanks.
    (o) Mechanical ventilation of sufficient capacity to insure a change 
of air within the cargo tanks every 3 minutes shall be provided during 
the inspection and maintenance of the cargo tanks.
    (p) Cargo tanks shall be electrically bonded to the hull of the 
barge. A vessel shall be electrically bonded to the shore piping prior 
to connecting the

[[Page 126]]

cargo hose. This electrical bonding shall be maintained until after the 
cargo hose has been disconnected.

[CGFR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 24, 1970, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4781, Feb. 3, 1983]

Sec. 151.50-55  Sulfur (molten).

    (a) Ventilation (cargo tank):
    (1) Cargo tank ventilation shall be provided to maintain the 
concentration of H<INF>2</INF>S below one-half of its lower explosive 
limit throughout the cargo tank vapor space for all conditions of 
carriage; i.e., below 1.85 percent by volume.
    (2) Where mechanical ventilation systems are used for maintaining 
low gas concentrations in cargo tanks, an alarm system shall be provided 
to give warning if the system fails.
    (3) Connections shall be provided to enable sampling of the 
atmosphere over the cargo in each cargo tank for analysis.
    (4) The ventilation system shall be designed and arranged to 
preclude the depositing of sulfur within the system.
    (b) Void spaces:
    (1) Openings to void spaces adjacent to cargo tanks shall be 
designed and fitted to prevent the entry of water, sulfur or cargo 
vapors.
    (2) Connections shall be provided to enable sampling and analyzing 
vapors in void spaces.
    (c) Temperature controls shall be provided in accordance with Sec. 
151.20-10 and applicable sections of Subpart 151.40 of this part. Heat 
transfer media shall be steam, and alternate media will require specific 
approval of the Commandant.

[CGFR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970]

Sec. 151.50-60  Benzene.

    The person in charge of a Coast Guard inspected barge must ensure 
that the provisions of part 197, subpart C, of this chapter are applied.

[CGD 88-040, 56 FR 65006, Dec. 13, 1991]

Sec. 151.50-70  Cargoes requiring inhibition or stabilization.

    When table 151.05 refers to this section, that cargo must be--
    (a) Inhibited; or
    (b) Stabilized.

[CGD 88-100, 54 FR 40040, Sept. 29, 1989]

Sec. 151.50-73  Chemical protective clothing.

    When table 151.05 refers to this section, the following apply:
    (a) The person in charge of cargo handling operations shall ensure 
that the following chemical protective clothing constructed of materials 
resistant to permeation by the cargo being handled is worn by all 
personnel engaged in an operation listed in paragraph (b) of this 
section:
    (1) Splash protective eyewear.
    (2) Long-sleeved gloves.
    (3) Boots or shoe covers.
    (4) Coveralls or lab aprons.

    Note: ``Guidelines for the Selection of Chemical Protective 
Clothing'', Third Edition, 1987, available from the American Conference 
of Governmental Industrial Hygienists, 1330 Kemper Meadow Drive, 
Cincinnati, OH 45240-1634, provides information on the proper clothing 
for the cargo being handled.

    (b) The section applies during the following operations:
    (1) Sampling cargo.
    (2) Transferring cargo.
    (3) Making or breaking cargo hose connections.
    (4) Gauging a cargo tank, unless gauging is by closed system.
    (5) Opening cargo tanks.
    (c) Coveralls or lab aprons may be replaced by splash suits or 
aprons constructed of light weight or disposable materials if, in the 
judgment of the person in charge of cargo handling operations,
    (1) Contact with the cargo is likely to occur only infrequently and 
accidentally; and
    (2) The splash suit or apron is disposed of immediately after 
contamination.
    (d) Splash protective eyewear must be tight-fitting chemical-splash 
goggles, face shields, or similar items intended specifically for eye 
protection from chemical splashing or spraying.
    (e) The person in charge of cargo handling operations shall ensure 
that each person in the vicinity of an operation listed in the paragraph 
(b) of this section or in the vicinity of tanks, piping, or pumps being 
used to transfer the

[[Page 127]]

cargo wears splash protective eyewear under paragraph (d) of this 
section.

[CGD 88-100, 54 FR 40040, Sept. 29, 1989, as amended by USCG-1999-6216, 
64 FR 53227, Oct. 1, 1999]

Sec. 151.50-74  Ethylidene norbornene.

    When Table 151.05 refers to this section, the following apply:
    (a) 151.50-5 (g) and (h)
    (b) Rubber hoses or fittings may not be used in transfer operations.

[CGD 80-001, 46 FR 63279, Dec. 31, 1981]

Sec. 151.50-75  Ferric chloride solution.

    A containment system (cargo tank piping system, venting system, and 
gauging system) carrying this solution must be lined with rubber, 
corrosion resistant plastic, or a material approved by the Commandant 
(G-MSO).

[CGD 80-001, 46 FR 63279, Dec. 31, 1981, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 
FR 4781, Feb. 3, 1983; CGD 88-100, 54 FR 40041, Sept. 29, 1989; 55 FR 
17276, Apr. 24, 1990]

Sec. 151.50-76  Hydrochloric acid, spent (NTE 15%).

    (a)(1) Gravity type cargo tanks must be designed and tested to meet 
the rules of the American Bureau of Shipping for a head of water at 
least 8 feet above the tank top or the highest level the lading may 
rise, whichever is greater. The plate thickness of any part of the tank 
may not be less than three-eighths inch. A shell plating of a barge may 
not be on the boundary of any part of the cargo tank.
    (2) Gravity tank vents must:
    (i) Terminate above the weatherdeck, clear of all obstructions and 
away from any from any source of ignition; and
    (ii) Be fitted with a single flame screen or two fitted flame 
screens as described in Sec. 151.03-25. Neither a shut-off valve nor a 
frangible disk may be fitted in the vent lines.
    (b) Openings in the tanks are prohibited below deck, except for 
access openings used for inspection and maintenance of tanks, or unless 
otherwise specifically approved by the Commandant (G-MSO). Openings must 
be fitted with bolted cover plates and acid-resistant gaskets.
    (c) Where special arrangements are approved by the Commandant (G-
MSO) to permit a pump suction to be led from the bottom of the tank, the 
filling and discharge lines must be fitted with shutoff valves located 
above the weatherdeck or operable from it.
    (d) The outage may not be less than 1 percent.
    (e) An enclosed compartment containing, or a compartment adjacent 
to, a cargo tank:
    (1) May have no electrical equipment that does not meet or exceed 
class I-B electrical requirements; and
    (2) Must have at least one gooseneck vent of 2.5 inch diameter or 
greater. The structural arrangement of the compartment must provide for 
the free passage of air and gases to the vent or vents.
    (f) No lights may be used during the cargo transfer operations, 
except installed electric or portable battery lights. Smoking is 
prohibited and the person in charge of cargo transfer shall ensure that 
``No Smoking'' signs are displayed during cargo transfer operations.
    (g) Tanks approved for the transportation of acid cargoes subject to 
this section may not be used for the transportation of any other 
commodity, except upon authorization by the Commandant (G-MSO).
    (h) Each cargo tank must be examined internally at least once in 
every 4 years. If the lining of the cargo tank has deteriorated in 
service or is not in place, the Marine Inspector may require the tank to 
be tested by such nondestructive means as he may consider necessary to 
determine its condition.

[CGD 80-001, 46 FR 63279, Dec. 31, 1981, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 
FR 4781, Feb. 3, 1983]

Sec. 151.50-77  Fluorosilicic acid (30% or less) (hydrofluorosilicic 
          acid).

    (a) Hydrofluorosilicic acid must be carried in gravity or pressure 
type cargo tanks independent of the vessel's structure. The tanks must 
be lined with rubber or other equally suitable material approved by the 
Commandant (G-MSO). See Sec. 151.15-3(f)(2).
    (b) Notwithstanding the provisions of Sec. 151.50-20(b)(3), no 
compressed air may be used to discharge hydrofluorosilicic

[[Page 128]]

acid from gravity type cargo tanks unless:
    (1) The tanks are of cylindrical shape with dished heads, and
    (2) The air pressure does not exceed:
    (i) The design pressure of the tank, and
    (ii) 10 pounds per square inch gauge. The tanks must be fitted with 
pressure relief devices.
    (c) During cargo tansfer, a water hose must be connected to a water 
supply and be ready for immediate use. Any leakage or spillage of acid 
must be immediately washed down. This requirement can be met by 
facilities provided from shore.

[CGD 80-001, 46 FR 63279, Dec. 31, 1981, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 
FR 4781, Feb. 3, 1983; CGD 92-100, 59 FR 17028, Apr. 11, 1994]

Sec. 151.50-79  Methyl acetylene-propadiene mixture.

    (a) The composition of the methyl acetylene-propadiene mixture at 
loading must be within one of the following sets of composition limits:
    (1) Composition 1 is:
    (i) Maximum methyl acetylene to propadiene molar ratio of 3 to 1;
    (ii) Maximum combined concentration of methyl acetylene and 
propadiene of 65 mole percent;
    (iii) Minimum combined concentration of propane, butane, and 
isobutane of 24 mole percent, of which at least one-third (on a molar 
basis) must be butanes and one-third propane; and
    (iv) Maximum combined concentration of propylene and butadiene of 10 
mole percent.
    (2) Composition 2 is:
    (i) Maximum methyl acetylene and propadiene combined concentration 
of 30 mole percent;
    (ii) Maximum methyl acetylene concentration of 20 mole percent;
    (iii) Maximum propadiene concentration of 20 mole percent;
    (iv) Maximum propylene concentration of 45 mole percent;
    (v) Maximum butadiene and butylenes combined concentration of 2 mole 
percent;
    (vi) Minimum saturated C<INF>4</INF> hydrocarbon concentration of 4 
mole percent; and
    (vii) Minimum propane concentration of 25 mole percent.
    (b) A barge carrying a methyl acetylene-propadiene mixture must have 
a refrigeration system that does not compress the cargo vapor or have a 
refrigeration system with the following features:
    (1) A vapor compressor that does not raise the temperature and 
pressure of the vapor above 60 <deg>C (140 <deg>F) and 1.72 MPa guage 
(250 psig) during its operations, and that does not allow vapor to 
stagnate in the compressor while it continues to run.
    (2) At the discharge piping from each compressor stage or each 
cylinder in the same stage of a reciprocating compressor:
    (i) Two temperature actuated shutdown switches set to operate at 60 
<deg>C (140 <deg>F) or less;
    (ii) A pressure actuated shutdown switch set to operate at 1.72 MPa 
gauge (250 psig) or less; and
    (iii) A safety relief valve set to relieve at 1.77 MPa gauge (256 
psig) or less anywhere except into the compressor suction line.
    (c) The piping system, including the cargo refrigeration system, for 
tanks to be loaded with methyl acetylene-propadiene mixture must be 
completely separate from piping and refrigeration systems for other 
tanks. If the piping system for the tanks to be loaded with methyl 
acetylene-propadiene mixture is not independent, the required piping 
separation must be accomplished by the removal of spool pieces, valves 
or other pipe sections and the installation of blank flanges at these 
locations. The required separation applies to all liquid and vapor 
piping, liquid and vapor vent lines and any other possible connections, 
such as common inert gas supply lines.

[CGD 80-001, 46 FR 63279, Dec. 31, 1981]

Sec. 151.50-80  Nitric acid (70% or less).

    (a) Tanks, cargo piping, valves, fittings, and flanges (where 
exposed to the acid) must be lined with nitric acid resistant rubber or 
fabricated from nitric acid resistant stainless steel. See Sec. 151.15-
3(f)(2).
    (b) During cargo transfer, a water hose must be connected to a water 
supply, ready for immediate use. Any

[[Page 129]]

leakage or spillage of acid must be immediately washed down. This 
requirement can be met by facilities provided from shore.
    (c) Nitric acid contaminated by other chemicals, oils, solvents, 
etc. may not be transported in bulk without an authorization from the 
Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 80-001, 46 FR 63280, Dec. 31, 1981, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 
FR 4781, Feb. 3, 1983; CGD 88-100, 54 FR 40041, Sept. 29, 1989]

Sec. 151.50-81  Special operating requirements for heat sensitive 
          cargoes.

    When table 151.05 refers to this section, the following apply to the 
cargo:
    (a) Must not be carried in a tank equipped with heating coils unless 
the heating supply to the coils is disconnected.
    (b) Must not be carried in a tank adjacent to another tank 
containing an elevated temperature cargo.
    (c) Must not be carried in a deck tank.

[CGD 80-001, 46 FR 63280, Dec. 31, 1981, as amended by CGD 88-100, 54 FR 
40041, Sept. 29, 1989]

Sec. 151.50-84  Sulfur dioxide.

    (a) Sulfur dioxide that is transported under the provisions of this 
part may not contain more than 100 ppm of water.
    (b) Cargo piping must be at least Schedule 40 pipe.
    (c) Flanges must be 150 lb. A.N.S.I. Standard minimum with tongue 
and groove or raised face.
    (d) A cargo tank must:
    (1) Meet the requirements of a Class I welded pressure vessel;
    (2) Be designed for a maximum allowable working pressure of at least 
125 psig;
    (3) Be hydrostatically tested every two years to at least 188 psig;
    (4) Be provided with one or more manholes that are fitted with a 
cover sized not less than 15 inches by 23 inches or 13 inches nominal 
diameter, located above the maximum liquid level, and as close as 
possible to the top of the tank;
    (5) Have no openings other than those required in paragraph (d)(4) 
of this section;
    (6) Have no liquid level gauges other than closed or indirect 
gauges;
    (7) Have all valves and the closed gauge that is required by Table 
151.05 bolted to the cover or covers that are required in paragraph 
(d)(4) of this section;
    (8) Have a metal housing that is fitted with a drain and vent 
connection protecting all valves and the closed gauge within this 
housing against mechanical damage;
    (9) Have all safety relief valves discharging into the protective 
housing;
    (10) Not be interconnected with another cargo tank by piping or 
manifold that carriers cargo liquid, except vapor lines connected to a 
common header, and
    (11) Have an excess flow valve that is located on the inside of the 
tank for every liquid and vapor connection, except the safety relief 
valve;
    (12) Have no bypass opening on any excess flow valve.
    (e) Cargo transfer operations:
    (1) May not be conducted with more than one cargo tank at a time 
unles each tank is filled from or discharged to shore tanks through 
separate lines;
    (2) Must be conducted with connections between fixed barge piping 
and shore piping of either Schedule 40 pipe having flexible metallic 
joints that meet Sec. 151.04-5(h) or of flexible metallic hose that is 
acceptable to the Commandant (G-MSO);
    (3) From barge to shore must be by pressurization with an oil free, 
non-reactive gas that has a maximum of 100 ppm moisture;
    (4) Must be conducted with vapor return to shore connections that 
ensure that all vapor is returned to shore; and
    (5) Must be conducted with every person on the barge carrying a 
respiratory protective device that protects the wearer against sulfur 
dioxide vapors and provides respiratory protection for emergency escape 
from a contaminated area that results from cargo leakage.
    (f) Respiratory protective equipment must be of a size and weight 
that allows unrestricted movement and wearing of a lifesaving device.
    (g) After the completion of cargo transfer, all liquid sulfur 
dioxide in the cargo piping must be removed and

[[Page 130]]

cargo transfer piping must be disconnected at the cargo tanks. After the 
cargo piping is disconnected, both ends of the line must be plugged or 
fitted with blind flanges.

[CGD 80-001, 46 FR 63280, Dec. 31, 1981, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 
FR 4781, Feb. 3, 1983; CGD 88-100, 54 FR 40041, Sept. 29, 1989; 55 FR 
17276, Apr. 24, 1990]

Sec. 151.50-86  Alkyl (C7-C9) nitrates.

    (a) The carriage temperature of octyl nitrates must be maintained 
below 100 <deg>C (212 <deg>F) in order to prevent the occurrence of a 
self-sustaining exothermic decomposition reaction.
    (b) Octyl nitrates may not be carried in a deck tank unless the tank 
has a combination of insulation and a water deluge system sufficient to 
maintain the tank's cargo temperature below 100 <deg>C (212 <deg>F) and 
the cargo temperature rise at or below 1.5 <deg>C(2.7 <deg>F)/hour, for 
a fire of 650 <deg>C (1200 <deg>F).

[CGD 88-100, 54 FR 40040, Sept. 29, 1989; CGD 92-100, 59 FR 17028, Apr. 
11, 1994]

   Subpart 151.55--Special Requirements for Materials of Construction

Sec. 151.55-1  General.

    (a) This section provides special requirements for the materials of 
construction of equipment that may come into contact with various 
cargoes. Table 151.05 contains specific requirements for various 
cargoes.
    (b) Copper, copper alloys, zinc, and aluminum shall not be used as 
materials of construction for tanks, pipelines, valves, fittings, and 
other items of equipment that may come in contact with the cargo liquid 
or vapor. (Equivalent to Sec. 151.56-1(a),(b), and (c).)
    (c) Copper, copper alloys, zinc, galvanized steel, and mercury shall 
not be used as materials of construction for tanks, pipelines, valves, 
fittings, and other items of equipment that may come in contact with the 
cargo liquid or vapor. (Equivalent to Sec. 151.56-1(b),(c), and (g).)
    (d) Aluminum, magnesium, zinc, and lithium shall not be used as 
materials of construction for tanks, pipelines, valves, fittings, and 
other items of equipment that may come in contact with the cargo liquid 
or vapor. (Equivalent to Sec. 151.56-1(a),(c), and (d).)
    (e) Copper and copper bearing alloys shall not be used as materials 
of construction for tanks, pipelines, valves, fittings, and other items 
of equipment that may come in contact with the cargo liquid or vapor. 
(Equivalent to Sec. 151.56-1(b).)
    (f) Aluminum or copper or alloys of either shall not be used as 
materials of construction for tanks, pipelines, valves, fittings, and 
other items of equipment that may come in contact with the cargo vapor 
or liquid. (Equivalent to Sec. 151.56-1(a) and (b).)
    (g) Aluminum, stainless steel, or steel covered with a suitable 
protective lining or coating shall be used as materials of construction 
for tanks, pipelines, valves fittings, and other items of equipment that 
may come in contact with the cargo liquid or vapor. (Equivalent to Sec. 
151.58-1(a).)
    (h) Alkaline or acidic materials, such as caustic soda or sulfuric 
acid, should not be allowed to contaminate this cargo.
    (i) For concentrations of 98 percent or greater, aluminum or 
stainless steel shall be used as materials of construction. For 
concentrations of less than 98 percent, 304L or 316 stainless steel 
shall be used as materials of construction.
    (j) Zinc, alloys that have more than 10 percent zinc by weight, and 
aluminum may not be used as materials of construction for tanks, 
pipelines, valves, fittings, and other items of equipment that may come 
in contact with cargo liquid or vapor. (Equivalent to Sec. 151.56-1(a) 
and (c).)

[CGFR 70-10, 35 FR 3714, Feb. 25, 1970, as amended by CGD 73-275R, 41 FR 
3087, Jan. 21, 1976; CGD 75-223, 42 FR 8378, Feb. 10, 1977; CGD 88-100, 
54 FR 40041, Sept. 29, 1989]

          Subpart 151.56--Prohibited Materials of Construction

Sec. 151.56-1  Prohibited materials.

    When one of the following paragraphs of this section is referenced 
in table 151.05, the materials listed in that paragraph may not be used 
in components that contact the cargo or its vapor:
    (a) Aluminum or aluminum alloys.
    (b) Copper or copper alloys.

[[Page 131]]

    (c) Zinc, galvanized steel, or alloys having more than 10 percent 
zinc by weight.
    (d) Magnesium.
    (e) Lead.
    (f) Silver or silver alloys.
    (g) Mercury.

[CGD 88-100, 54 FR 40041, Sept. 29, 1989]

           Subpart 151.58--Required Materials of Construction

Sec. 151.58-1  Required materials.

    When one of the following paragraphs of this section is referenced 
in table 151.05, only those materials listed in that paragraph may be 
used in components that contact the cargo or its vapor:
    (a) Aluminum, stainless steel, or steel covered with a protective 
lining or coating. (See Sec. 151.15-3(f)(2).)
    (b)-(c) [Reserved]
    (d) Solid austenitic stainless steel.
    (e) Stainless steel or steel covered with a suitable protective 
lining or coating. (See Sec. 151.15-3(f)(2).)

[CGD 88-100, 54 FR 40041, Sept. 29, 1989]

                           PART 152 [RESERVED]


<R03>
PART 153--SHIPS CARRYING BULK LIQUID, LIQUEFIED GAS, OR COMPRESSED GAS 
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
153.0 Availability of materials.
153.1 Applicability.
153.2 Definitions and acronyms.
153.3 Right of appeal.
153.4 Incorporation by reference.
153.7 Ships built before December 27, 1977 and non-self-propelled ships 
          built before July 1, 1983: Application.
153.8 Procedures for requesting an endorsed Certificate of Inspection.
153.9 Foreign flag vessel endorsement application.
153.10 Procedures for requesting alternatives and waivers; termination 
          of waivers.
153.12 IMO Certificates for United States Ships.
153.15 Conditions under which the Coast Guard issues a Certificate of 
          Inspection or Certificate of Compliance.
153.16 Requirements for foreign flag vessel permits.
153.30 Special area endorsement.
153.40 Determination of materials that are hazardous.

                     Subpart B--Design and Equipment

                       General Vessel Requirements

153.190 Stability requirements.
153.201 Openings to accommodation, service or control spaces.
153.208 Ballast equipment.
153.209 Bilge pumping systems.
153.214 Personnel emergency and safety equipment.
153.215 Safety equipment lockers.
153.216 Shower and eyewash fountains.
153.217 Access to enclosed spaces and dedicated ballast tanks.
153.219 Access to double bottom tanks serving as dedicated ballast 
          tanks.

                        Cargo Containment Systems

153.230 Type I system.
153.231 Type II system.
153.232 Type III system.
153.233 Separation of tanks from machinery, service and other spaces.
153.234 Fore and aft location.
153.235 Exceptions to cargo piping location restrictions.
153.236 Prohibited materials.
153.238 Required materials.
153.239 Use of cast iron.
153.240 Insulation.

                               Cargo Tanks

153.250 Double-bottom and deep tanks as cargo tanks.
153.251 Independent cargo tanks.
153.252 Special requirement for an independent cargo tank.
153.254 Cargo tank access.
153.256 Trunks, domes, and openings of cargo tanks.
153.266 Tank linings.

               Piping Systems and Cargo Handling Equipment

153.280 Piping system design.
153.281 Piping to independent tanks.
153.282 Cargo filling lines.
153.283 Valving for cargo piping.
153.284 Characteristics of required quick closing valves.
153.285 Valving for cargo pump manifolds.
153.292 Separation of piping systems.
153.294 Marking of piping systems.
153.296 Emergency shutdown stations.
153.297 Emergency actuators at the point of cargo control.

                    Cargo Handling Space Ventilation

153.310 Ventilation system type.
153.312 Ventilation system standards.

[[Page 132]]

153.314 Ventilation of spaces not usually occupied.
153.316 Special cargo pumproom ventilation rate.

                             Cargo Pumprooms

153.330 Access.
153.332 Hoisting arrangement.
153.333 Cargo pump discharge pressure gauge.
153.334 Bilge pumping systems.
153.336 Special cargo pump or pumproom requirements.

                          Cargo Venting Systems

153.350 Location of B/3 vent discharges.
153.351 Location of 4 m vent discharges.
153.352 B/3 and 4 m venting system outlets.
153.353 High velocity vents.
153.354 Venting system inlet.
153.355 PV venting systems.
153.358 Venting system flow capacity.
153.360 Venting system restriction.
153.361 Arrangements for removal of valves from venting systems having 
          multiple relief valves.
153.362 Venting system drain.
153.364 Venting system supports.
153.365 Liquid overpressurization protection.
153.368 Pressure-vacuum valves.
153.370 Minimum relief valve setting for ambient temperature cargo 
          tanks.
153.371 Minimum relief valve setting for refrigerated cargo tanks.
153.372 Gauges and vapor return for cargo vapor pressures exceeding 100 
          kPa (approx. 14.7 psia).

                          Cargo Gauging Systems

153.400 General requirements for gauges.
153.404 Standards for containment systems having required closed gauges.
153.406 Standards for containment systems having required restricted 
          gauges.
153.407 Special requirements for sounding tube gauges.
153.408 Tank overflow control.
153.409 High level alarms.

                    Cargo Temperature Control Systems

153.430 Heat transfer systems; general.
153.432 Cooling systems.
153.434 Heat transfer coils within a tank.
153.436 Heat transfer fluids: compatibility with cargo.
153.438 Cargo pressure or temperature alarms required.
153.440 Cargo temperature sensors.

        Special Requirements for Flammable or Combustible Cargoes

153.460 Fire protection systems.
153.461 Electrical bonding of independent tanks.
153.462 Static discharges from inert gas systems.
153.463 Vent system discharges.
153.465 Flammable vapor detector.
153.466 Electrical equipment.

               Design and Equipment for Pollution Control

153.470 System for discharge of NLS residue to the sea: Categories A, B, 
          C, and D.
153.480 Stripping quantity for Category B and C NLS tanks on ships built 
          after June 30, 1986: Categories B and C.
153.481 Stripping quantities and interim standards for Category B NLS 
          tanks on ships built before July 1, 1986: Category B.
153.482 Stripping quantities and interim standards for Category C NLS 
          tanks on ships built before July 1, 1986: Category C.
153.483 Restricted voyage waiver for Category B and C NLS tanks on ships 
          built before July 1, 1986: Category B and C.
153.484 Prewash equipment.
153.486 Design and equipment for removing NLS residue by ventilation: 
          Categories A, B, C, and D.
153.488 Design and equipment for tanks carrying high melting point NLSs: 
          Category B.
153.490 Cargo Record Book and Approved Procedures and Arrangements 
          Manual: Categories A, B, C, and D.
153.491 Waiver of certain equipment for dedicated cargo tanks.

                          Special Requirements

153.500 Inert gas systems.
153.501 Requirement for dry inert gas.
153.515 Special requirements for extremely flammable cargoes.
153.520 Special requirements for carbon disulfide.
153.525 Special requirements for unusually toxic cargoes.
153.526 Toxic vapor detectors.
153.527 Toxic vapor protection.
153.530 Special requirements for alkylene oxides.
153.545 Special requirements for liquid sulfur.
153.554 Special requirements for acids.
153.555 Special requirements for inorganic acids.
153.556 Special requirements for sulfuric acid and oleum.
153.557 Special requirements for hydrochloric acid.
153.558 Special requirements for phosphoric acid.
153.559 Special requirements for nitric acid (less than 70 percent).
153.560 Special requirements for Alkyl (C7-C9) nitrates.
153.565 Special requirements for temperature sensors.

[[Page 133]]

153.602 Special requirements for cargoes reactive with water.

                         Testing and Inspection

153.806 Loading information.
153.808 Examination required for a Certificate of Compliance.
153.809 Procedures for having the Coast Guard examine a vessel for a 
          Certificate of Compliance.
153.812 Inspection for Certificate of Inspection.

                          Subpart C--Operations

                     Documents and Cargo Information

153.900 Certificates and authorization to carry a bulk liquid hazardsous 
          material.
153.901 Documents: Posting, availability, and alteration.
153.902 Expiration and invalidation of the Certificates of Compliance.
153.903 Operating a United States ship in special areas: Categories A, 
          B, and C.
153.904 Limitations in the endorsement.
153.905 Regulations required to be on board.
153.907 Cargo information.
153.908 Cargo viscosity and melting point information; measuring cargo 
          temperature during discharge: Categories A, B, and C.
153.909 Completing the Cargo Record Book and record retention: 
          Categories A, B, C, and D.
153.910 Cargo piping plan.
153.912 Certficate of inhibition or stabilization.

                 General Cargo Operational Requirements

153.920 Cargo quantity limitations.
153.921 Explosives.
153.923 Inerting systems.

                          General Vessel Safety

153.930 Cargo antidotes.
153.931 Obstruction of pumproom ladderways.
153.932 Goggles and protective clothing.
153.933 Chemical protective clothing.
153.934 Entry into spaces containing cargo vapor.
153.935 Opening of tanks and cargo sampling.
153.935a Storage of cargo samples.
153.936 Illness, alcohol, drugs.

                     Marking of Cargo Transfer Hose

153.940 Standards for marking of cargo hose.

                        Cargo Transfer Procedures

153.953 Signals during cargo transfer.
153.955 Warning signs during cargo transfer.
153.957 Persons in charge of transferring liquid cargo in bulk or 
          cleaning cargo tanks.
153.959 Approval to begin transfer operations required.
153.964 Discharge by gas pressurization.
153.966 Discharge by liquid displacement.
153.968 Cargo transfer conference.
153.970 Cargo transfer piping.
153.972 Connecting a cargo hose.
153.975 Preparation for cargo transfer.
153.976 Transfer of packaged cargo or ship's stores.
153.977 Supervision of cargo transfer.
153.979 Gauging with a sounding tube.
153.980 Isolation of automatic closing valves.
153.981 Leaving room in tank for cargo expansion.
153.983 Termination procedures.

                        Special Cargo Procedures

153.1000 Special operating requirements for cargoes reactive with water.
153.1002 Special operating requirements for heat sensitive cargoes.
153.1003 Prohibited carriage in deck tanks.
153.1004 Inhibited and stabilized cargoes.
153.1010 Alkylene oxides.
153.1011 Changing containment systems and hoses to and from alkylene 
          oxide service.
153.1020 Unusually toxic cargoes.
153.1025 Motor fuel antiknock compounds.
153.1035 Acetone cyanohydrin or lactonitrile solutions.
153.1040 Carbon disulfide.
153.1045 Inorganic acids.
153.1046 Sulfuric acid.
153.1052 Carriage of other cargoes in acid tanks.
153.1060 Benzene.
153.1065 Sodium chlorate solutions.

 Approval of Surveyors and Handling of Categories A, B, C, and D Cargo 
                             and NLS Residue

153.1100 Responsibility of the person in charge.
153.1101 Procedures for getting a Surveyor: Approval of Surveyors.
153.1102 Handling and disposal of NLS residue: Categories A, B, C, and 
          D.
153.1104 Draining of cargo hose: Categories A, B, C, and D.
153.1106 Cleaning agents.
153.1108 Heated prewash for solidifying NLS, high viscosity NLS and 
          required prewashes of NLS whose viscosity exceeds 25 mPa sec 
          at 20 <deg>C: Categories A, B, and C.
153.1112 Prewash for tanks containing Category A NILS residue.
153.1114 Conditions under which a prewash may be omitted: Categories A, 
          B, and C.
153.1116 Prewash for tanks unloaded without following the approved 
          Procedures and Arrangements Manual: Category B and C.

[[Page 134]]

153.1118 Prewash of Categories B and C cargo tanks not meeting stripping 
          standards: Categories B and C.
153.1119 When to prewash and discharge NLS residues from a prewash; 
          unloading an NLS cargo in a country whose Administration is 
          not signatory to MARPOL 73/78: Categories A, B, and C.
153.1120 Procedures for tank prewash: Categories A, B, and C.
153.1122 Discharges of NLS residue from tank washing other than a 
          prewash: Categories A, B, and C.
153.1124 Discharges of Category D NLS residue.
153.1126 Discharge of NLS residue from a slop tank to the sea: 
          Categories A, B, C, and D.
153.1128 Discharge of NLS residue from a cargo tank to the sea: 
          Categories A, B, C, and D.
153.1130 Failure of slops discharge recording equipment; operating with, 
          reporting failures, and replacing pollution equipment: 
          Category A, B, C, D.
153.1132 Reporting spills and non-complying discharges: Category A, B, 
          C, and D.

                               Maintenance

153.1500 Venting system rupture disks.
153.1502 Fixed ballast relocation.
153.1504 Inspection of personnel emergency and safety equipment.

  Subpart D--Test and Calculation Procedures for Determining Stripping 
          Quantity, Clingage NLS Residue, and Total NLS Residue

153.1600 Equipment required for conducting the stripping quantity test.
153.1602 Test procedure for determining the stripping quantity.
153.1604 Determining the stripping quantity from the test results.
153.1608 Calculation of total NLS residue and clingage NLS residue.

Table 1 to Part 153--Summary of minimum requirements
Table 2 to Part 153--Cargoes not regulated under Subchapters D or O of 
          this chapter when carried in bulk on non-oceangoing barges
Appendix I to Part 153 [Reserved]
Appendix II to Part 153--Metric Units Used in Part 153

    Authority: 46 U.S.C. 3703; 49 CFR 1.46. Section 153.40 issued under 
49 U.S.C. 5103. Sections 153.470 through 153.491, 153.1100 through 
153.1132, and 153.1600 through 153.1608 also issued under 33 U.S.C. 1903 
(b).

    Source: CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, unless otherwise 
noted.

    Editorial Note: Nomenclature changes for Part 153 appear at 59 FR 
17028, Apr. 11, 1994, CGD 95-072, 60 FR 50465, Sept. 29, 1995 and at CGD 
96-041, 61 FR 50732, Sept. 27, 1996.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 153.0  Availability of materials.

    (a) Various sections in this part refer to the following documents 
which are incorporated in Annex II of MARPOL 73/78.
    (1) IMO Standards for Procedures and Arrangements for the Discharge 
of Noxious Liquid Substances, Resolution MEPC 18(22), 1985 in effect on 
April 6, 1987.
    (2) IMO International Code for the Construction and Equipment of 
Ships Carrying Dangerous Chemicals in Bulk, Resolution MEPC 19(22), 1985 
in effect on April 6, 1987.
    (3) IMO Code for the Construction and Equipment of Ships Carrying 
Dangerous Chemicals in Bulk, Resolution MEPC 20(22), 1985 in effect on 
April 6, 1987.
    (b) The IMO documents listed in this section are available from the 
following:
    (1) IMO Secretariat, Publications section, 4 Albert Embankment, 
London SE1 7SR, United Kingdom, Telex 23588;
    (2) New York Nautical Instrument and Service Company, 140 West 
Broadway, New York, NY 10013;
    (3) Baker, Lyman & Company, 3220 South I-10 Service Road, Metairie, 
LA 70001.
    (4) UNZ & Company, 190 Baldwin Avenue, Jersey City, NJ 07306.
    (5) Southwest Instrument Company, 235 West 7th Street, San Pedro, CA 
90731.
    (6) Marine Education Textbooks, 124 North Van Avenue, Houma, LA 
70363-5895.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7777, Mar. 12, 1987, as amended by CGD 92-100, 59 FR 
17028, Apr. 11, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 153.1  Applicability.

    This part applies to the following:
    (a) All United States self-propelled ships and those foreign self-
propelled ships operating in United States waters that carry in bulk a 
cargo listed in Table 1 or allowed in a written permission under Sec. 
153.900(d), unless--
    (1) The ship is carrying the cargo under 33 CFR part 151;

[[Page 135]]

    (2) The ship is carrying the cargo in a portable tank under subpart 
98.30 or 98.33 of this chapter; or
    (3) The ship is an offshore supply vessel carrying the cargo under 
subpart 98.31 of the chapter; or
    (b) All United States oceangoing non-self-propelled ships and those 
foreign non-self-propelled ships operating in United States waters that 
carry in bulk a Category A, B, or C NLS cargo listed in Table 1 or 
allowed in a written permission under Sec. 153.900(d), unless--
    (1) The ship is carrying the cargo under 33 CFR part 151;
    (2) The ship is carrying the cargo in a portable tank under subpart 
98.30 or 98.33 of this chapter;
    (3) The ship is an offshore supply vessel carrying the cargo under 
subpart 98.31 of this chapter; or
    (4) The ship's Certificate of Inspection is endorsed for a limited 
short protected coastwise route and the ship is constructed and 
certificated primarily for service on an inland route.
    (c) All ships that carry a bulk liquid, liquefied gas, or compressed 
gas cargo that is not--
    (1) Listed in Table 1 of this part;
    (2) Listed in Table 2 of this part;
    (3) Carried under a written permission granted under Sec. 
153.900(d);
    (4) Carried under part 30 through 35, 98, 151, or 154 of this 
chapter; or
    (5) Carried as an NLS under 33 CFR part 151.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7777, Mar. 12, 1987, as amended by CGD 84-025, 53 FR 
15844, May 4, 1988; CGD 81-101, 53 FR 28974, Aug. 1, 1988 and 54 FR 
12629, Mar. 28, 1989; CGD 84-043, 55 FR 37413, Sept. 11, 19905; CGD 96-
041, 61 FR 50732, Sept. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 153.2  Definitions and acronyms.

    As used in this part:
    Accommodation spaces means halls, dining rooms, lounges, lavatories, 
cabins, staterooms, offices, hospitals, cinemas, game and hobby rooms, 
pantries containing no cooking appliances, and similar permanently 
enclosed spaces.
    Adequate reception facility means each facility certified as 
adequate under 33 CFR 158.160 and each facility provided by a 
Administration signatory to MARPOL 73/78 under Regulation 7 of Annex II.
    Annex II means Annex II to MARPOL 73/78 and is the Annex to MARPOL 
73/78 regulating the discharge of noxious liquid substances to the sea.
    B means the breadth of the vessel and is defined in Sec. 42.13-15(d) 
of this chapter.
    Built means that a ship's construction has reached any of the 
following stages:
    (1) The keel is laid.
    (2) The mass of the partially assembled ship is 50,000 kg.
    (3) The mass of the partially assembled ship is one percent of the 
estimated mass of the completed ship.
    Cargo area means that part of a vessel that includes the cargo 
tanks, spaces adjacent to the cargo tanks and the part of the deck over 
the cargo tanks and adjacent spaces.
    Cargo containment system means a cargo tank, its cargo piping 
system, its venting system, and its gauging system.
    Cargo handling space means an enclosed space that must be entered 
during a routine loading, carriage, or discharge of cargo and that 
contains an element of the cargo containment system having a seal or 
packing to prevent the escape of cargo, such as a valve, cargo pump, or 
cargo vapor compressor.
    Cargo piping system means a tankship's permanently installed piping 
arrangement, including any valves and pumps, that carries cargo to or 
from a cargo tank.
    Cargo tank means a tank that:
    (1) Is part of or permanently affixed to a tankship; and
    (2) Carries a cargo described in part 153, table 1--SUMMARY OF 
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS in any quantity, including residual liquid or 
vapor.
    Certificate of Compliance means a certificate issued by the Coast 
Guard that a foreign flag vessel had been examined and found to comply 
with the regulations in this chapter.
    Closed gauging system means an arrangement for gauging the amount of 
cargo in a tank, such as a float and tape or a magnetically coupled 
float and indicator, that does not have any opening through which cargo 
vapor or liquid can escape.

[[Page 136]]

    Combustible is defined in Sec. 30.10-15 of this chapter.
    Commandant means Commandant of the U.S. Coast Guard.

The term is often followed by a mailing code in parentheses. The mailing 
address should include any mailing code and should be written as 
follows:

Commandant (mailing code), U.S. Coast Guard, 2100 Second Street SW. 
Washington, D.C. 20593-0001.

    Control space is defined in Sec. 30.10-19a of this chapter.
    Cycle, means that the tank washing machine progresses through 
complete rotations until it reaches an orientation identical to its 
starting orientation.

    Note: For a typical one or two nozzle tank washing machine that 
rotates in both the horizontal and vertical planes though more slowly in 
one than the other, a cycle would be at least one rotation in each plane 
of rotation.

    Dedicated ballast tank means a tank that is used only for ballast.
    Emergency shutdown station means a part of the tankship where the 
required emergency shutdown controls are clustered.
    Flammable is defined in Sec. 30.10-22 of this chapter.
    Forward perpendicular is defined in Sec. 42.13-15(b) of this 
chapter.
    Hazardous material means a liquid material or substance that is--
    (1) Flammable or combustible;
    (2) Designated a hazardous substance under section 311(b) of the 
Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1321); or
    (3) Designated a hazardous material under 49 U.S.C. 5103.

    Note: The Environmental Protection Agency designates hazardous 
substances in 40 CFR Table 116.A. The Coast Guard designates hazardous 
materials that are transported as bulk liquids by water in Sec. 153.40.

    High viscosity NLS includes high viscosity Category B NLS and high 
viscosity Category C NLS.
    High viscosity Category B NLS means any Category B NLS having a 
viscosity of at least 25 mPa.s at 20 <deg>C and at least 25 mPa.s at the 
time it is unloaded.
    High viscosity Category C NLS means any Category C NLS having a 
viscosity of at least 60 mPa.s at 20 <deg>C and at least 60 mPa.s at the 
time it is unloaded.
    IMO means the International Maritime Organization (IMO, formerly 
Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization or IMCO).
    IMO Bulk Chemical Code includes the IMO International Code for the 
Construction and Equipment of Ships Carrying Dangerous Chemicals in 
Bulk, Resolution MEPC 19(22), 1985 and the IMO Code for the Construction 
and Equipment of Ships Carrying Dangerous Chemicals in Bulk, Resolution 
MEPC 20(22), 1985.
    IMO Certificate includes a Certificate of Fitness for the Carriage 
of Dangerous Chemicals in Bulk issued under the IMO Code for the 
Construction and Equipment of Ships Carrying Dangerous Chemicals in 
Bulk, Resolution MEPC 20(22), 1985 and an International Certificate of 
Fitness for the Carriage of Dangerous Chemicals in Bulk issued under the 
IMO International Code for the Construction and Equipment of Ships 
Carrying Dangerous Chemicals in Bulk, Resolution MEPC 19(22), 1985.
    Independent, as applied to a cargo piping, venting, heating or 
cooling system means that the system is connected to no other system, 
and has no means available for connection to another system.
    Independent tank means a cargo tank that is permanently affixed to 
the vessel, that is self-supporting, that incorporates no part of the 
vessel's hull and that is not essential to the integrity of the hull.
    Intank cargo pump means a pump:
    (1) Located within the cargo tank it serves; and
    (2) Whose piping passes through only the top of the cargo tank.
    Integral tank means a cargo tank that also is part of or is formed 
in part by the vessel's hull structure so that the tank and the hull may 
be stressed by the same loads.
    IOPP Certificate means an International Oil Pollution Prevention 
Certificate required under 33 CFR 151.19.
    L means the length of the vessel and is defined in Sec. 42.13-15(a) 
of this chapter.
    Liquid means each substance having a vapor pressure of 172 kPa or 
less at 37.8 <deg>C.

[[Page 137]]

    Marine Inspector is defined in Sec. 30.10-43 of this chapter.
    MARPOL 73/78 means the International Convention for Prevention of 
Pollution from Ships, 1973 (done at London, November 2, 1973), modified 
by the Protocol of 1978 relating to the International Convention for 
Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973 (done at London, on February 
17, 1978).
    Master means the person-in-charge of a self-propelled or non-self-
propelled ship.
    Mixture means a mixture containing only the substances described in 
conjunction with the term.
    Nearest land has the same meaning as in 33 CFR 151.05(h).
    Noxious liquid substance (NLS) means--
    (1) Each substance listed in 33 CFR 151.47 or 33 CFR 151.49;
    (2) Each substance having an ``A,'' ``B,'' ``C,'' or ``D'' beside 
its name in the column headed ``Pollution Category'' in Table 1; and
    (3) Each substance that is identified as an NLS in a written 
permission issued under Sec. 153.900(c).
    NLS Certificate means an International Pollution Prevention 
Certificate for the Carriage of Noxious Liquid Substances in Bulk issued 
under Annex II of MARPOL 73/78.
    Oceangoing ship has the same meaning as in 33 CFR 151.05(j).
    Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, is defined in Sec. 1.05(b) of 
this chapter.
    Open gauging means an arrangement for gauging the amount of cargo in 
a tank through a large opening, such as a tank hatch or ullage opening.
    Open venting system means a venting system that always allows vapor 
to flow freely to and from the tank.
    Phosphoric acid means phosphoric acid, superphosphoric acid, and 
aqueous solutions of phosphoric acid.
    Pressure-vacuum (PV) valve means a valve that is normally closed and 
which opens under a preset positive pressure or a vacuum.
    Prewash means a tank washing operation that meets the procedure in 
Sec. 153.1120.
    Pumproom means any enclosed space containing a pump that is part of 
a cargo containment system.
    Reception facility means anything capable of receiving NLS residues 
in a country whose Administration is not signatory to MARPOL 73/78 and 
each adequate reception facility.
    Refrigerated tank means a cargo tank that is equipped to carry a 
cargo that must be cooled in order to keep the cargo's vapor pressure 
from exceeding the tank's pressure-vacuum or safety relief valve setting 
under ambient conditions of 32 <deg>C (approx. 90 <deg>F) still water 
and 46 <deg>C (approx. 115 <deg>F) still air.
    Relief valve setting means the inlet line pressure at which a vent 
system's pressure-vacuum or safety relief valve fully opens.
    Residues and mixtures containing NLSs (NLS residue) means--
    (1) Any Category A, B, C, or D NLS cargo retained on the ship 
because it fails to meet consignee specifications;
    (2) Any part of a Category A, B, C, or D NLS cargo remaining on the 
ship after NLS is discharged to the consignee, including but not limited 
to puddles on the tank bottom and in sumps, clingage in the tanks, and 
substance remaining in the pipes; or
    (3) Any material contaminated with a Category A, B, C, or D NLS 
cargo, including but not limited to bilge slops, ballast, hose drip pan 
contents, and tank wash water.
    Restricted gauging system means a method of gauging the amount of 
cargo in a tank through an opening of limited size that restricts or 
prevents the release of cargo vapors from the tank vapor space.
    Safety relief (SR) valve means a normally closed valve that opens 
under a preset positive pressure.
    Separate and separated, as applied to a cargo piping, venting, 
heating or cooling system, means either an independent system or one 
that may be disconnected from all other systems by:
    (a) Removing spool pieces or valves and blanking the open pipe ends; 
or
    (b) Blocking each system interconnection with two blind flanges in 
series and providing a means of detecting leakage into the pipe section 
between the flanges.
    Service spaces means spaces outside the cargo area used for galleys, 
pantries containing cooking appliances,

[[Page 138]]

lockers, store rooms, workshops other than those forming part of 
machinery spaces, and trunks to such spaces.
    Ship means a vessel of any type whatsoever, including hydrofoils, 
air-cushion vehicles, submersibles, floating craft whether self-
propelled or not, and fixed or floating platforms.
    Slop tanks include slop tanks and cargo tanks used as slop tanks.
    Solidifying NLS means a Category A, B, or C NLS that has a melting 
point--
    (1) Greater than 0 <deg>C but less than 15 <deg>C and a temperature, 
measured under the procedure in Sec. 153.908(d), that is less than 5 
<deg>C above its melting point at the time it is unloaded; or
    (2) 15 <deg>C or greater and has a temperature, measured under the 
procedure in Sec. 153.908(d), that is less than 10 <deg>C above its 
melting point at the time it is unloaded.
    Solution means a water solution.
    Special area means the Baltic Sea Area as defined in 33 CFR 
151.13(a)(2) and the Black Sea Area as defined in 33 CFR 151.13(a)(3).
    SR venting system means a venting system in which an SR valve 
controls vapor flow from the cargo tank.
    Tankship has the same meaning as ``ship''.
    Venting system means a permanent piping arrangement leading from a 
cargo tank and used to control the flow of vapor to and from the tank.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21204, May 17, 1982; CGD 81-052, 50 FR 8732, Mar. 5, 1985; CGD 81-078, 
50 FR 21170, May 22, 1985; CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7778, Mar. 12, 1987; CGD 
81-101, 53 FR 28974, Aug. 1, 1988; CGD 88-070, 53 FR 34535, Sept. 7, 
1988; CGD 81-101, 54 FR 12629, Mar. 28, 1989; CGD 96-041, 61 FR 50732, 
Sept. 27, 1996; CGD 95-028, 62 FR 51209, Sept. 30, 1997; USCG-1998-4442, 
63 FR 52191, Sept. 30, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 153.3  Right of appeal.

    Any person directly affected by a decision or action taken under 
this part, by or on behalf of the Coast Guard, may appeal therefrom in 
accordance with subpart 1.03 of this chapter.

[CGD 88-033, 54 FR 50381, Dec. 6, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 153.4  Incorporation by reference.

    (a) Certain material is incorporated by reference into this part 
with the approval of the Director of the Federal Register in accordance 
with 5 U.S.C. 552(a). To enforce any edition other than that specified 
in paragraph (b) of this section, the Coast Guard must publish notice of 
change in the Federal Register and make the material available to the 
public. All approved material is on file at the Office of the Federal 
Register, 800 North Capitol Street NW., suite 700, Washington, DC, and 
at the U.S. Coast Guard, Office of Operating and Environmental Standards 
(G-MSO), 2100 Second Street SW., Washington, DC 20593-0001 and is 
available from the sources indicated in paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) The material approved for incorporation by reference in this 
part and the sections affected are:

              American National Standards Institute (ANSI)

11 West 42nd Street, New York, NY 10036
ANSI B16.5, Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings, 1988..............153.940
ANSI B16.24, Bronze Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings, 1979......153.940
ANSI B16.31, Non-Ferrous Flanges, 1971...........................153.940

            American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)

100 Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959.
ASTM F 1122-87 (1992), Standard Specification for Quick Disconnect 
Couplings........................................................153.940
ASTM F 1271-90 (1995), Standard Specification for Spill Valves for Use 
in Marine Tank Liquid Overpressure Protections Applications......153.365

[CGD 88-032, 56 FR 35826, July 29, 1991, as amended by CGD 96-041, 61 FR 
50732, Sept. 27, 1996; CGD 97-057, 62 FR 51048, Sept. 30, 1997; USCG-
1999-5151, 64 FR 67183, Dec. 1, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 153.7  Ships built before December 27, 1977 and non-self-propelled ships 
built before July 1, 1983: Application.

    (a) Definitions.
    (1) Permit means a Certificate of Inspection, Letter of Compliance, 
or Certificate of Compliance.
    (2) Existing tankship means a tankship for which a contract was let 
on or before December 27, 1977.
    (3) Letter of Compliance in this section means a letter issued by 
the Coast Guard before 27 December 1977 which permitted a foreign flag 
tankship to

[[Page 139]]

carry a bulk cargo regulated under this part.
    (b) Endorsements for existing tankships. (1) The Coast Guard 
endorses the permit of an existing tankship to carry a cargo listed in 
Table 1 if:
    (i) The tankship held a permit on December 27, 1977, endorsed for 
the cargo in question;
    (ii) The tankship meets the construction standards under which the 
Coast Guard issued the permit; and
    (iii) The tankship meets the standards in paragraph (c) of this 
section.
    (2) The Coast Guard endorses the permit of an existing tankship to 
carry a cargo listed in Table 1 if:
    (i) The tankship held a permit on December 27, 1977;
    (ii) The Coast Guard did not require the permit to be endorsed with 
the name of the cargo at any time before December 27, 1977;
    (iii) The tankship meets the construction standards under which the 
Coast Guard issued the permit;
    (iv) The tankship carried the cargo in question; and
    (v) The tankship meets the standards in paragraph (c) of this 
section.
    (3) The Coast Guard endorses the permit of an existing tankship to 
carry a cargo listed in Table 1 if:
    (i) The tankship held a permit on December 27, 1977 endorsed to 
carry class B or C poisons under 46 CFR part 39;
    (ii) The cargo in question is a class B or C poison;
    (iii) The tankship meets the construction standards in 46 CFR part 
39; and
    (iv) The tankship meets the standards in paragraph (c) of this 
section.
    (4) The Commandant (G-MSO) considers on a case by case basis 
endorsing the permit of an existing tankship to carry a cargo listed in 
Table 1 if:
    (i) The tankship does not come within the categories described in 
paragraphs (b) (1) through (3) of this section;
    (ii) The tankship meets paragraph (c) of this section; and
    (iii) The tankship meets any additional requirements the Commandant 
(G-MSO) may prescribe.
    (c) An existing tankship must meet all the requirements of this part 
except as provided in paragraphs (c) (3), (4), (5) and (6) of this 
section.
    (1)-(2) [Reserved]
    (3) The Commandant (G-MSO) considers on a case by case basis 
endorsing as a type II containment system one that fails to meet 
Sec.Sec. 153.231(b), 153.234, 172.130 and 172.133 of this chapter if the 
tankship and containment system meet the following minimum conditions:
    (i) The tankship has a loadline certificate.
    (ii) The cargo tank is not part of the tankship's shell plating.
    (iii) The distance between the bottom plating of the cargo tank and 
the bottom shell plating of the tankship is at least 76 cm measured 
parallel to the vertical axis of the tankship.
    (4) The Commandant (G-MSO) considers on a case by case basis 
endorsing a containment system as a type II containment system if:
    (i) The containment system is modified to meet Sec. 153.231(b) by 
adding double bottoms or wing tanks; and
    (ii) The tankship can survive the damage described in Sec.Sec. 
172.135 and 172.150 of this chapter to those parts of the tankship other 
than machinery spaces.
    (5) The Commandant (G-MSO) considers on a case by case basis 
endorsing as a type III containment system one that does not meet 
Sec.Sec. 153.234, 172.130 and 172.133 of this chapter if the tankship 
has a load line certificate.
    (6) The Commandant (G-MSO) considers on a case by case basis 
endorsing the tankship to carry cargoes listed in Table 1 of this part 
if the tankship does not meet Sec.Sec. 153.217, 153.219 and 153.254.
    (d) Except as required by this paragraph, subpart B of this part 
does not apply to a non-self-propelled ship that carries an NLS cargo 
under this part if--
    (1) The ship was built before July 1, 1983;
    (2) The ship carries no NLS cargo or NLS residue at any time it is 
in waters of another Administration signatory to MARPOL 73/78;
    (3) The NLS does not require a type I containment system;
    (4) The ship meets all requirements in parts 30 through 34 and part 
151 of this chapter that apply to the cargo;

[[Page 140]]

    (5) The ship meets the provisions in Sec. 153.216 and Sec.Sec. 
153.470 through 153.491 applying to the NLS category of that cargo;
    (6) When the ``Special Requirements'' column of Table 1 contains an 
entry for Sec. 153.408 or Sec. 153.409 beside the cargo name, the ship 
meets the section, except the system prescribed by the section need be 
capable of operation only during loading;
    (7) [Reserved]
    (8) No part of the ship's hull plating is a component of a cargo 
tank if the cargo tank is endorsed to carry a cargo having a type II 
containment system in Table 1.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21204, May 17, 1982; CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 4781, Feb. 3, 1983; CGD 79-023, 
48 FR 51009, Nov. 4, 1983; CGD 81-052, 50 FR 8733, Mar. 5, 1985; CGD 81-
101, 52 FR 7779, Mar. 12, 1987; CGD 81-101, 53 FR 28974, Aug. 1, 1988 
and 54 FR 12629, Mar. 28, 1989; CGD 95-072, 60 FR 54106, Oct. 19, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 153.8  Procedures for requesting an endorsed Certificate of Inspection.

    (a) When applying for the endorsed Certificate of Inspection that 
Sec. 153.900 requires for a ship to carry a cargo listed in Table 1, the 
applicant must proceed as follows:
    (1) Send a letter to one of the Coast Guard offices listed in Sec. 
91.55-15 of this chapter that includes--
    (i) A request for the endorsed Certificate of Inspection;
    (ii) The name of the ship; and
    (iii) A list of the cargoes from Table 1 the applicant wishes the 
endorsement to allow.
    (2) Supply to the Coast Guard when requested--
    (i) Hull type calculations;
    (ii) The plans and information listed in Sec.Sec. 54.01-18, 56.01-
10, 91.55-5 (a), (b), (d), (g), and (h), and 110.25-1 of this chapter;
    (iii) A copy of the Procedures and Arrangements Manual required by 
Sec. 153.490; and
    (iv) Any other ship information, including plans, design 
calculations, test results, certificates, and manufacturer's data, that 
the Coast Guard needs to determine if the ship meets this part.
    (b) The Coast Guard notifies the applicant in writing--
    (1) Whether any further information is necessary to evaluate the 
request for the endorsed Certificate of Inspection; and
    (2) Of the outcome of the request for the endorsed Certificate of 
Inspection.
    (c) The Coast Guard returns the Procedures and Arrangements Manual 
stamped ``Approved'' or indicating what corrections are necessary.

    Note: The procedures for requesting an IOPP Certificate are found in 
33 CFR Part 151.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7779, Mar. 12, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 153.9  Foreign flag vessel endorsement application.

    (a) Application for a vessel whose flag administration is signatory 
to MARPOL 73/78 and issues IMO Certificates. A person who desires a 
Certificate of Compliance endorsed to carry a cargo in table 1 of this 
part, as described in Sec. 153.900 of this part, must request the 
endorsement from the cognizant Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection and 
have aboard the vessel copies of IMO Certificates issued by the vessel's 
administration and--
    (1) An additional classification society statement that the vessel 
complies with Sec. 153.530 (b), (d), and (p)(1) if a person desires a 
Certificate of Compliance endorsed with the name of an alkylene oxide; 
and
    (2) An additional classification society statement that the vessel 
complies with Sec.Sec. 153.370, 153.371, and 153.438 if a person desires 
a Certificate of Compliance endorsed with the name of a cargo whose 
vapor pressure exceeds 100 kPa absolute at 37.8 <deg>C (approximately 
14.7 psia at 100 <deg>F).
    (b) Application for a vessel whose flag administration does not 
issue IMO Certificates. A person who desires a Certificate of Compliance 
\1\ endorsed with the name of a cargo in Table 1 of this part, as 
described in Sec. 153.900, must submit to Commanding Officer, U.S. Coast 
Guard Marine Safety Center (MSC), 400 Seventh St., SW., Washington, DC 
20590-0001 an application that includes the following information:
    (1) A copy of the vessel's Cargo Ship Safety Construction 
Certificate and Cargo Ship Safety Equipment Certificate issued under the 
International

[[Page 141]]

Convention for Safety of Life at Sea, 1974.
    (2) A list of those cargoes for which the Letter of Compliance is to 
be endorsed.
    (3) The specific tanks that are to be endorsed for each cargo.
    (4) The names of the U.S. ports in which the person anticipates 
operating the vessel.
    (5) The name of the vessel's flag administration.
    (6) The name of the society that classes the vessel.
    (7) A brief description of the vessel's cargo containment systems.
    (8) Hull type calculations.
    (9) The plans and information listed in Sec.Sec. 54.01-18, 56.01-10, 
91.55-5 (a), (b), (d), (g), and (h), and 111.05-5(d) of this chapter.
    (c) Conditions applying to all Certificate of Compliance 
applications. (1) If requested by the Commanding Officer, U.S. Coast 
Guard Marine Safety Center (MSC), 400 Seventh St., SW., Washington, DC 
20590-0001, a person desiring a Certificate of Compliance for a vessel 
must furnish any other vessel information such as plans, design 
calculations, test results, certificates, and manufacturer's data, that 
the Coast Guard needs to determine that the vessel meets the standards 
of this part.
    (2) Correspondence with the Coast Guard and vessel information 
submitted under this part must be in English except IMO Certificates 
which may be in French.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 81-052, 50 FR 
8733, Mar. 5, 1985; 50 FR 15895, Apr. 23, 1985; CGD 88-070, 53 FR 34535, 
Sept. 7, 1988; CGD 88-070, 53 FR 37570, Sept. 27, 1988; CGD 89-025, 54 
FR 19571, May 8, 1989; CGD 90-008, 55 FR 30663, July 26, 1990; CGD 92-
100, 59 FR 17028, Apr. 11, 1994; CGD 95-027, 61 FR 26008, May 23, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 153.10  Procedures for requesting alternatives and waivers; termination 
of waivers.

    (a) The Coast Guard considers allowing the use of an alternative in 
place of a requirement in this part if--
    (1) The person wishing to use the alternative sends a written 
application to the Commandant (G-MSO) explaining--
    (i) The requirement in this part that would not be met and the 
reason why;
    (ii) The alternative the person proposes to be substituted; and
    (iii) How the alternative would ensure a level of safety and 
pollution protection at least equal to that of the requirement for which 
the alternative would substitute;
    (2) The alternative does not substitute an operational standard for 
a design or equipment standard; and
    (3) The Commandant (G-MSO) determines that the alternative provides 
a level of protection for purposes of safety and pollution at least 
equal to the requirement in this part.
    (b) The Coast Guard considers granting a waiver of a requirement for 
which this part allows a waiver if the person wishing the waiver sends a 
written application to the Commandant (G-MSO) that includes--
    (1) A citation of the regulation that allows the waiver; and
    (2) Any information and pledges that the regulation requires to be 
submitted with the application for the waiver.
    (c) The Commandant notifies the applicant in writing--
    (1) Whether any further information is necessary to evaluate the 
request for an alternative or waiver; and
    (2) Of the outcome of the request for an alternative or waiver.
    (d) A waiver issued under this part terminates if any--
    (1) Information required to be supplied with the application for the 
waiver changes;
    (2) Pledges required to be supplied with the application for the 
waiver are repudiated;
    (3) Restrictions or procedures applying to operations under the 
waiver are violated; or
    (4) Requirements in the section of this part authorizing the waiver 
are violated.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7780, Mar. 12, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 153.12  IMO Certificates for United States Ships.

    Either a classification society authorized under 46 CFR part 8, or 
the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, issues a United States ship an 
IMO Certificate endorsed to allow the carriage of a hazardous material 
or NLS cargo in table 1 of this part if the following requirements are 
met:

[[Page 142]]

    (a) The ship's owner must make a request to the OCMI for the IMO 
Certificate.
    (b) The ship must meet this part.
    (c) Self-propelled ships contracted for after November 1, 1973 but 
built before December 28, 1977 must meet requirements in this part that 
apply to a self-propelled ship built on December 28, 1977.
    (d) Non-self-propelled ships contracted for after November 1, 1973 
but built before July 1, 1983 must meet the requirements in this part 
applying to non-self-propelled ships built on July 1, 1983.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7780, Mar. 12, 1987, as amended by CGD 95-010, 62 FR 
67537, Dec. 24, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 153.15  Conditions under which the Coast Guard issues a Certificate of 
Inspection or Certificate of Compliance.

    (a) The Coast Guard issues the endorsed Certificate of Inspection 
required under Sec. 153.900 for a United States ship to carry a 
hazardous material or NLS listed in Table 1 if--
    (1) The person wishing the Certificate of Inspection applies 
following the procedures under Sec. 153.8; and
    (2) The ship meets the design and equipment requirements of this 
part and--
    (i) Subchapter D of this chapter if the hazardous material or NLS is 
flammable or combustible; or
    (ii) Either Subchapter D or I of this chapter, at the option of the 
ship owner, if the hazardous material or NLS is non-flammable or non-
combustible.
    (b) The Coast Guard issues the endorsed Certificate of Compliance 
required under Sec. 153.900 for a foreign ship to carry a hazardous 
material or NLS listed in Table 1 if--
    (1) The person wishing the Certificate of Compliance follows the 
procedures under Sec. 153.9;
    (2) The ship has an IMO Certificate issued by its Administration and 
endorsed with the name of the hazardous material or NLS if the ship's 
Administration is signatory to MARPOL 73/78;
    (3) The ship meets the requirements of this part applying to United 
States ships and Sec. 30.01-5(e) of this chapter if the ship's 
Administration is not signatory to MARPOL 73/78; and
    (4) The ship meets any additional design and equipment requirements 
specified by the Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7780, Mar. 12, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 153.16  Requirements for foreign flag vessel permits.

    To have its Certificate of Compliance endorsed to carry a cargo 
listed in Table 1, a foreign flag vessel must:
    (a) Have an IMO Certificate, if the flag administration issues IMO 
Certif icates, endorsed with the name of the cargo and meet any specific 
requirements in this subpart that the Commandant (G-MSO) may prescribe; 
or
    (b) Meet the requirements of this subpart and Sec. 30.01-5(e) of 
this chapter.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 
FR 4781, Feb. 3, 1983; CGD 81-052, 50 FR 8733, Mar. 5, 1985; CGD 81-101, 
52 FR 7780, Mar. 12, 1987; CGD 95-027, 61 FR 26008, May 23, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 153.30  Special area endorsement.

    The Coast Guard endorses the Certificate of Inspection of a United 
States ship allowing it to operate in special areas if the ship owner--
    (a) Requests the endorsement following the procedures in Sec. 153.8;
    (b) Shows that the ship meets the design and equipment requirements 
applying to ships operating in special areas contained in Regulations 5, 
5A, and 8 of Annex II and the Standards for Procedures and Arrangements.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7780, Mar. 12, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 153.40  Determination of materials that are hazardous.

    Under the authority delegated by the Secretary of Transportation in 
49 CFR 1.46(t) to carry out the functions under 49 U.S.C. 1803, the 
Coast Guard has found the following materials to be hazardous when 
transported in bulk:
    (a) Materials listed in Table 30.25-1 of this chapter.
    (b) Materials listed in Table 151.05.
    (c) Materials listed in Table 1.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Those hazardous material cargoes designated Category A, B, C, or 
D in Table 1 are also Noxious Liquid Substances under Annex II and the 
Act to Prevent Pollution from Ships, 33 U.S.C. 1901 et seq.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 143]]

    (d) Materials listed in Table 4 of Part 154.
    (e) Materials that are NLSs under MARPOL Annex II.
    (f) Liquids, liquefied gases, and compressed gases, that are--
    (1) Listed in 49 CFR 172.101;
    (2) Listed in 49 CFR 172.102; or
    (3) Listed or within any of the definitions in subparts C through O 
of 49 CFR part 173.
    (g) Those liquid, liquefied gas, and compressed gas materials 
designated as hazardous in the permissions granted under Sec. 
153.900(c).\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ The Coast Guard continues to propose in the Federal Register any 
addition of these designated hazardous materials to one of the tables 
referred to in paragraphs (a) through (d).

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7780, Mar. 12, 1987]


<R04>
                     Subpart B--Design and Equipment

                       General Vessel Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 153.190  Stability requirements.

    Each vessel must meet the applicable requirements in Subchapter S of 
this chapter.

[CGD 79-023, 48 FR 51009, Nov. 4, 1983. Redesignated by CGD 81-101, 52 
FR 7780, Mar. 12, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 153.201  Openings to accommodation, service or control spaces.

    (a) Except as allowed in paragraph (b) of this section, entrances, 
ventilation intakes and exhausts, and other openings to accommodation, 
service, or control spaces must be located aft of the house bulkhead 
facing the cargo area a distance at least equal to the following:
    (1) 3 m (approx. 10 ft) if the vessel length is less than 75 meters 
(approx. 246 ft).
    (2) L/25 if the vessel length is between 75 and 125 meters (approx. 
246 ft and 410 ft).
    (3) 5 m (approx. 16.5 ft) if the vessel length is more than 125 
meters (approx. 410 ft).
    (b) Fixed port lights, wheelhouse doors, and windows need not meet 
the location requirements specified in paragraph (a) of this section if 
they do not leak when tested with a fire hose at 207 kPa gauge (30 
psig).

[CGD 81-078, 50 FR 21173, May 22, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 153.208  Ballast equipment.

    (a) Except for the arrangement described in paragraph (b) of this 
section no piping that serves a dedicated ballast tank that is adjacent 
to a cargo tank may enter an engine room or accommodation space.
    (b) Piping used only to fill a dedicated ballast tank adjacent to a 
cargo tank may enter an engine room or accommodation space if the piping 
has a valve or valving arrangement:
    (1) Within the part of the tankship where a containment system may 
be located under Sec. 153.234;
    (2) That allows liquid to flow only towards that ballast tank (such 
as a check valve); and
    (3) That enables a person to shut off the fill line from the 
weatherdeck (such as a stop valve).
    (c) Except as prescribed in paragraph (d) of this section, pumps, 
piping, vent lines, overflow tubes and sounding tubes serving dedicated 
ballast tanks must not be located within a cargo containment system.
    (d) Each vent line, overflow tube and sounding tube that serves a 
dedicated ballast tank and that is located within a cargo containment 
system must meet Sec. 32.60-10(e)(2) of this chapter.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21207, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.209  Bilge pumping systems.

    Bilge pumping systems for cargo pumprooms, slop tanks, and void 
spaces separated from cargo tanks by only a single bulkhead must be 
entirely within the locations allowed containment systems in Sec. 
153.234.


<R05>
Sec. 153.214  Personnel emergency and safety equipment.

    Each self-propelled ship must have the following:
    (a) Two stretchers or wire baskets complete with equipment for 
lifting an injured person from a pumproom or a cargo tank.

[[Page 144]]

    (b) In addition to any similar equipment required by Subchapter D of 
this chapter, three each of the following:
    (1) A 30 minute self-contained breathing apparatus of the pressure 
demand type, approved by the Mining Safety and Health Administration 
(formerly the Mining Enforcement and Safety Administration) and the 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, or the tankship's 
flag administration with five refill tanks or cartridges of 30 minutes 
capacity each.
    (2) A set of overalls or large apron, boots, long sleeved gloves, 
and goggles, each made of materials resistant to the cargoes in Table 1 
that are endorsed on the Certificate of Inspection or Certificate of 
Compliance.
    (3) A steel-cored lifeline with harness.
    (4) An explosion-proof lamp.
    (c) First aid equipment.

[GCD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 77-222, 43 FR 
57256, Dec. 7, 1978; CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21207, May 17, 1982; CGD 81-052, 
50 FR 8733, Mar. 5, 1985; CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7781, Mar. 12, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 153.215  Safety equipment lockers.

    Each self-propelled ship must have the following:
    (a) Each tankship must have at least two safety equipment lockers.
    (b) One safety equipment locker must be adjacent to the emergency 
shutdown station required by Sec. 153.296(b). This locker must contain 
one set of the equipment required by Sec. 153.214(a) and two sets of 
that required by Sec. 153.214(b).
    (c) The second safety equipment locker must be adjacent to the 
second emergency shutdown station required by Sec. 153.296. This locker 
must contain the remaining equipment required by Sec. 153.214 (a) and 
(b).
    (d) Each safety equipment locker must be marked as described in Sec. 
153.955 (c), (d), and (e) with the legend ``SAFETY EQUIPMENT.''

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21207, May 17, 1982; CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7781, Mar. 12, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 153.216  Shower and eyewash fountains.

    (a) Each non-self-propelled ship must have a fixed or portable 
shower and eyewash fountain that operates during cargo transfer and 
meets paragraph (c) of this section.
    (b) Each self-propelled ship must have a shower and eyewash fountain 
that operates at all times and meets paragraph (c) of this section.
    (c) The shower and eyewash fountains required by paragraphs (a) and 
(b) of this section must--
    (1) Operate in any ambient temperature;
    (2) Dispense water at a temperature between 0 <deg>C and 40 <deg>C 
(approx. 32 <deg>F and 104 <deg>F);
    (3) Be located on the weatherdeck; and
    (4) Be marked ``EMERGENCY SHOWER'' as described in Sec. 153.955 (c), 
(d), and (e), so that the marking is visible from work areas in the part 
of the deck where the cargo containment systems are located.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7781, Mar. 12, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 153.217  Access to enclosed spaces and dedicated ballast tanks.

    An access opening to an enclosed space or a dedicated ballast tank 
must meet the requirements for a cargo tank access in Sec. 153.254 (b), 
(c), and (d) if:
    (a) The enclosed space or dedicated ballast tank is located within 
the cargo area of the vessel; or
    (b) A part of a cargo containment system lies within the enclosed 
space or dedicated ballast tank.

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21207, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.219  Access to double bottom tanks serving as dedicated ballast tanks.

    (a) Except as prescribed in paragraph (b) of this section, access 
openings to double bottom tanks serving as dedicated ballast tanks must 
not be located within a cargo containment system.
    (b) Each access opening to a double bottom tank that is a dedicated 
ballast tank and that is located within a cargo containment system must 
be:
    (1) Enclosed in an access trunk extending to the weatherdeck;
    (2) Separated from the cargo containment system by two manhole 
coverings; or

[[Page 145]]

    (3) Approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21207, May 17, 1982, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]

                        Cargo Containment Systems


<R05>
Sec. 153.230  Type I system.

    A type I containment system must meet the following requirements:
    (a) The vessel must meet the requirements in subpart F of part 172 
of this chapter for a type I hull.
    (b) Except as described in Sec. 153.235:
    (1) It may be no closer to the tankship's shell than 76 cm (approx. 
29.9 in.); and
    (2) It may not be located in any part of the tankship subject to the 
damage described in Table 172.135 of this chapter for:
    (i) Collision Penetration, Transverse extent; and
    (ii) Grounding Penetration, Vertical extents from the baseline 
upward.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 79-023, 48 FR 
51009, Nov. 4, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 153.231  Type II system.

    A type II containment system must meet the following requirements:
    (a) The vessel must meet the requirements in subpart F of part 172 
of this chapter for a type I or II hull.
    (b) Except as allowed in Sec.Sec. 153.7 and 153.235--
    (1) It may be no closer to the tankship's shell than 76 cm (approx. 
29.9 in.); and
    (2) It may not be located in any part of the tankship subject to the 
damage described in Table 172.135 of this chapter for Grounding 
Penetration, Vertical extent from the baseline upward.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 79-023, 48 FR 
51009, Nov. 4, 1983; CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7781, Mar. 12, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 153.232  Type III system.

    A type III containment system must be in either a type I, II, or III 
hull. The requirements for type I, II, and III hulls are in subpart F of 
part 172 of this chapter.

[CGD 79-023, 48 FR 51009, Nov. 4, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 153.233  Separation of tanks from machinery, service and other spaces.

    (a) To prevent leakage through a single weld failure, the following 
spaces must be separated from a cargo by two walls, two bulkheads, or a 
bulkhead and a deck not meeting in a cruciform joint:
    (1) Machinery spaces.
    (2) Service spaces.
    (3) Accommodation spaces.
    (4) Spaces for storing potable domestic, or feed water.
    (5) Spaces for storing edibles.
    (b) Some examples of arrangements that may separate cargo from the 
spaces listed in paragraph (a) of this section are the following:
    (1) Dedicated ballast tanks.
    (2) Cargo pumprooms.
    (3) Ballast pumprooms.
    (4) Tanks not carrying a cargo listed in this part. \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \3\ See also Sec.Sec. 32.56-5 and 32.60-10 of this chapter for 
limitations on the stowage of combustible liquids adjacent to ignition 
sources.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (5) A cofferdam aft of the cargo containment systems and whose 
forward bulkhead is forward of any joint common to an accommodations 
space and the deck.
    (6) Double walled piping or a piping tunnel.


<R05>
Sec. 153.234  Fore and aft location.

    Except as allowed in Sec. 153.7, each ship must meet the following:
    (a) Each cargo containment system and any compartments within which 
a containment system is located must be forward of a tankship's 
accommodation spaces.
    (b) Except as described in Sec. 153.235, each cargo containment 
system must be located at least 0.05L aft of the forward perpendicular, 
but in no case forward of a collision bulkhead.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 81-101, 52 FR 
7781, Mar. 12, 1987]

[[Page 146]]


<R05>
Sec. 153.235  Exceptions to cargo piping location restrictions.

    Cargo piping must not be located in those areas from which a 
containment system is excluded by Sec.Sec. 153.230(b), 153.231(b), and 
153.234(b) unless the cargo piping:
    (a) Drains back to the cargo tank under any heel or trim resulting 
from the damage specified in Sec. 172.135 of this chapter; and
    (b) Enters the cargo tank above the liquid level for a full tank in 
any condition of heel or trim resulting from the damage specified in 
Sec. 172.135 of this chapter.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 79-023, 48 FR 
51009, Nov. 4, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 153.236  Prohibited materials.

    When one of the following paragraphs of this section is referenced 
in Table 1, the materials listed in that paragraph may not be used in 
components that contact the cargo liquid or vapor:
    (a) Aluminum or aluminum alloys.
    (b) Copper or copper alloys.
    (c) Zinc, galvanized steel or alloys having more than 10 percent 
zinc by weight.
    (d) Magnesium.
    (e) Lead.
    (f) Silver or silver alloys.
    (g) Mercury.


<R05>
Sec. 153.238  Required materials.

    When one of the following paragraphs of this section is referenced 
in Table 1, only those materials listed in that paragraph may be used in 
components that contact the cargo liquid or vapor:
    (a) Aluminum, stainless steel, or steel covered with a protective 
lining or coating.
    (b) With cargo concentrations of 98 percent or greater, aluminum or 
stainless steel.
    (c) With cargo concentrations of less than 98 percent, 304L or 316 
stainless steel.
    (d) Solid austenitic stainless steel.
    (e) Stainless steel or steel covered with a suitable protective 
lining or coating. (See Sec. 153.266.)

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 88-100, 54 FR 
40041, Sept. 29, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 153.239  Use of cast iron.

    (a) Cast iron used in a cargo containment system must meet the 
requirements of Sec. 56.60-10(b) of this chapter.
    (b) For purposes of this section, the term ``lethal products'' in 
Sec. 56.60-10(b) means those cargoes that Table 1 references to Sec. 
153.525 or Sec. 153.527.

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21207, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.240  Insulation.

    Cargo containment system insulation made necessary by the 
requirements of this part must meet the requirements in Sec. 38.05-20 of 
this chapter. However, the vapor barrier required by Sec. 38.05-20(b) is 
unnecessary if the insulation is:
    (a) Protected from the weather, and attached to a containment system 
maintained at a temperature in excess of 46 <deg>C (approx. 115 <deg>F); 
or
    (b) In an atmosphere whose dewpoint is less than the temperature of 
any surface in contact with the insulation.

                               Cargo Tanks


<R05>
Sec. 153.250  Double-bottom and deep tanks as cargo tanks.

    Except in those cases in which Commandant (G-MSO) specifically 
approves another arrangement, such as a double-bottom or deep tank as a 
cargo tank, an integral cargo tank or the hold within which an 
independent cargo tank is located must extend to the weatherdeck.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 
FR 4781, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 153.251  Independent cargo tanks.

    All independent cargo tank must meet Sec. 38.05-10 (a)(1), (b), (d), 
and (e)(1) of this chapter.

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21208, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.252  Special requirement for an independent cargo tank.

    When Table 1 refers to this section, the cargo tank must be an 
independent tank that meets Sec.Sec. 38.05-2(d) and 38.05-4(g) of this 
chapter. (See also Sec. 153.256(b)).

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21208, May 17, 1982]

[[Page 147]]


<R05>
Sec. 153.254  Cargo tank access.

    (a) A cargo tank must have at least one covered manhole opening into 
the vapor space described in Sec. 153.354.
    (b) An access through a vertical cargo tank surface must be at least 
60 cm by 80 cm (approx. 23.6 x 31.5 in.) and no more than 60 cm above a 
foothold grating, or surface on both sides of the access way.
    (c) An access through a horizontal cargo tank surface must be at 
least 60 cm by 60 cm (approx. 23.6 x 23.6 in.).
    (d) An access trunk must be no less than 76 cm (approx. 29.9 in.) in 
diameter.


<R05>
Sec. 153.256  Trunks, domes, and openings of cargo tanks.

    (a) The hatch of a cargo tank must:
    (1) Be at the highest point of the tank; and
    (2) Open on or above the weatherdeck.
    (b) To be endorsed to carry a cargo requiring an independent cargo 
tank, a tank must have:
    (1) A trunk or dome at the uppermost part of the tank, extending 
above the weatherdeck;
    (2) Its hatch at the top of the trunk or dome; and
    (3) No openings below the weatherdeck.


<R05>
Sec. 153.266  Tank linings.

    A tank lining must be:
    (a) At least as elastic as the tank material; and
    (b) Applied or attached to the tank as recommended by the lining 
manufacturer.

               Piping Systems and Cargo Handling Equipment


<R05>
Sec. 153.280  Piping system design.

    (a) Each cargo piping system must meet the standards of Part 56 and 
Sec.Sec. 38.10-1(b), 38.10-1(e), and 38.10-10(a) of this chapter.
    (b) Piping carrying cargo or cargo residue may not enter any 
machinery space except a cargo pumproom.


<R05>
Sec. 153.281  Piping to independent tanks.

    Piping for an independent cargo tank must penetrate the tank only 
through that part of the tank or dome extending above the weatherdeck.

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21208, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.282  Cargo filling lines.

    The discharge point of a cargo tank filling line must be no higher 
above the bottom of the cargo tank or sump than 10 cm (approx. 4 in.) or 
the radius of the filling line, whichever is greater.


<R05>
Sec. 153.283  Valving for cargo piping.

    (a) Except as described in this section, a cargo line must have a 
deck operable, manual stop valve:
    (1) In each tank which the line serves; and
    (2) At each cargo hose connection point.
    (b) The valve required by paragraph (a)(1) of this section may be in 
a cargo pumproom at the pumproom bulkhead if the cargo tank the cargo 
line serves is adjacent to the pumproom.
    (c) The valve required by paragraph (a)(1) of this section may be on 
the weatherdeck if:
    (1) The weatherdeck is the top of the tank;
    (2) The line goes through the weatherdeck into the tank; and
    (3) The valve is at the point where the line penetrates the 
weatherdeck.
    (d) The valve required by paragraph (a)(1) of this section may be 
outside the tank if:
    (1) The tank is an independent tank; and
    (2) The valve is at the point where the line penetrates the tank.
    (e) The discharge line of an intank cargo pump need not have the 
valve required by paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
    (f) If the cargo exerts a gravity head pressure on a valve required 
by this section, the valve must be a positive shutoff valve that meets 
Sec. 56.50-60(d) of this chapter.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21208, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.284  Characteristics of required quick closing valves.

    A remotely actuated quick closing shutoff valve required by Sec. 
153.530(n) must:

[[Page 148]]

    (a) Be a positive shutoff valve;
    (b) Be of the fail-closed type that closes on loss of power;
    (c) Be capable of local manual closing;
    (d) Close from the time of actuation in 30 seconds or less; and
    (e) Be equipped with a fusible element that melts at less than 104 
<deg>C (approx. 220 <deg>F) and closes the valve.

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21208, May 17, 1982; 47 FR 27293, June 24, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.285  Valving for cargo pump manifolds.

    (a) When cargo lines serving different tanks enter a pumproom and 
connect to the same pump:
    (1) Each cargo line must have a stop valve within the line;
    (2) The valve must be before the cargo line joins the other lines or 
pump; and
    (3) The valve must be within the pumproom.
    (b) The valve in paragraph (a) of this section is required in 
addition to any valve required under Sec. 153.283(b).


<R05>
Sec. 153.292  Separation of piping systems.

    Cargo piping systems must be arranged so that operations necessary 
to provide separate systems can be accomplished in a cargo handling 
space or on the weatherdeck.

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21208, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.294  Marking of piping systems.

    (a) Each cargo piping system must be marked with the designation 
number of the cargo tank it serves at each hose connection, valve, and 
blind in the piping system. The markings must be in characters at least 
5 cm (approx. 2 in.) high.
    (b) Every hose connection of a cargo piping system must be marked 
with the cargo piping system's working pressure required by Sec. 38.10-
10(a) of this chapter. \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \4\ See Sec. 153.280 of the part.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


<R05>
Sec. 153.296  Emergency shutdown stations.

    (a) Each tankship must have at least two emergency shutdown 
stations.
    (b) One emergency shutdown station must be located forward of the 
deckhouse, in the after part of the weatherdeck in which the cargo tanks 
are located.
    (c) A second emergency shutdown station must be located so that one 
of the two stations is accessible from any part of the weatherdeck if a 
break in a cargo piping system or hose causes spraying or leaking.
    (d) Each emergency shutdown station must contain a single remote 
actuator for all quick closing shutoff valves required by this part.
    (e) Each emergency shutdown station must have the controls necessary 
to stop all cargo pumps on the tankship.
    (f) Any remote emergency actuator, such as that for a quick closing 
shut-off valve, a cargo pump, or a water spray system, must be of a type 
that will not defeat the operation of other remote emergency actuators. 
The emergency action must occur whether one or several actuators are 
operated.
    (g) Each emergency shutdown station must be marked as described in 
Sec. 153.955 (c), (d), and (e) with the legend ``EMERGENCY SHUTDOWN 
STATION'' so that the legend is visible from work areas in the part of 
the deck where the cargo containment systems are located.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21208, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.297  Emergency actuators at the point of cargo control.

    (a) The point from which cargo transfer is controlled must have the 
same actuators an emergency shutdown station must have under Sec. 
153.296 and an actuator for any deck water spray systems required by 
this part.
    (b) The point from which cargo transfer is controlled may be one of 
the emergency shutdown stations required under Sec. 153.296 if it meets 
the requirements of that section.

                    Cargo Handling Space Ventilation


<R05>
Sec. 153.310  Ventilation system type.

    A cargo handling space must have a permanent forced ventilation 
system of the exhaust type.

[[Page 149]]


<R05>
Sec. 153.312  Ventilation system standards.

    A cargo handling space ventilation system must meet the following:
    (a) A ventilation system exhaust duct must discharge no less than 10 
m (approx. 32.8 ft) from openings into or ventilation intakes for, 
accommodation or service spaces.
    (b) A ventilation system must not recycle vapors from ventilation 
discharges.
    (c) Except for the space served by the ventilation duct, a 
ventilation duct must not pass through a machinery room, an 
accommodation space, or working spaces.
    (d) A ventilation system must be operable from outside the space it 
ventilates.
    (e) A ventilation system must be sized to change the air in the 
ventilated space at least 30 times per hour.
    (f) A ventilation system must not allow air to stagnate in any part 
of a ventilated space.
    (g) A ventilation system must be able to exhaust air from both above 
and below the deck plates of a ventilated space.


<R05>
Sec. 153.314  Ventilation of spaces not usually occupied.

    (a) Each tankship must have portable ventilation equipment that fits 
the mount required in paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
    (b) Each enclosed space within the cargo area that does not have a 
permanent ventilation system meeting Sec. 153.312 must have:
    (1) A mount for the portable mechanical ventilation equipment 
required by this section; and
    (2) Either permanent ventilation ductwork connected to the mount and 
arranged to supply air to the extremities of the space; or
    (3) An attachment for temporary ductwork at the mount with enough 
ductway in the ventilated space and temporary ductwork stowed aboard the 
vessel to supply air to the extremities of the space.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21208, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.316  Special cargo pumproom ventilation rate.

    When Table 1 refers to this section, the cargo pumproom ventilation 
system must change the air in the cargo pumproom 45 times per hour and 
discharge no less than 4 m (approx. 13.1 ft) above the deck.

                             Cargo Pumprooms


<R05>
Sec. 153.330  Access.

    (a) The access door to a cargo pump-room must open on the 
weatheredeck.
    (b) The access way to a cargo pump-room and its valving must allow 
passage of a man wearing the breathing apparatus required by Sec. 
153.214(b)(1).
    (c) Each ladderway in a cargo pump-room must be free from 
obstructions by piping, framework, or other equipment.
    (d) Cargo pumproom ladders and platforms must have guard railings.
    (e) Each ladder to a cargo pump-room must have an incline from the 
horizontal of less than 60<deg>.


<R05>
Sec. 153.332  Hoisting arrangement.

    (a) A cargo pumproom located below the weatherdeck must have a 
permanent hoisting arrangement with a lifting capacity of 2500 N 
(approx. 562 lbs), operable from the weatherdeck, for the removal of an 
unconscious person.
    (b) The cargo pumproom must have a 60 cm by 60 cm (approx. 2 ft by 2 
ft) cross-sectional clearance through the hoistway.


<R05>
Sec. 153.333  Cargo pump discharge pressure gauge.

    Each cargo pump within a pump-room must have a discharge pressure 
gauge outside the pumproom.


<R05>
Sec. 153.334  Bilge pumping systems.

    (a) A cargo pumproom must have a bilge pumping system.
    (b) The bilge pumping system must have:
    (1) Complete remote operating controls outside the cargo pumproom; 
and
    (2) An alarm that operates when the depth of liquid in the bilges 
exceeds 50 cm (approx. 19.7 in.).

[[Page 150]]


<R05>
Sec. 153.336  Special cargo pump or pumproom requirements.

    (a) When Table 1 refers to this section:
    (1) The cargo pump must be an intank cargo pump;
    (2) The cargo pumproom must be on or above the weatherdeck; or
    (3) The cargo pumproom must have the specific approval of the 
Commandant (G-MSO).
    (b) For a cargo pumproom described in paragraph (a)(2) or (a)(3) the 
tankship must:
    (1) Have a low pressure breathing quality air supply system for use 
with the breathing apparatus in the pumproom; or
    (2) Meet any requirements specified by the Commandant (G-MSO).
    (c) A low pressure air supply system described in paragraph (b)(1) 
of this section must:
    (1) Run from fixed air bottles to the pumproom;
    (2) Have an air compressor to recharge the fixed air bottles;
    (3) have hose connections in the pumproom suitable for use with the 
breathing apparatus required in Sec. 153.214(b)(1); and
    (4) have the air capacity to enable two men to work in the pumproom 
for at least one hour each without using the cartridges for the 
breathing apparatus required in Sec. 153.214(b)(1).

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21208, May 17, 1982, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4781, Feb. 3, 1983]

                          Cargo Venting Systems


<R05>
Sec. 153.350  Location of B/3 vent discharges.

    Except as prescribed in Sec. 153.353, a

B/3 venting system must discharge:
    (a) At the highest of the following points:
    (1) 6m (approx. 19.7 ft) above the weatherdeck.
    (2) B/3 above the weatherdeck.
    (3) 6m (approx. 19.7 ft) above a walkway, if the walkway is within a 
6m (approx. 19.7 ft) horizontal radius from the vent discharge.
    (b) At least 15m (approx. 49.2 ft) from air intakes for, or openings 
into, accommodation and service spaces.

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21208, May 17, 1982; 47 FR 27293, June 24, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.351  Location of 4m vent discharges.

    Except as prescribed in Sec. 153.353, a 4m venting system must 
discharge:
    (a) At least 4m (approx. 13.1 ft) above the higher of:
    (1) the weatherdeck; or
    (2) any walkway that is within a 4m (approx. 13.1 ft) horizontal 
radius from the vent discharge.
    (b) At least 10m (approx. 32.8 ft) from air intakes for, or openings 
into, accommodation or service spaces.

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21208, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.352  B/3 and 4 m venting system outlets.

    A B/3 or 4 m venting system outlet must:
    (a) Discharge vertically upwards; and
    (b) Prevent precipitation from entering the vent system.


<R05>
Sec. 153.353  High velocity vents.

    The discharge point of a B/3 or 4m venting system must be located at 
least 3m (approx. 10 ft) above the weatherdeck or walkway if:
    (a) The discharge is a vertical, unimpeded jet;
    (b) The jet has a minimum exit velocity of 30 m/sec (approx. 98.4 
ft/sec); and
    (c) The high velocity vent has been approved by Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21208, May 17, 1982, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 153.354  Venting system inlet.

    A venting system must terminate in the vapor space above the cargo 
when the tank is filled to a 2 percent ullage and the tankship has no 
heel or trim.


<R05>
Sec. 153.355  PV venting systems.

    When Table 1 requires a PV venting system, the cargo tank must have 
a PV valve in its vent line. The PV valve must be located between the 
tank and any connection to another tank's vent line (such as a vent 
riser common to two or more tanks).

[[Page 151]]


<R05>
Sec. 153.358  Venting system flow capacity.

    (a) The cross-sectional flow area of any vent system segment, 
including any PV or SR valve, must at no point be less than that of a 
pipe whose inside diameter is 6.4 cm (approx. 2.5 in.).
    (b) When Table 1 requires a closed or restricted gauging system, 
calculations must show that, under conditions in which a saturated cargo 
vapor is discharged through the venting system at the maximum 
anticipated loading rate, the pressure differential between the cargo 
tank vapor space and the atmosphere does not exceed 28 kPa gauge 
(approx. 4 psig), or, for independent tanks, the maximum working 
pressure of the tank.


<R05>
Sec. 153.360  Venting system restriction.

    A venting system must have no assembly that could reduce its cross-
sectional flow area or flow capacity to less than that required in Sec. 
153.358.


<R05>
Sec. 153.361  Arrangements for removal of valves from venting systems having 
multiple relief valves.

    A venting system having multiple relief valves may be arranged to 
allow the removal of a valve (for repair, as an example) provided the 
venting system:
    (a) Has valves that are interlocked, so that the removal of a valve 
does not reduce the venting system relieving capacity below the minimum 
relieving capacity required by Sec. 153.358; and
    (b) Is arranged so that cargo vapor will not escape through the 
opening left after a valve has been removed.

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21208, May 17, 1982; 47 FR 27293, June 24, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.362  Venting system drain.

    Unless a cargo vent system at every point is level or slopes back to 
the cargo tank under all conditions of heel and trim allowed under Sec. 
153.806, the cargo vent system must have a drain valve at each low point 
(trap) in the vent line.


<R05>
Sec. 153.364  Venting system supports.

    Supports for a vent system must meet Sec. 38.10-10(c) of this 
chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 153.365  Liquid overpressurization protection.

    (a) Except as noted in paragraph (b) of this section, a containment 
system requiring closed or restricted gauging must:
    (1) Be designed to withstand the maximum pressure that develops 
during an overfill of the densest cargo endorsed for the containment 
system; or
    (2) Have an overflow control system that meets Sec. 153.408; or
    (3) Meet the requirements specified by the Commandant (G-MSO).
    (b) A containment system requiring restricted gauging, except for 
those cargoes that reference Sec.Sec. 153.525 or 153.527, may be 
equipped with a spill valve that:
    (1) Meets ASTM F 1271 (incorporated by reference, see Sec. 153.4); 
and
    (2) Limits the maximum pressure during liquid overfill at a 
specified cargo loading rate to that which the containment system is 
able to withstand (see Sec.Sec. 153.294(b) and 152.977(b)).

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21208, May 17, 1982, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983; CGD 88-032, 56 FR 35827, July 29, 1991; USCG-2000-
7790, 65 FR 58463, Sept. 29, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 153.368  Pressure-vacuum valves.

    (a) The pressure side of a required pressure-vacuum relief valve 
must begin to open only at a pressure exceeding 3.5 kPa gauge (approx. 
0.5 psig).
    (b) A pressure-vacuum relief valve must meet the requirements of 
Subpart 162.017 of this chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 153.370  Minimum relief valve setting for ambient temperature cargo tanks.

    The relief valve setting for a containment system that carries a 
cargo at ambient temperature must at least equal the cargo's vapor 
pressure at 46 <deg>C (approx. 115 <deg>F).

[CGD 81-078, 50 FR 21173, May 22, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 153.371  Minimum relief valve setting for refrigerated cargo tanks.

    The relief valve setting for a containment system that carries a 
refrigerated cargo must at least equal the lesser of:
    (a) That in Sec. 153.370; or

[[Page 152]]

    (b) 110 percent of the cargo's vapor pressure at the steady state 
temperature obtained by a full tank of cargo with the refrigeration 
system operating under ambient conditions described within the 
definition of a refrigerated tank in Sec. 153.2.


<R05>
Sec. 153.372  Gauges and vapor return for cargo vapor pressures exceeding 
100 kPa (approx. 14.7 psia).

    When table 1 references this section, the containment system must 
have a:
    (a) Tank pressure gauge at the point where cargo flow is controlled 
during transfer; and
    (b) Vapor return connection.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977; 42 FR 57126, Nov. 1, 1977, as 
amended by CGD 81-078, 50 FR 21173, May 22, 1985]

                          Cargo Gauging Systems


<R05>
Sec. 153.400  General requirements for gauges.

    (a) Columnar gauge glasses must not be installed on a cargo 
containment system.
    (b) Flat sight glasses must meet Sec. 38.10-20(h) of this chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 153.404  Standards for containment systems having required closed gauges.

    When Table 1 requires a cargo's containment system to have a closed 
gauge, the containment system must have the following:
    (a) A permanently installed closed gauging system.
    (b) A vapor return connection.
    (c) The high level alarm described in Sec. 153.409.
    (d) Either a closed cargo sampling system or a cargo sampling 
arrangement allowing the retrieval of a sample through an orifice not 
exceeding:
    (1) 0.635 cm (approx. 0.25 in.) diameter when the cargo's vapor 
pressure is 28 kPa gauge (approx. 4 psig) or less; or
    (2) 0.140 cm (approx. 0.055 in.) diameter when the cargo's vapor 
pressure exceeds 28 kPa (approx. 4 psig).


<R05>
Sec. 153.406  Standards for containment systems having required restricted 
gauges.

    When Table 1 requires a cargo's containment system to have a 
restricted gauge, the containment system must have:
    (a) A closed gauging system; or
    (b) A system that has:
    (1) A restricted gauge (e.g., a sounding tube) with an orifice 
diameter not exceeding 20 cm (approx. 7.8 in.);
    (2) A permanently attached gauge cover that is vapor tight when in 
place; and
    (3) A venting system that has either:
    (i) Lock open PV valves; or
    (ii) Valved bypasses around the PV valves.


<R05>
Sec. 153.407  Special requirements for sounding tube gauges.

    (a) A sounding tube installed as a restricted gauge must extend to 
within one meter (approx. 39.4 in.) of the bottom of the tank.
    (b) A sounding tube must not be installed on a tank whose relief 
valve setting exceeds 28 kPa (approx. 4 psig) unless it is specifically 
permitted by the Commandant (G-MSO).
    (c) A sounding tube must have no perforations in the tube wall.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 
FR 4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 153.408  Tank overflow control.

    (a) When table 1 references this section, a cargo containment system 
must have a cargo high level alarm meeting Sec. 153.409 and one of the 
following additional systems:
    (1) A second high level (cargo overflow) alarm.
    (2) A system that automatically stops cargo flow to the tank 
(automatic shutdown system).
    (b) The high level alarm and the cargo overflow alarm or automatic 
shutdown system must:
    (1) Be independent of one-another; and
    (2) Operate on loss of power.
    (c) The cargo overflow alarm or the automatic shutdown system must 
operate early enough to:
    (1) Stop the loading operation before the cargo tank overflows; and
    (2) Avoid surge pressures that exceed the working pressure specified 
in Sec. 153.294(b).

[[Page 153]]

    (d) A tank overflow must be identified with the legend ``TANK 
OVERFLOW ALARM'' in lettering as specified for the warning sign in Sec. 
153.955.
    (e) A tank overflow alarm must be audible and visible in that part 
of the deck where the containment systems are located and at the point 
where cargo loading is controlled on the tankship.
    (f) The automatic shutdown system or tank overflow alarm must be 
able to be checked at the tank for proper operation (for example, by 
electrically simulating an overfill at the tank gauge connection).
    (g) In this section, ``independent'' as applied to two systems means 
that one system will operate with a failure of any part of the other 
system except high level power sources and electrical feeder panels. 
Conduit need not be independent; the control wiring for several 
independent systems may be carried in a single conduit.

[CGD 81-078, 50 FR 21173, May 22, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 153.409  High level alarms.

    When Table 1 refers to this section or requires a cargo to have a 
closed gauging system, the cargo's containment system must have a high 
level alarm:
    (a) That gives an audible and visual alarm before the tank fills to 
97 percent of its capacity;
    (b) That can be seen and heard where cargo transfer is controlled 
and on the open deck;
    (c) Whose operation can be checked prior to each loading; and
    (d) That must be marked as described in Sec. 153.408(c)(6) with the 
legend ``HIGH LEVEL ALARM.''

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21209, May 17, 1982; 47 FR 27293, June 24, 1982]

                    Cargo Temperature Control Systems


<R05>
Sec. 153.430  Heat transfer systems; general.

    Each cargo cooling system required by this part and each cargo 
heating system must:
    (a) Meet the standards of Subchapters F (Marine Engineering) and J 
(Electrical Engineering) of this chapter;
    (b) Have valving that enables the system to be separated from all 
other cooling and heating systems; and
    (c) Allow manual regulation of the system's heat transfer rate.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21209, May 17, 1982; CGD 81-078, 50 FR 21174, May 22, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 153.432  Cooling systems.

    (a) Each cargo cooling system must have an equivalent standby unit 
that is installed and that can be placed in operation immediately after 
failure of the primary cooling system.
    (b) Each tankship that has a cargo tank with a required cooling 
system must have a manual that contains:
    (1) A piping diagram for the cooling system; and
    (2) Instructions for changing over to the standby system described 
in paragraph (a) of this section.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21209, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.434  Heat transfer coils within a tank.

    When a cargo tank contains any quantity of cargo, a cargo cooling or 
heating system having coils within the tank must keep the heat transfer 
fluid at a pressure greater than the pressure exerted on the heating or 
cooling system by the cargo.

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21209, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.436  Heat transfer fluids: compatibility with cargo.

    A heat transfer fluid separated from the cargo by only one wall (for 
example, the heat transfer fluid in a coil within a tank) must be 
compatible with the cargo under the standards prescribed for 
compatibility between two cargoes in Part 150 of this chapter.

[CGD 81-078, 50 FR 21174, May 22, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 153.438  Cargo pressure or temperature alarms required.

    (a) Each refrigerated tank must have:
    (1) An alarm that operates when the cargo's pressure exceeds the 
vapor pressure described in Sec. 153.371(b); or
    (2) An alarm that operates when the cargo's temperature exceeds the 
steady

[[Page 154]]

state temperature described in Sec. 153.371(b).
    (b) The alarm must give an audible and visual signal on the bridge 
and at the cargo control station.
    (c) The cargo pressure or temperature alarm must be independent of 
other cargo pressure or temperature sensing arrangements.


<R05>
Sec. 153.440  Cargo temperature sensors.

    (a) Except as prescribed in paragraph (c) of this section, when 
Table 1 refers to this section, the containment system must meet the 
following requirements:
    (1) A heated or refrigerated cargo tank must have a remote reading 
thermometer sensing the temperature of the cargo at the bottom of the 
tank.
    (2) A refrigerated tank must have a remote reading second 
thermometer near the top of the tank and below the maximum liquid level 
allowed by Sec. 153.981.
    (3) Unless waived under Sec. 153.491(a), a cargo tank endorsed to 
carry a Category A, B, or C NLS cargo must have a thermometer whose 
temperature reading is no greater than the temperature of the cargo at a 
level above the tank bottom at least one-eighth but no more than one-
half the height of the tank if the cargo is--
    (i) A Category A NLS or a Category B NLS having a viscosity of at 
least 25 mPa.s at 20 <deg>C;
    (ii) A Category C NLS having a viscosity of at least 60 mPa.s at 20 
<deg>C; or
    (iii) A Category A, B, or C NLS that has a melting point greater 
than 0 <deg>C.
    (b) A readout for each remote thermometer required by this section 
must be at the point where cargo transfer is controlled.
    (c) A portable thermometer may be substituted for the equipment 
required in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section if--
    (1) Table 1 allows open gauging with the cargo; or
    (2) Table 1 allows restricted gauging with the cargo, and the 
portable thermometer is designed to be used through the containment 
system's restricted gauging system.

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21209, May 17, 1982, as amended by CGD 81-101, 52 FR 
7781, Mar. 12, 1987; CGD 81-101, 53 FR 28974, Aug. 1, 1988 and 54 FR 
12629, Mar. 28, 1989]

        Special Requirements for Flammable or Combustible Cargoes


<R05>
Sec. 153.460  Fire protection systems.

    Each self-propelled ship and each manned non-self-propelled ship 
must meet the following:
    (a) With the exception of the vent riser, each part of a cargo 
containment system exposed on the weatherdeck must be covered by the 
fire protection system listed beside the cargo in Table 1 and described 
in the footnotes to Table 1.
    (b) The Commandant (G-MSO) approves the substitution of a dry 
chemical (D) type fire protection system for an A or B type on a case by 
case basis.
    (c) A fire protection system required by this part must meet part 34 
of this chapter or be specifically approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 
FR 4782, Feb. 3, 1983; CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7781, Mar. 12, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 153.461  Electrical bonding of independent tanks.

    An independent metallic cargo tank that carries a flammable or 
combustible cargo must be electrically bonded to the tankship's hull.


<R05>
Sec. 153.462  Static discharges from inert gas systems.

    An inert gas system on a tank that carries a flammable or 
combustible cargo must not create static arcing as the inert gas is 
injected into the tank.


<R05>
Sec. 153.463  Vent system discharges.

    The discharge of a venting system must be at least 10 m (approx. 
32.8 ft) from an ignition source if:
    (a) The cargo tank is endorsed to carry a flammable or combustible 
cargo; and
    (b) Table 1 requires the cargo to have a PV venting system.

[[Page 155]]


<R05>
Sec. 153.465  Flammable vapor detector.

    (a) A tankship that carries a flammable cargo must have two vapor 
detectors that meet Sec. 35.30-15(b) of this chapter.
    (b) At least one of the vapor detectors in paragraph (a) of this 
section must be portable.


<R05>
Sec. 153.466  Electrical equipment.

    A tankship carrying a flammable or combustible cargo under this part 
must meet subchapter J of this chapter.

               Design and Equipment for Pollution Control

    Source: Sections 153.470 through 153.491 appear at CGD 81-101, 52 FR 
7781, Mar. 12, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 153.470  System for discharge of NLS residue to the sea: Categories 
A, B, C, and D.

    Unless waived under Sec. 153.491, each ship that discharges Category 
A, B, or C NLS residue, or Category D NLS residue not diluted to \1/
10\th of its original concentration, into the sea under Sec.Sec. 
153.1126 and 153.1128 must have an NLS residue discharge system meeting 
the following:
    (a) Minimum diameter of an NLS residue discharge outlet. The outlet 
of each NLS residue discharge system must have a diameter at least as 
great as that given by the following formula:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC13NO91.044

where:

D=Minimum diameter of the discharge outlet in meters.
Q<INF>d</INF>=Maximum rate in cubic meters per hour at which the ship 
operator wishes to discharge slops (note: Q<INF>d</INF> affects the 
discharge rate allowed under Sec. 153.1126(b)(2)).
L=Distance from the forward perpendicular to the discharge outlet in 
meters.
[phis]=The acute angle between a perpendicular to the shell plating at 
the discharge location and the direction of the average velocity of the 
discharged liquid.

    (b) Location of an NLS residue discharge outlet. Each NLS residue 
discharge outlet must be located--
    (1) At the turn of the bilge beneath the cargo area; and
    (2) Where the discharge from the outlet is not drawn into the ship's 
seawater intakes.
    (c) Location of dual NLS residue discharge outlets. If the value of 
6.45 for K is used in Sec. 153.1126(b)(2), the NLS residue discharge 
system must have two outlets located on opposite sides of the ship.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7781, Mar. 12, 1987, as amended by CGD 81-101, 53 FR 
28974, Aug. 1, 1988 and 54 FR 12629, Mar. 28, 1989; CGD 95-028, 62 FR 
51209, Sept. 30, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 153.480  Stripping quantity for Category B and C NLS tanks on ships 
built after June 30, 1986: Categories B and C.

    Unless waived under Sec. 153.491, Category B and C NLS cargo tanks 
on each ship built after June 30, 1986 must have stripping quantities 
determined under Sec. 153.1604 that are less than--
    (a) 0.15 m\3\ if Category B; and
    (b) 0.35 m\3\ if Category C.


<R05>
Sec. 153.481  Stripping quantities and interim standards for Category B 
NLS tanks on ships built before July 1, 1986: Category B.

    Unless waived under Sec. 153.483 or Sec. 153.491, each Category B 
NLS cargo tank on ships built before July 1, 1986 must meet the 
following:
    (a) Unless the tank meets the interim standard provided by paragraph 
(b) of this section and is prewashed in accordance with Sec. 153.1118, 
the tank must have a stripping quantity determined under Sec. 153.1604 
that is less than 0.35m \3\.
    (b) Before October 3, 1994, the tank may have a total NLS residue 
determined under Sec. 153.1608 that is less than 1.0 m\3\ or \1/3000\th 
of the tank's capacity and an NLS residue discharge system meeting the 
following:
    (1) The system must be capable of discharging at a rate equal to or 
less than Q in the following formula:

Q=K U<SUP>1.4</SUP> L<SUP>1.6</SUP>x10<SUP>-5</SUP> m\3\/hr

where:

K=4.3, except K=6.45 if the discharge is equally distributed between two 
NLS residue discharge outlets on opposite sides of the ship (see 
Sec.Sec. 153.470(c) and 153.1126(b)).
L=ship's length in meters.

[[Page 156]]

U=for a ship that is self-propelled, the minimum speed in knots 
specified in the approved Procedures and Arrangements Manual for 
discharging Category B NLS residue, but at least 7;
U=for a ship that is not self-propelled, the minimum speed in knots 
specified in the approved Procedures and Arrangements Manual for 
discharging Category B NLS residue, but at least 4.

    (2) The system must have equipment capable of automatically 
recording--
    (i) The time of day that discharge of NLS residue through the 
residue discharge system starts and ends; and
    (ii) The dates on which discharge begins and ends unless the 
equipment allows a person to enter these dates on the record manually.
    (3) Each system that has the capacity to exceed Q calculated in 
paragraph (b)(1) of this section must have equipment that--
    (i) Records the NLS residue flow through the system; and
    (ii) Is sufficiently accurate that its recorded values averaged over 
any 30 second period differ no more than 15% from the actual flow 
averaged over the same 30 second period.
    (4) Each system that has the capacity to exceed Q calculated under 
paragraph (b)(1) of this section and does not automatically control the 
flow rate must have--
    (i) Manual controls that enable the flow to be adjusted to the value 
of Q calculated in paragraph (b)(1) of this section and that must be 
moved through at least 25% of their total range of movement for the 
discharge rate to change from 0.5Q to 1.5Q; and
    (ii) A flow rate meter located where the flow is manually 
controlled.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7781, Mar. 12, 1987, as amended by CGD 81-101, 53 FR 
28974, Aug. 1, 1988 and 54 FR 12629, Mar. 28, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 153.482  Stripping quantities and interim standards for Category C NLS 
tanks on ships built before July 1, 1986: Category C.

    Unless waived under Sec. 153.483 or Sec. 153.491, each Category C 
NLS cargo tank on ships built before July 1, 1986 must meet the 
following:
    (a) Unless the tank meets the interim standard provided by paragraph 
(b) of this section, the tank must have a stripping quantity determined 
under 153.1604 that is less than 0.95 m\3\.
    (b) Before October 3, 1994, the tank may have a total NLS residue 
determined under Sec. 153.1608 that is less than 3.0 m\3\ or 1/1000th of 
the tank's capacity.


<R05>
Sec. 153.483  Restricted voyage waiver for Category B and C NLS tanks on 
ships built before July 1, 1986: Category B and C.

    At its discretion the Coast Guard waives Sec.Sec. 153.481 and 
153.482 under this section and allows a ship to carry Category B and C 
NLS cargoes between ports or terminals in one or more countries 
signatory to MARPOL 73/78 if the ship's owner requests a waiver 
following the procedures in Sec. 153.10 and includes--
    (a) A written pledge to--
    (1) Limit the loading and discharge of Category B and C NLS cargoes 
in a foreign port to those ports and terminals in countries signatory to 
MARPOL 73/78 and listed in accordance with paragraph (b) of this 
section; and
    (2) Prewash the cargo tank as required under Sec. 153.1118 after 
each Category B or C NLS is unloaded unless the prewash is allowed to be 
omitted under Sec. 153.1114;
    (b) A list of--
    (1) All foreign ports or terminals at which the ship is expected to 
load or discharge Category B or C NLS cargo, and
    (2) All foreign ports or terminals at which the ship is expected to 
discharge Category B or C NLS residue from the tank;
    (c) An estimate of the quantity of NLS residue to be discharged to 
each foreign port or terminal listed under paragraph (b)(2) of this 
section;
    (d) Written statements from the owners of adequate reception 
facilities in the ports and terminals listed in accordance with 
paragraph (b)(2) of this section who have agreed to take NLS residue 
from the ship, showing the amount of NLS residue each agrees to take; 
and
    (e) A written attestation from the person in charge of each port or 
terminal listed in accordance with paragraph (b)(1) of this section that 
the administration has determined the port

[[Page 157]]

or terminal to have adequate reception facilities for the NLS residue.

    Note to Sec. 153.483: Certificates of Inspection and any IMO 
Certificates issued to ships on restricted voyage waivers indicate that 
while the ship carries an NLS cargo or NLS residue, it is limited to 
voyages between the ports or terminals listed on the certificate.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7781, Mar. 12, 1987, as amended by CGD 81-101, 53 FR 
28975, Aug. 1, 1988 and 54 FR 12629, Mar. 28, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 153.484  Prewash equipment.

    Unless the ship operator shows that the prewash equipment specified 
in this section will be available at discharge or prewash facilities or 
the equipment is waived under Sec. 153.491, to have its Certificate of 
Inspection or Certificate of Compliance endorsed to carry a Category A 
NLS or a Category B or C NLS requiring viscosity or melting point 
information under Sec. 153.908 (a) and (b), a ship must have the 
following:
    (a) For the tanks that carry the NLS, a tank washing system capable 
of washing all interior tank surfaces except those shielded from the 
washing system spray by ship's structure, and consisting of a wash water 
supply system and--
    (1) A fixed tank washing machine in each tank; or
    (2) A portable tank washing machine and, if required by the Coast 
Guard, equipment to move it during washing and when storing.
    (b) Piping, valving, and crossovers needed to arrange the cargo 
piping so that the wash water passes through the cargo pump and cargo 
piping during tank washing or discharge of tank wash water.
    (c) If the approved Procedures and Arrangements Manual specifies the 
hot water prewash required under 153.1108, a means of supplying water to 
the tank washing machine under paragraph (a) of this section at--
    (1) A temperature of at least 60 <deg>C (140 <deg>F) when it leaves 
the washing machine; and
    (2) The flow rate needed for the washing machine jets to meet 
paragraph (a) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 153.486  Design and equipment for removing NLS residue by ventilation: 
Categories A, B, C, and D.

    (a) If NLS residue is to be removed from a cargo tank by 
ventilation, in addition to the equipment required under paragraph (b) 
of this section the ship must have--
    (1) Openings in the tank deck near the sump or suction point;
    (2) If the openings required by paragraph (a)(1) of this section are 
insufficient, an access opening for visually determining whether liquid 
remains in the sump area of the cargo tank after ventilation or some 
other means for making this determination; and
    (3) An approved Procedures and Arrangements Manual with instructions 
that meet Sec. 153.490(b)(3).
    (b) Unless the ship operator shows that the ventilation equipment 
specified in this paragraph will be available from shore when needed, if 
NLS residue is to be removed from a cargo tank by ventilation, in 
addition to the equipment required under paragraph (a) of this section 
the ship must have--
    (1) Portable forced air ventilating equipment fitting the 
ventilation openings required in paragraph (a) of this section and able 
to ventilate the extremities of the tank to the extent prescribed in 
Appendix C of the IMO Standards for Procedures and Arrangements for the 
Discharge of Noxious Liquid Substances, Resolution MEPC 18(22), 1985; 
and
    (2) A connector that allows a fan or air supply to be connected to 
the hose connections for the tank at the manifold.

    Note: The Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401 et seq.) allows states to 
regulate emissions from tank ventilation. There may be other 
regulations, both local and Federal, that affect the use of tank 
ventilation for safety or environmental purposes.


<R05>
Sec. 153.488  Design and equipment for tanks carrying high melting point NLSs: 
Category B.

    Unless waived under Sec. 153.491, for a ship to have its Certificate 
of Inspection or Certificate of Compliance endorsed allowing a tank to 
carry a Category B NLS with a melting point of 15 <deg>C or more, the 
cargo tank must have--

[[Page 158]]

    (a) An arrangement enabling the cargo to be heated before cargo 
transfer, using heat supplied by the ship or by another source; and
    (b) Sides and bottom separate from the ship's side or bottom shell 
plating.


<R05>
Sec. 153.490  Cargo Record Book and Approved Procedures and Arrangements Manual: 
Categories A, B, C, and D.

    (a) Unless waived under Sec. 153.491, to have a Certificate of 
Inspection or Certificate of Compliance endorsed to carry NLS cargo, a 
ship must have--
    (1) If U.S., a Cargo Record Book published by the Coast Guard (OMB 
App. No. 2115-0089), or, if foreign, a Cargo Record Book having the same 
entries and format as Appendix 4 of Annex II; and
    (2) A Procedures and Arrangements Manual meeting paragraph (b) of 
this section and approved by--
    (i) The Coast Guard, if the ship is a United States ship or one 
whose Administration is not signatory to MARPOL 73/78; or
    (ii) The Administration, if the ship is one whose Administration is 
signatory to MARPOL 73/78.
    (b) Each Procedures and Arrangements Manual under paragraph (a)(2) 
of this section must include the following:
    (1) The standard format and content prescribed in Chapter 2 and 
Appendix D of the IMO Standards for Procedures and Arrangements for the 
Discharge of Noxious Liquid Substances, Resolution MEPC 18(22), 1985, 
or, for ships for which the only NLS carried is a Category D NLS and 
ships having a waiver under Sec. 153.483 or Sec. 153.491, the format and 
content prescribed by the Commandant (G-MSO).
    (2) If the ship has a tank that carries a cargo under a waiver 
issued under Sec. 153.483, procedures ensuring that--
    (i) Category B and C NLSs are discharged from the tank only in the 
ports or terminals listed in accordance with Sec. 153.483(b); and
    (ii) The tank is prewashed after discharging each Category B or C 
NLS unless Sec. 153.1114 allows the prewash to be omitted.
    (3) If ventilation is used to clean a tank under Sec. 
153.1102(b)(2), ventilation procedures that meet those in Appendix C of 
the IMO Standards for Procedures and Arrangements for the Discharge of 
Noxious Liquid Substances, Resolution MEPC 18(22), 1985.
    (4) If tank cleaning agents are used, quantities to use and 
instructions for using the cleaning agents.
    (5) If the tank has the discharge recording equipment required in 
Sec. 153.481(b), procedures to ensure that no NLS residue is discharged 
from the tank when the recording equipment is incapacitated unless the 
concentration and total quantity limits for the NLS in Annex II are not 
exceeded.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7781, Mar. 12, 1987, as amended by CGD 81-101, 53 FR 
28975, Aug. 1, 1988 and 54 FR 12629, Mar. 28, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 153.491  Waiver of certain equipment for dedicated cargo tanks.

    (a) The Coast Guard waives Sec.Sec. 153.440(a)(3), 153.480, 153.481, 
153.482, and 153.488 and endorses a ship's Certificate of Inspection or 
Certificate of Compliance allowing a cargo tank to carry a single, 
specific NLS cargo and no other cargo if the ship's owner--
    (1) Requests a waiver following the procedures in Sec. 153.10; and
    (2) Pledges in writing that while any waiver is in effect the cargo 
tank will--
    (i) Carry only the NLS cargo listed on the Certificate of Inspection 
or Certificate of Compliance;
    (ii) Carry no cargo other than the NLS; and
    (iii) Not be washed or ballasted unless the wash water or ballast 
water is discharged to a reception facility.
    (b) The Coast Guard waives Sec.Sec. 153.470 and 153.490(a)(2) if--
    (1) The ship's owner requests a waiver following the procedures in 
Sec. 153.10;
    (2) The Coast Guard has issued a waiver to each of the ship's NLS 
cargo tanks under paragraph (a) of this section; and
    (3) The ship's owner adds to the ship's operational manual any 
provisions for preventing NLS discharge specified by the Commandant (G-
MSO) as a condition for issuing the waiver.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7781, Mar. 12, 1987, as amended by CGD 81-101, 53 FR 
28975, Aug. 1, 1988 and 54 FR 12629, Mar. 28, 1989]

[[Page 159]]

                          Special Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 153.500  Inert gas systems.

    When Table 1 refers to this section, a cargo containment system must 
have a permanent inert gas system that:
    (a) Maintains the vapor space of the containment system in an inert 
state by filling the vapor space with a gas that is neither reactive 
with the cargo nor flammable;
    (b) Has a pressure control system that:
    (1) Prevents the inert gas system from raising the cargo tank 
pressure to more than the relief valve setting; and
    (2) Maintains at least a 3.5 kPa gauge (approx. 0.5 psig) pressure 
within the containment system at all times, including cargo discharge;
    (c) Has storage for enough inerting gas to replace that normally 
lost while the tank's atmosphere is maintained in an inert condition 
(e.g. through tank breathing and relief valve leakage), but in no case 
an amount less than 5 percent of the tank's capacity when measured with 
the gas at -18 <deg>C (approx. 0 <deg>F) and a pressure equal to the 
cargo tank's relief valve setting; and
    (d) Has connections for any supplemental gas supply necessary to 
maintain the inert gas pressure described in paragraph (b) of this 
section during cargo discharge.


<R05>
Sec. 153.501  Requirement for dry inert gas.

    When Table 1 refers to this section, an inert gas system for the 
containment system must supply inert gas containing no more than 100 ppm 
water.


<R05>
Sec. 153.515  Special requirements for extremely flammable cargoes.

    When Table 1 refers to this section:
    (a) An enclosed space containing a cargo tank must have an inerting 
system that meets the requirements in Sec. 153.500 applying to the inert 
gas system of a containment system;
    (b) Cargo discharge pumps must be of a type that does not subject 
the shaft gland to the cargo under pressure or that is submerged; and
    (c) The cargo tank's relief valve setting must be no less than 21 
kPa gauge (approx. 3 psig).


<R05>
Sec. 153.520  Special requirements for carbon disulfide.

    A containment system carrying carbon disulfide must meet the 
following:
    (a) Each cargo pump must be of the intank type and encased within a 
cylindrical well that extends from the top of the tank to a point no 
more than 10 cm (approx. 4 in.) above the bottom of the tank.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) The cargo piping and venting systems must be completely 
independent of those for other cargo.
    (d) Pressure relief valves must be made of type 304 or 316 stainless 
steel.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21209, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.525  Special requirements for unusually toxic cargoes.

    When Table 1 refers to this section a containment system must meet 
the following:
    (a) Cargo piping and venting systems must be designed so that they 
can be separated from any containment system endorsed for a cargo not 
covered by this section.
    (b) A cargo tank's relief valve setting must be not less than 21 kPa 
gauge (approx. 3 psig).
    (c) All cargo pumps and valves located below the weatherdeck must be 
operable from the weatherdeck.
    (d) A heat transfer system for the cargo must:
    (1) Be independent of other ship service systems, except for other 
cargo heat transfer systems, and not enter the engine room;
    (2) Be totally external to the cargo containment system; or
    (3) Be approved by the Commandant (G-MSO) for use with toxic 
cargoes.
    (e) The cargo must be separated from any bunkers by at least two 
bulkheads.
    (f) A cargo containment system must have a vapor return connection.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21209, May 17, 1982; CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 153.526  Toxic vapor detectors.

    (a) When Table 1 refers to this section, a tankship must have two 
toxic vapor detectors, at least one of which

[[Page 160]]

must be portable, each able to measure vapor concentrations in the range 
of the time weighted average (TWA) for the cargo. The portable detector 
may be a direct reading detector tube instrument. These vapor detectors 
may be combined with those required by Sec. 153.465.
    (b) When the toxic vapor detectors required by paragraph (a) of this 
section are not available and the cargo referenced to this section is 
transferred through a cargo pumproom, the tankship must meet Sec. 
153.336(b).

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21210, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.527  Toxic vapor protection.

    When Table 1 refers to this section, a tankship must have on board 
for each crew member:
    (a) An emergency escape breathing apparatus (EEBA) approved by the 
Mining Safety and Health Administration (formerly the Mining Enforcement 
and Safety Administration) and the National Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health, or the tankship's flag administration.
    (b) Where the emergency escape breathing apparatus does not protect 
the eyes from vapors, a set of goggles that either:
    (1) Meet the specifications of ANSI Practice for Occupational and 
Educational Eye and Face Protection, Z-87.1(1979); or
    (2) Are approved by the tankship's flag administration.

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21210, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.530  Special requirements for alkylene oxides.

    When Table 1 refers to this section, a containment system must meet 
the following:
    (a) Except as provided in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, a 
cargo containment system must be made of:
    (1) Stainless steel other than types 416 and 442; and
    (2) Steel.
    (b) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, gaskets 
must be composites of spirally wound stainless steel and Teflon or 
similar flourinated polymer.
    (c) The Commandant (G-MSO) approves a cargo containment system using 
materials other than those described in this section for alkylene oxides 
on a case by case basis if:
    (1) The person wishing to have the containment system approved 
completes any tests prescribed by the Commandant (G-MSO); and
    (2) The Commandant (G-MSO) approves the results of the tests and the 
material for use with alkylene oxides.
    (d) The following materials are generally found unsatisfactory for 
gaskets, packing, insulation, and similar uses in alkylene oxide 
containment systems and would require extensive testing as described in 
paragraph (c) of this section before being approved:
    (1) Neoprene or natural rubber if it might be in contact with the 
alkylene oxide.
    (2) Asbestos or asbestos mixed with other materials such as with 
many common insulations, packing materials, and gasket materials.
    (3) Materials containing oxides of magnesium, such as mineral wools.
    (e) The tank's relief valve setting must not be less than 21 kPa 
gauge (approx. 3 psig).
    (f) If the containment system is equipped with a cooling system, the 
cooling system must:
    (1) Not compress the cargo; and
    (2) Regulate the cargo temperature automatically and allow manual 
regulation.
    (g) The cargo piping system must:
    (1) Comply with Part 38 of this chapter;
    (2) Be completely separate from all other systems;
    (3) Be assembled from valves, fittings, and accessories having a 
pressure rating of not less than 1030 kPa gauge (approx. 150 psig) 
(American National Standards Institute); and
    (4) Have no threaded joints.
    (h) The cargo containment system vapor space and each space listed 
in paragraphs (k) and (l) of this section must have continuous 
monitoring of oxygen concentration or have an arrangement to enable 
sampling with a portable oxygen analyzer.
    (i) Valve disks or disk faces, seats, and other wearing valve parts 
must be made of stainless steel containing no less than 11 percent 
chromium.

[[Page 161]]

    (j) The venting system must be independent of other containment or 
tankship systems.
    (k) When a cargo tank is in an enclosed space, the space must have:
    (1) An inert gas system meeting the requirements that apply to the 
inert gas system of a containment system in Sec. 153.500, or
    (2) A forced ventilation system meeting the requirements that apply 
to a cargo handling space ventilation system in Sec. 153.312.
    (l) Cofferdams, cargo tanks, double bottom spaces, void spaces and 
other enclosed spaces adjacent to an integral cargo tank must have an 
inert gas system meeting the requirements that apply to the inert gas 
system of a containment system in Sec. 153.500.
    (m) An intank pump or inert gas displacement must be used to 
discharge cargo.
    (n) The cargo discharge piping system must have a remotely actuated 
quick closing shutoff valve that meets Sec. 153.284 at the cargo 
transfer hose connection.
    (o) Cargo hose must:
    (1) Have the specific approval of the Commandant (G-MSO) for use in 
alkylene oxide transfer; and
    (2) Be marked ``For Alkylene Oxide Transfer Only''.
    (p) All exposed parts of the cargo containment system above or on 
the deck, such as tank domes, cargo piping, and loading manifolds, must 
be covered by a water spray system that:
    (1) Operates automatically in a fire involving the cargo containment 
system;
    (2) Has at least two remote manual actuators, one in each emergency 
shutdown station required by Sec. 153.296; and
    (3) Covers the area of application with a uniform spray of

0.175 l/m\2\ sec (0.0043 gal/ft\2\ sec).

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21210, May 17, 1982; CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 4782, Feb. 3, 1983; CGD 82-063b, 
48 FR 39629, Sept. 1, 1983; CGD 81-078, 50 FR 21174, May 22, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 153.545  Special requirements for liquid sulfur.

    (a) A containment system carrying liquid sulfur must have:
    (1) A cargo tank ventilation system that:
    (i) Maintains the H<INF>2</INF>S vapor concentration below 1.85 
percent by volume; and
    (ii) Prevents sulfur buildup within itself; and
    (2) An alarm system designed to operate when the ventilation system 
blower fails.
    (b) The void spaces around a cargo tank that carries liquid sulfur 
must be oil tight.
    (c) A cargo tank that carries liquid sulfur and the void spaces 
surrounding the tank must have connections for sampling vapor.


<R05>
Sec. 153.554  Special requirements for acids.

    When Table 1 refers to this section:
    (a) Each containment system loading and discharge connection must 
have a spray shield;
    (b) Each cargo containment system must be separated from bunkers by 
double walls, such as a cofferdam and piping tunnels; and
    (c) Each vessel must have on board a means to determine whether 
cargo has leaked into the spaces adjacent to a cargo containment system.


<R05>
Sec. 153.555  Special requirements for inorganic acids.

    When Table 1 refers to this section, a tankship's shell plating must 
not be a part of the cargo tank.

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21210, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.556  Special requirements for sulfuric acid and oleum.

    (a) Except as prescribed in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, 
containment systems carrying sulfuric acid, oleum, or contaminated 
sulfuric acid are approved by the Commandant (G-MSO) on a case by case 
basis.
    (b) A containment system carrying sulfuric acid may be:
    (1) Made of unlined steel if the cargo composition is between 70 and 
80 or between 90 and 100 percent acid by weight;
    (2) Lined with lead if the cargo composition does not exceed 96 
percent acid by weight; or

[[Page 162]]

    (3) Lined with natural rubber or neoprene if the cargo composition 
does not exceed 51 percent acid by weight.
    (c) A containment system for oleum may be of unlined steel if the 
concentration of free sulfur trioxide in the oleum exceeds 20 percent by 
weight.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 
FR 4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 153.557  Special requirements for hydrochloric acid.

    (a) A containment system that carries hydrochloric acid must be 
lined with:
    (1) Natural rubber;
    (2) Neoprene; or
    (3) A material approved for hydrochloric acid tanks by the 
Commandant (G-MSO).
    (b) Containment systems for contaminated hydrochloric acid are 
approved by the Commandant (G-MSO) on a case by case basis.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 
FR 4781, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 153.558  Special requirements for phosphoric acid.

    A phosphoric acid containment system must be:
    (a) Lined with natural rubber or neoprene;
    (b) Lined with a material approved for phosphoric acid tanks by the 
Commandant (G-MSO); or
    (c) Made of a stainless steel that resists corrosion by phosphoric 
acid.

    Note: ``Phosphoric acid'', as defined in Sec. 153.2, includes 
phosphoric acid, superphosphoric acid, and aqueous solutions of 
phosphoric acid.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 
FR 4782, Feb. 3, 1983; CGD 88-100, 54 FR 40042, Sept. 29, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 153.559  Special requirements for nitric acid (less than 70 percent).

    A containment system that carries nitric acid (less than 70 percent) 
must be of stainless steel that resists corrosion by nitric acid.


<R05>
Sec. 153.560  Special requirements for Alkyl (C7-C9) nitrates.

    (a) The carriage temperature of octyl nitrates must be maintained 
below 100 <deg>C (212 <deg>F) in order to prevent the occurrence of a 
self-sustaining exothermic decomposition reaction.
    (b) Octyl nitrates may not be carried in a deck tank unless the tank 
has a combination of insulation and a water deluge system sufficient to 
maintain the tank's cargo temperature below 100 <deg>C (212 <deg>F) and 
the cargo temperature rise at below 1.5 <deg>C(2.7 <deg>F)/hour, for a 
fire of 650 <deg>C (1200 <deg>F).

[CGD 88-100, 54 FR 40042, Sept. 29, 1989, as amended by CGD 92-100, 59 
FR 17028, Apr. 11, 1994; CGD 94-900, 59 FR 45139, Aug. 31, 1994]


<R05>
Sec.153.565  Special requirement for temperature sensors.

    If a cargo listed in table 1 of this part refers to this section, 
temperature sensors must be used to monitor the cargo pump temperature 
to detect overheating due to pump failures, when carrying that cargo.

[CGD 94-900, 59 FR 45139, Aug. 31, 1994]


<R05>
Sec.153.602  Special requirements for cargoes reactive with water.

    When Table 1 refers to this section, the air inlet to the pressure-
vacuum valve for the cargo tank must be located at least 2m (approx. 6.6 
ft) above the weatherdeck.

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21210, May 17, 1982]

                         Testing and Inspection


<R05>
Sec. 153.806  Loading information.

    Each tankship must have a manual containing information that enables 
the master to load and ballast the tankship while keeping structural 
stresses within design limits.

[CGD 79-023, 48 FR 51009, Nov. 4, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 153.808  Examination required for a Certificate of Compliance.

    Before a vessel receives either an initial or a reissued Certificate 
of Compliance endorsed to carry a cargo from Table 1 of this part, the 
vessel must call at a U.S. port for an examination during which the 
Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, determines whether or not the 
vessel meets the requirements of this chapter.

[CGD 81-052, 50 FR 8733, Mar. 5, 1985, as amended by CGD 95-027, 61 FR 
26009, May 23, 1996]

[[Page 163]]


<R05>
Sec. 153.809  Procedures for having the Coast Guard examine a vessel for 
a Certificate of Compliance.

    The owner of a foreign flag vessel wishing to have the Coast Guard 
conduct a Certificate of Compliance examination, as required by Sec. 
153.808, must proceed as follows:
    (a) Notify the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection of the port 
where the vessel is to be inspected at least 7 days before the vessel 
arrives and arrange the exact time and other details of the examination. 
This notification is in addition to any other pre-arrival notice to the 
Coast Guard required by other regulations, but may be concurrent with 
the endorsement application in Sec. 153.9, and must include--
    (1) The name of the vessel's first U.S. port of call;
    (2) The date that the vessel is scheduled to arrive;
    (3) The name and telephone number of the owner's local agent; and
    (4) The names of all cargoes listed in table 1 of this part that are 
on board the vessel.
    (b) Before the examination required by Sec. 153.808 is begun, make 
certain that the following plans are on board the vessel and available 
to the Marine Inspector. These plans include--
    (1) A general arrangement (including the location of fire fighting, 
safety, and lifesaving gear);
    (2) A capacity plan;
    (3) A schematic diagram of cargo piping on deck and in tanks 
(including the location of all valves and pumps); and
    (4) A schematic diagram of cargo tank vent piping (including the 
location of relief valves and flame screens).

[CGD 95-027, 61 FR 26009, May 23, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 153.812  Inspection for Certificate of Inspection.

    The rules governing the issuance of Certificates of Inspection are 
contained in part 31 of this chapter.


<R04>
                          Subpart C--Operations

                     Documents and Cargo Information


<R05>
Sec. 153.900  Certificates and authorization to carry a bulk liquid hazardous 
material.

    (a) Except as allowed in 33 CFR 151.33(a), no ship may carry a cargo 
of bulk liquid hazardous material or an NLS residue if the bulk liquid 
hazardous material or NLS is listed in Table 1 or carried under a 
written permission under paragraph (d) of this section unless the ship 
meets the following:
    (1) The cargo must be carried in a cargo tank.
    (2) If a United States ship, the ship must have a Subchapter D or I 
Certificate of Inspection that is endorsed to allow the cargo tank to 
carry the cargo.
    (3) If a foreign ship, the ship must have a Certificate of 
Compliance that is endorsed to allow the cargo tank to carry the cargo.
    (4) The ship must have an IMO Certificate of Fitness issued under 
Sec. 153.12 that is endorsed to allow the cargo tank to carry the cargo 
if it is--
    (i) A United States self-propelled ship in foreign waters; or
    (ii) A United States non-self-propelled ship in the waters of 
another Administration signatory to MARPOL 73/78 and the cargo is a 
Category A, B, or C NLS.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) No ship may carry any bulk liquid cargo not listed in Sec. 
30.25-1 of this chapter, Table 151.05 of Part 151 of this chapter, Table 
1 or Table 2 of this part, Table 4 of Part 154 of this chapter, 33 CFR 
151.47, or 33 CFR 151.49 unless the cargo name is endorsed on the 
Certificate of Inspection or contained in a letter issued under 
paragraph (d) of this section.
    (d) The Coast Guard at its discretion endorses the Certificate of 
Inspection with the name of or issues a letter allowing the carriage of 
an unlisted cargo described under paragraph (c) of this section if--
    (1) The shipowner--
    (i) Requests the Coast Guard to add the cargo; and

[[Page 164]]

    (ii) Supplies any information the Coast Guard needs to develop 
carriage requirements for the bulk liquid cargo; and
    (2) The ship--
    (i) Has a Certificate of Inspection, Certificate of Compliance, or 
IOPP Certificate as specified in this part;
    (ii) Meets the design and equipment requirements of this part 
specified by the Coast Guard; and
    (iii) Meets any additional requirements made by the Coast Guard.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7783, Mar. 12, 1987, as amended by CGD 81-101, 53 FR 
28975, Aug. 1, 1988 and 54 FR 12629, Mar. 28, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 153.901  Documents: Posting, availability, and alteration.

    (a) No person may operate a United States ship unless the endorsed 
Certificate of Inspection is readily available on the ship.
    (b) No person may operate a foreign ship unless the endorsed 
Certificate of Compliance or Certificate of Inspection is readily 
available on the ship.
    (c) No person may operate a ship under an alternative or waiver 
granted under this part unless the document granting the alternative or 
waiver is attached to the ship's Certificate of Inspection or 
Certificate of Compliance.
    (d) Except as allowed in paragraph (e) of this section, the Coast 
Guard does not accept the following if altered:
    (1) Certificates of Inspection.
    (2) Certificates of Compliance.
    (3) Certificates of Fitness, unless the alteration is by the issuing 
authority.
    (4) Approved Procedures and Arrangements Manuals, unless the 
alteration is approved by the issuing authority.
    (5) NLS Certificates.
    (e) A person wishing to change a Procedures and Arrangements Manual 
approved by the Coast Guard must submit a copy to the Coast Guard 
following the procedures for requesting an endorsed Certificate of 
Inspection in Sec. 153.8.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7783, Mar. 12, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 153.902  Expiration and invalidation of the Certificate of Compliance.

    (a) The Certificate of Compliance shows its expiration date.
    (b) The endorsement of a Certificate of Compliance under this part 
is invalid if the vessel does not have a valid IMO Certificate of 
Fitness.
    (c) The endorsement on a Certificate of Compliance invalidated under 
paragraph (b) of this section, becomes valid again once the ship has the 
IMO Certificate of Fitness revalidated or reissued.

    Note: See Sec. 153.809 for procedures for having a Certificate of 
Compliance reissued.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7784, Mar. 12, 1987; CGD 95-072, 60 FR 50465, Sept. 
29, 1995; 60 FR 54106, Oct. 19, 1995; CGD 95-027, 61 FR 26009, May 23, 
1996]


<R05>
Sec. 153.903  Operating a United States ship in special areas: Categories 
A, B, and C.

    No person may operate a United States ship that carries an NLS or 
NLS residue in a special area unless--
    (a) The ship's Certificate of Inspection is endorsed in accordance 
with Sec. 153.30; and
    (b) The ship meets the operating requirements applying to special 
areas in Regulations 5, 5A, 8 and the Standards for Procedures and 
Arrangements of Annex II.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7784, Mar. 12, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 153.904  Limitations in the endorsement.

    No person may operate a tankship unless that person complies with 
all limitations in the endorsement on the tankship's Certificate of 
Inspection or Certificate of Compliance.

[CGD 81-052, 50 FR 8734, Mar. 5, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 153.905  Regulations required to be on board.

    No person may operate a tankship unless the most recent editions of 
this part, and parts 35 and 150 of this chapter are on board.

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21210, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.907  Cargo information.

    (a) The master shall ensure that the following information for each 
cargo carried under this part is readily available to those on the 
tankship engaged in cargo operations:
    (1) The name of the cargo as listed in table 1.

[[Page 165]]

    (2) A description of the cargo's appearance and color.
    (3) Hazards in handling the cargo.
    (4) Any special handling procedures for the cargo, such as inerting.
    (5) Procedures to follow if the cargo spills or leaks.
    (6) Procedures for treating a person exposed to the cargo.
    (7) A list of fire fighting procedures and extinguishing agents 
effective with cargo fires.
    (8) Shipper's name.
    (9) Loading point.
    (10) Approximate quantity of cargo.
    (11) Tank in which the cargo is located.
    (12) The name of an agent in the United States authorized to accept 
service of legal process for the vessel.
    (b) The master shall make sure that the following information for 
cargoes other than those carried under this part is readily available on 
the tankship:
    (1) The name of the cargo as listed in Table 4 of Part 154 of this 
chapter or Sec. 30.25-1 of this chapter if the cargo is listed in one of 
these two tables.
    (2) The name of the cargo prescribed in the letter authorizing 
carriage of the cargo under Sec. 153.900(d) if the cargo is a hazardous 
or flammable cargo authorized for carriage under that section.
    (3) The shipper's name for the cargo and the name of the shipper if 
the cargo is neither a hazardous nor flammable cargo.

[CGD 81-078, 50 FR 21174, May 22, 1985; as amended by CGD 88-100, 54 FR 
40042, Sept. 29, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 153.908  Cargo viscosity and melting point information; measuring cargo 
temperature during discharge: Categories A, B, and C.

    (a) The person in charge of the ship may not accept a shipment of a 
Category A, B, or C NLS cargo having a reference to this paragraph in 
the ``Special Requirements'' column of Table 1 unless the person has, 
from the cargo's manufacturer or the person listed as the shipper on the 
bill of lading, a written statement of the following:
    (1) For Category A or B NLS, the cargo's viscosity at 20 <deg>C in 
mPa.s and, if the cargo's viscosity exceeds 25 mPa.s at 20 <deg>C, the 
temperature at which the viscosity is 25 mPa.s.
    (2) For Category C NLS, the cargo's viscosity at 20 <deg>C in mPa.s 
and, if the cargo's viscosity exceeds 60 mPa.s at 20 <deg>C, the 
temperature at which the viscosity is 60 mPa.s. If the cargo's viscosity 
varies from shipment to shipment, the maximum viscosity and maximum 
temperature values may be supplied.
    (b) The person in charge of the ship may not accept a shipment of a 
Category A, B, or C cargo having a reference to this paragraph in the 
``Special Requirements'' column of Table 1 unless the person has a 
written statement of the cargo's melting point in <deg>C from the 
cargo's manufacturer or the person listed as the shipper on the bill of 
lading. If the cargo's melting point varies from shipment to shipment, 
the highest melting point may be supplied.
    (c) The person in charge of the ship shall ensure that the cargo 
temperature is read and recorded in the Cargo Record Book following the 
procedures in paragraph (d) of this section when a cargo having a 
reference to paragraph (a) or (b) of this section in the ``Special 
Requirements'' column of Table 1 is unloaded.
    (d) The cargo temperature measured in paragraph (c) of this section 
must be made using the following procedure:
    (1) Each reading must be made with the sensor or thermometer 
required by Sec. 153.440(a)(3) or (c). If a portable thermometer is 
used, it must be located as prescribed for the temperature sensor in 
Sec. 153.440(a)(3).
    (2) A total of 2 readings must be made, the first reading to be made 
no more than 30 minutes after cargo transfer begins and the second 
reading no more than 30 minutes before the main cargo pump is shut down.
    (3) The cargo's temperature is the average of the 2 readings made 
under paragraph (d)(2) of this section.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7784, Mar. 12, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 153.909  Completing the Cargo Record Book and record retention: Categories 
A, B, C, and D.

    (a) The person in charge of a ship shall ensure that the Cargo 
Record

[[Page 166]]

Book required under Sec. 153.490 is completed immediately after any of 
the following occurs:
    (1) An NLS cargo is loaded.
    (2) An NLS cargo is transferred between tanks on a ship.
    (3) An NLS cargo is unloaded from a tank.
    (4) A tank that last carried an NLS cargo is prewashed under this 
part.
    (5) A tank that last carried an NLS cargo is washed, except as 
reported under paragraph (a)(4) of this section, cleaned, or ventilated.
    (6) Washings from a tank that last carried an NLS cargo are 
discharged to the sea.
    (7) Tanks that last carried an NLS cargo are ballasted.
    (8) Ballast water is discharged to the sea from a cargo tank that 
last carried an NLS.
    (9) An NLS cargo or NLS residue is discharged to the sea by accident 
or except as allowed by this part.
    (10) A Surveyor is present during an operation that this part 
requires the presence of a Surveyor.
    (11) NLS residue or NLS cargo is transferred from cargo pumproom 
bilges or transferred to an incinerator.
    (12) A waiver is issued to the ship, ship owner, ship operator, or 
person in charge of the ship under this part.
    (13) The concentration of a Category A NLS residue is measured under 
Sec. 153.1120(a).
    (14) Any discharge recording equipment required by Sec. 
153.481(b)(2) fails.
    (b) The person in charge of the ship shall ensure that the Cargo 
Record Book is on board and readily available for inspection and copying 
by the Coast Guard and when the ship is a U.S. ship in the waters of a 
foreign country whose Administration is signatory to MARPOL 73/78, the 
authorities of that country.
    (c) Each officer in charge of an operation listed under paragraph 
(a) of this section, and each Surveyor observing an operation that this 
part requires the presence of a Surveyor, shall attest to the accuracy 
and completeness of each Cargo Record Book entry concerning those 
operations by signing after each entry.
    (d) After all the entries on a page of the Cargo Record Book are 
completed, and if the person in charge of the ship agrees with the 
entries, the person in charge of the ship shall sign the bottom of that 
page.
    (e) The ship owner or operator shall ensure that--
    (1) Each Cargo Record Book is retained on board the ship for at 
least 3 years after the last entry; and
    (2) Each discharge recording required by Sec. 153.1126(b)(1) is 
retained on board the ship for at least three years.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7784, Mar. 12, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 153.910  Cargo piping plan.

    No person may operate a tankship unless the tankship has a cargo 
piping plan that:
    (a) Shows all cargo piping on the tankship;
    (b) Shows all cargo valving, pumps, and other equipment that is used 
during cargo transfer;
    (c) Shows the cargo tanks;
    (d) Shows any modifications necessary to a containment system that 
is to be separated as prescribed under Part 150 of this subchapter, or 
Sec.Sec. 153.525 and 153.1020;
    (e) Emphasizes the piping and equipment described in paragraphs (a), 
(b) and (d) of this section by using contrasting colors, line widths, or 
similar methods; and
    (f) Shows the cargo loading rates chosen under Sec. 153.365(b) for 
all applicable cargo lines.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21210, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.912  Certificate of inhibition or stabilization.

    (a) When a cargo in Table 1 is referred to this section, no person 
may operate a tankship carrying the cargo without a written 
certification, carried on the bridge of the tankship, from the shipper 
that the cargo is:
    (1) Inhibited; or
    (2) Stabilized.
    (b) The certification required by this section must contain the 
following information:
    (1) Whether the cargo is inhibited or stabilized.
    (2) The name and concentration of the inhibitor or stabilizer.

[[Page 167]]

    (3) The date the inhibitor or stabilizer was added.
    (4) The length of time the inhibitor or stabilizer is effective.
    (5) Any temperature limitations qualifying the inhibitor's or 
stabilizer's effective lifetime.
    (6) The action to be taken should the duration of the voyage exceed 
the inhibitor's or stabilizer's useful life.

                 General Cargo Operational Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 153.920  Cargo quantity limitations.

    (a) No person may load a cargo tank or operate a tankship that 
carries a cargo tank containing in excess of 1250 m\3\ (approx. 44,138 
ft\3\) of cargo requiring a type I containment system.
    (b) No person may load a cargo tank or operate a tankship that 
carries a cargo tank containing in excess of 3000 m\3\ (approx. 105,932 
ft\3\) of a cargo requiring a type II containment system.


<R05>
Sec. 153.921  Explosives.

    No person may load, off-load, or carry a cargo listed in this part 
on board a vessel that carries explosives unless he has the prior 
written permission of the Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 
FR 4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 153.923  Inerting systems.

    The master shall ensure that the inert gas systems for any cargo 
that this part requires to be inerted are operating correctly.

                          General Vessel Safety


<R05>
Sec. 153.930  Cargo antidotes.

    No person may operate a tankship that carries a cargo listed in 
Table 1 unless the tankship has on board the antidotes described for the 
cargo in the Medical First Aid Guide for Use in Accidents Involving 
Dangerous Goods, published by IMO.


<R05>
Sec. 153.931  Obstruction of pumproom ladderways.

    The master shall ensure that all cargo pumproom ladderways are 
unobstructed at all times.


<R05>
Sec. 153.932  Goggles and protective clothing.

    (a) The master shall ensure that each person wear a face mask or 
tight-fitting goggles for eye protection against splashing or spraying 
liquids if that person is:
    (1) Sampling cargo;
    (2) Transferring cargo;
    (3) Making or breaking a cargo hose connection;
    (4) Gauging a cargo tank; or
    (5) Opening a cargo tank by opening a Butterworth hatch, ullage 
hatch, cargo tank hatch, or similar opening.
    (b) The master shall ensure that each person wear a face mask or 
tight-fitting goggles for eye protection against splashing or spraying 
liquids if the person is:
    (1) In the area of the deck where the cargo tanks, cargo piping, and 
cargo pumprooms are located while a cargo transfer is taking place; or
    (2) In a cargo pumproom, an enclosed space adjacent to a cargo tank, 
or a space containing part of a cargo containment system.
    (c) The master shall ensure that each person in paragraphs (a) and 
(b) of this section wear any additional protective clothing the master 
believes necessary to protect the person from the cargo's hazards.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21210, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.933  Chemical protective clothing.

    When table 1 refers to this section, the following apply:
    (a) The master shall ensure that the following chemical protective 
clothing constructed of materials resistant to permeation by the cargo 
being handled is worn by all personnel engaged in an operation listed in 
paragraph (b) of this section:
    (1) Splash protective eyewear.
    (2) Long-sleeved gloves.
    (3) Boots or shoe covers.
    (4) Coveralls or lab aprons.

    Note: ``Guidelines for the Selection of Chemical Protective 
Clothing'', Third Edition, 1987, available from the American Conference 
of Governmental Industrial Hygienists, 1330 Kemper Meadow Drive, 
Cincinnati, OH 45240-1634, provides information on the proper clothing 
for the cargo being handled.


[[Page 168]]


    (b) This section applies during the following operations:
    (1) Sampling cargo.
    (2) Transferring cargo.
    (3) Making or breaking cargo hose connections.
    (4) Gauging a cargo tank, unless gauging is by closed system.
    (5) Opening cargo tanks.
    (c) Coveralls or lab aprons may be replaced by splash suits or 
aprons constructed of light weight or disposable materials if, in the 
judgment of the master--
    (1) Contact with the cargo being handled is likely to occur only 
infrequently and accidentally; and
    (2) The splash suit or apron is disposed of immediately after 
contamination.
    (d) Splash protective eyewear must be tight-fitting chemical-splash 
goggles, face shields, or similar items intended specifically for eye 
protection from chemical splashing or spraying.
    (e) The master shall ensure that each person in the vicinity of an 
operation listed in paragraph (b) of this section or in the vicinity of 
tanks, piping, or pumps being used to transfer the cargo wears splash 
protective eyewear under paragraph (d) of this section.

[CGD 88-100, 54 FR 40042, Sept. 29, 1989; as amended by USCG-1999-6216, 
64 FR 53227, Oct. 1, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 153.934  Entry into spaces containing cargo vapor.

    (a) No person may enter a cargo tank, cargo handling space, pumproom 
or enclosed space in the cargo area without the permission of the 
master.
    (b) Before permitting anyone to enter a cargo tank, cargo handling 
space, pumproom or other enclosed space in the cargo area, the master 
shall make sure that:
    (1) The space is free of toxic vapors and has sufficient oxygen to 
support life; or
    (2) Those entering the space wear protective equipment with self-
contained breathing apparatus as described in Sec. 153.214(b) and an 
officer closely supervises the entire operation.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21210, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.935  Opening of tanks and cargo sampling.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, the master 
shall ensure that all cargo tank hatches, ullage openings, and tank 
cleaning openings are tightly closed at all times.
    (b) The master may not authorize the opening of a cargo tank, 
except:
    (1) To clean a tank;
    (2) To transfer a cargo that Table 1 allows in a containment system 
having an open gauging system;
    (3) To sample a cargo that Table 1 allows in a containment system 
having an open gauging system; or
    (4) To sample a cargo that Table 1 allows in a containment system 
having a restricted gauging system if:
    (i) The tank is not being filled during sampling;
    (ii) The vent system has relieved any pressure in the tank;
    (iii) The person sampling the cargo wears the protective clothing 
required during cargo transfer; and
    (iv) The tank is closed tightly following sampling.
    (c) The master shall make sure that cargoes requiring closed gauging 
are sampled only through the controlled sampling arrangement required by 
Sec. 153.404(d).

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21210, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.935a  Storage of cargo samples.

    (a) The master shall make sure that any cargo samples are stored in:
    (1) A designated and ventilated space in the cargo area of the 
vessel; or
    (2) An area approved by the Commandant (G-MSO) or the tankship's 
flag administration for the stowage of cargo samples.
    (b) The master shall make sure that cargo sample bottles are stored:
    (1) In a way that prevents shifting of the sample bottles when the 
vessel is at sea;
    (2) In bins or containers constructed of materials that are 
resistant to the cargo samples; and

[[Page 169]]

    (3) Apart from other sample bottles containing incompatible liquids 
(See part 150, subpart A).

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21211, May 17, 1982, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 153.936  Illness, alcohol, drugs.

    The master shall ensure that no person participates in cargo related 
operations who appears to be intoxicated by alcohol or drugs or to be so 
ill as to be unfit for the particular operation.

                     Marking of Cargo Transfer Hose


<R05>
Sec. 153.940  Standards for marking of cargo hose.

    No person may mark a hose assembly as meeting the standards of this 
section unless the hose assembly meets the following requirements:
    (a) Each hose assembly must have:
    (1) Fully threaded connections;
    (2) Flanges that meet ANSI B16.5, B16.24, or B16.31; or
    (3) Class 1 quick-disconnect couplings that comply with ASTM F 1122 
(incorporated by reference, see Sec. 153.4), and are marked ``C1-1.''
    (b) Each hose assembly must be marked with the:
    (1) Date of manufacture;
    (2) Working pressure discribed in paragraph (d) of this section;
    (3) Date of the last test made as prescribed in paragraph (e) of 
this section; and
    (4) Manufacturer's recommended maximum and minimum temperatures.
    (c) A cargo hose assembly must have a minimum bursting pressure as 
stated by the manufacturer of at least 5152 kPa gauge (approx. 750 
psig).
    (d) The working pressure marked on a hose must meet the following:
    (1) Be at least 1030 kPa gauge (approx. 150 psig).
    (2) Not exceeded 20 per cent (one-fifth) of the manufacturer's 
stated bursting pressure.
    (3) Not exceed the manufacturer's recommended working pressure.
    (4) Not exceed the test pressure used in the latest test under 
paragraph (e)(3) of this section.
    (e) A cargo hose assembly must be inspected and tested by placing it 
in a straight, horizontal position so that its entire external surface 
is accessible. It must be ascertained that the hose assembly:
    (1) Has no loose covers, kinks, bulges, soft spots, and no gouges, 
cuts, or slashes that penetrate any hose reinforcement;
    (2) Has no external and, to the extent internal inspection is 
possible with both ends of the hose open, no internal deterioration; and
    (3) Does not burst, bulge, leak, or abnormally distort under static 
liquid pressure at least as great as the recommended working pressure.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21211, May 17, 1982; CGD 88-032, 56 FR 35827, July 29, 1991; USCG-2000-
7790, 65 FR 58463, Sept. 29, 2000]

                        Cargo Transfer Procedures


<R05>
Sec. 153.953  Signals during cargo transfer.

    The master shall ensure that:
    (a) The tankship displays a red flag in the day and a red light at 
night when transferring cargo while fast to a dock;
    (b) The tankship displays a red flag when transferring cargo while 
at anchor; and
    (c) The red flag or the red light is visible from all sides of the 
tankship.


<R05>
Sec. 153.955  Warning signs during cargo transfer.

    (a) When transferring cargo while fast to a dock or at anchor in 
port, the master shall ensure that the tankship displays a warning sign 
at the gangway facing the shore so that it may be seen from the shore 
and another warning sign facing outboard toward the water so that it may 
be seen from the water. (See figure 1).
    (b) Except as provided in paragraph (f) of this section, each 
warning sign must have the following legends:
    (1) Warning.
    (2) Dangerous Cargo.
    (3) No Visitors.
    (4) No Smoking.
    (5) No Open Lights.
    (c) Each letter must be block style, black on a white background.
    (d) Each letter must:
    (1) Be 7.5 cm (approx. 3 in.) high;

[[Page 170]]

    (2) Be 5 cm (approx. 2 in.) wide except for ``M'' and ``W'' which 
must be 7.5 cm (approx. 3 in.) wide and the letter ``I'' which may be 
1.3 cm (approx. \1/2\ in.) wide; and
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02FE91.082

    (3) Have 1.3 cm (approx. \1/2\ in.) stroke width.
    (e) The spacing must be:
    (1) 1.3 cm (approx. \1/2\ in.) between letters of the same word;
    (2) 5 cm (approx. 2 in.) between words;
    (3) 5 cm (approx. 2 in.) between lines; and
    (4) 5 cm (approx. 2 in.) at the borders of the sign.
    (f) Except as described in Sec. 153.1045, the legends ``No Smoking'' 
and ``No Open Lights'' are not required when the cargoes on board the 
tankship are neither flammable nor combustible.


<R05>
Sec. 153.957  Persons in charge of transferring liquid cargo in bulk or 
cleaning cargo tanks.

    (a) The owner and operator of the vessel, and his or her agent, and 
each of them, shall ensure that--
    (1) Enough ``Tankerman-PICs'' or restricted ``Tankerman-PICs'', and 
``Tankerman-Assistants'', authorized for the classification of cargo 
carried, are on duty to safely transfer liquid cargo in bulk or to 
safely clean cargo tanks;
    (2) Each transfer of liquid cargo in bulk and each cleaning of a 
cargo tank is supervised by a qualified person designated as a person in 
charge of the transfer or the cleaning under Subpart C of 33 CFR part 
155;
    (3) When cargo regulated under this part is due for transfer, the 
person in charge of the transfer has received special training in the 
particular hazards associated with the cargo and in all special 
procedures for its handling; and
    (4) On each foreign vessel, the person in charge understands his or 
her responsibilities as described in this subchapter.
    (b) Upon request by the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, in 
whose zone the transfer will take place, the owner and operator of the 
vessel, and his or her agent, and each of them, shall provide 
documentary evidence that the person in charge has received the training 
specified by paragraph (a)(3) of this section and is capable of 
competently performing the procedures necessary for the cargo.

[CGD 79-116, 60 FR 17158, Apr. 4, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 153.959  Approval to begin transfer operations required.

    No person may make connections for cargo transfer or transfer cargo 
unless he has authorization from the person in charge of cargo transfer.

[[Page 171]]


<R05>
Sec. 153.964  Discharge by gas pressurization.

    The person in charge of cargo transfer may not authorize cargo 
discharge by gas pressurization unless:
    (a) The tank to be offloaded has an SR or PV venting system;
    (b) The pressurization medium is either the cargo vapor or a 
nonflammable, nontoxic gas inert to the cargo; and
    (c) The pressurizing line has:
    (1) A pressure reducing valve whose setting does not exceed 90% of 
the tank's relief valve setting and a manual control valve between the 
pressure reducing valve and the tank; or
    (2) For an inert gas medium:
    (i) A safety relief valve with a cross sectional flow area at least 
equal to that of the pressurizing line and whose relieving pressure does 
not exceed 90 percent of the tank's relief valve setting;
    (ii) A manual control valve between the safety relief valve and the 
tank; and
    (iii) A check valve between the manual control valve and the tank.


<R05>
Sec. 153.966  Discharge by liquid displacement.

    The person in charge of cargo transfer may not authorize cargo 
discharge by liquid displacement unless the liquid supply line to the 
tank has:
    (a) A safety relief or pressure reducing valve set to operate at no 
more than 80 percent of the tank's relief valve setting; and
    (b) A manual control valve between the tank and the supply line's 
safety relief valve or pressure reducing valve.


<R05>
Sec. 153.968  Cargo transfer conference.

    (a) Before he may begin making connections for cargo transfer, the 
person in charge of cargo transfer shall confer with the person 
supervising the cargo transfer at the facility.
    (b) The person in charge of cargo transfer shall discuss the 
important aspects of the transfer operation, such as the following, with 
the supervisor at the facility:
    (1) The products to be transferred.
    (2) The cargo loading rates marked on the cargo piping plan or the 
maximum safe transfer rates.
    (3) The critical or hazardous stages of the transfer operation.
    (4) The emergency procedures in case of a spill.
    (5) If the vessel is equipped with the tank overflow alarm 
prescribed in Sec. 153.408(c), a procedure for shutdown of shore pumps, 
shore valves, and ship's valves that prevents piping system pressures 
from exceeding those for which the piping system is designed.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21211, May 17, 1982; CGD 81-078, 50 FR 21174, May 22, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 153.970  Cargo transfer piping.

    The person in charge of cargo transfer shall ensure that:
    (a) Cargo is transferred to or from a cargo tank only through the 
tankship's cargo piping system;
    (b) Vapor not returned to shore through the tankship's vapor return 
system is discharged at the height required for the cargo's vent riser 
in Table 1, and
    (c) All cargo vapor is returned to shore through the valved 
connection on the venting system if:
    (1) The cargo requires closed gauging, is referenced to Sec. 153.372 
or is referenced to Sec. 153.525;
    (2) The transfer terminal has vapor return equipment; and
    (3) In his estimation the vapor return equipment is adequate to 
handle the vapor expected from the tank.


<R05>
Sec. 153.972  Connecting a cargo hose.

    The person in charge of cargo transfer may not authorize the 
connection of a hose to a cargo containment system unless:
    (a) He has ensured himself that the cargo will not weaken or damage 
the hose;
    (b) The hose is marked as meeting the standards of Sec. 153.940;
    (c) The date of the hose's last pressure test is within one year of 
the date on which the hose is used to transfer cargo;
    (d) The recommended working pressure marked on a hose used for 
discharge meets or exceeds the working pressure marked on the cargo 
piping at the hose connection; and

[[Page 172]]

    (e) The cargo's temperature is within the manufacturer's recommended 
maximum and minimum hose temperatures.


<R05>
Sec. 153.975  Preparation for cargo transfer.

    The person in charge of cargo transfer may not approve or continue 
cargo transfer unless the following conditions are met:
    (a) No fires or open flames are on deck or in compartments near the 
hose connections when Table 1 requires the cargo's containment system to 
have a fire protection system.
    (b) Any electrical bonding of the tankship to the transfer facility 
is made before the cargo transfer piping is joined.
    (c) Any supplemental inert gas supply necessary to maintain the 3.5 
kPa gauge (approx. 0.5 psig) pressure in the tank during offloading (see 
Sec. 153.500) is connected to the inert gas pressure control system.
    (d) The transfer connections have enough slack to allow for vessel 
movement.
    (e) The transfer connections are supported by tackles.
    (f) The cargo high level alarms, tank overflow alarms and overflow 
control systems are functioning correctly when the cargo is loaded.
    (g) Joints and couplings are gasketed and mated tightly.
    (h) Flanges are bolted tightly.
    (i) No repair work is underway in areas where cargo or cargo vapors 
may collect.
    (j) Cargo and sea valves are properly set, with those sea valves 
connected to cargo piping lashed or sealed shut.
    (k) Venting system bypass valves are set for cargo transfer and are 
operating properly.
    (l) All scuppers are plugged.
    (m) Smoking is limited to safe places.
    (n) Fire fighting and safety equipment is ready.
    (o) He is in effective communication with the transfer terminal.
    (p) The person in charge of the transfer terminal has acknowledged 
that he is ready to transfer.
    (q) Pressures within the cargo transfer and containment systems do 
not exceed the pressure ranges for which the transfer hose and 
containment systems are designed.
    (r) No vessels that would hazard cargo transfer are alongside the 
tankship.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21211, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.976  Transfer of packaged cargo or ship's stores.

    The person in charge of cargo transfer may neither begin nor 
continue the transfer of a flammable or combustible cargo while packaged 
cargo or ship's stores are transferred unless transfer of the packaged 
cargo or ship's stores does not hazard transfer of the flammable or 
combustible cargo.


<R05>
Sec. 153.977  Supervision of cargo transfer.

    The person in charge of cargo transfer shall:
    (a) Supervise the operation of cargo system valves;
    (b) Monitor the cargo loading rate to ensure it does not exceed that 
stated on the cargo piping plan; and
    (c) Monitor the cargo level in the tanks to make sure they do not 
overflow.

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21211, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.979  Gauging with a sounding tube.

    (a) No person may remove the cover of a sounding tube unless he has 
authorization from the person in charge of cargo transfer.
    (b) The person in charge of cargo transfer may not authorize removal 
of the cover from a sounding tube gauge unless all tank pressure has 
been relieved through the tank's venting system.


<R05>
Sec. 153.980  Isolation of automatic closing valves.

    The person in charge of cargo transfer may isolate automatic closing 
valves described in Sec. 153.408(b) from a cargo containment system if 
the following conditions are met:
    (a) The containment system carries products to which Sec. 153.408 
does not apply.
    (b) The valves are isolated by:

[[Page 173]]

    (1) Removing the valves; or
    (2) Installing removable pipes and blind flanges to by-pass the 
valves.

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21211, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.981  Leaving room in tank for cargo expansion.

    The person in charge of cargo transfer shall ensure that the amount 
of cargo in a tank does not exceed the tank's capacity at any ambient 
temperature between -18 <deg>C (approx. 0 <deg>F) and 46 <deg>C (approx. 
115 <deg>F).


<R05>
Sec. 153.983  Termination procedures.

    Upon completion of the transfer operation, the person in charge of 
cargo transfer shall ensure that:
    (a) The cargo transfer connections are closed off;
    (b) The transfer lines and hoses are drained of cargo, either into 
the tank or back to the transfer terminal;
    (c) Any electrical bonding between the vessel and the shore facility 
is broken only after the cargo hose is disconnected and all spills 
removed; and
    (d) Each vent system is returned to its nonloading configuration.

                        Special Cargo Procedures


<R05>
Sec. 153.1000  Special operating requirements for cargoes reactive with water.

    When Table 1 refers to this section, the master must ensure that the 
cargo:
    (a) Is carried only in a containment system completely isolated from 
any systems containing water, such as slop tanks, ballast tanks, cargo 
tanks containing slops or ballast, their vent lines or piping; and
    (b) Is separated by double walls, such as cofferdams and piping 
tunnels, from any system containing water, as for example those 
described in paragraph (a) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 153.1002  Special operating requirements for heat sensitive cargoes.

    When Table 1 refers to this section, the master shall make sure 
that:
    (a) The cargo temperature is maintained below the temperature that 
would induce polymerization, decomposition, thermal instability, 
evolution of gas or reaction of the cargo;
    (b) Any heating coils in the cargo tank are blanked off; and
    (c) The cargo is not carried in uninsulated deck tanks.

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21211, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.1003  Prohibited carriage in deck tanks.

    When Table 1 refers to this section, cargoes may not be carried in 
deck tanks.

[CGD 95-900, 60 FR 34050, June 29, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 153.1004  Inhibited and stabilized cargoes.

    (a) Before loading a cargo containment system with a cargo 
referenced to this section in Table 1, the person in charge of cargo 
transfer shall make sure that the cargo containment system is free of 
contaminants that could:
    (1) Catalyze the polymerization or decomposition of the cargo; or
    (2) Degrade the effectiveness of the inhibitor or stabilizer.
    (b) The master shall make sure that the cargo is maintained at a 
temperature which will prevent crystallization or solidification of the 
cargo.

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21211, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.1010  Alkylene oxides.

    (a) Before each loading of a cargo containment system with a cargo 
referenced to this section in Table 1, the person in charge of cargo 
transfer shall:
    (1) Unless the tankship is equipped with independent cargo piping 
that meets paragraph (d) of this section:
    (i) Obtain verification from a Coast Guard Marine Inspector or from 
a representative of the tankship's flag administration that separation 
of the alkylene oxide piping system complies with alkylene oxide 
handling plans approved by the Coast Guard or the tankship's flag 
administration; and
    (ii) Make sure that each spectacle flange and blank flange 
connection that is required to separate alkylene oxide piping systems 
from other systems has a wire and seal attached by a Coast Guard Marine 
Inspector or a representative of the tankship's flag administration.

[[Page 174]]

    (2) Purge the containment system until the oxygen content of the 
cargo tank is less than 2% by volume.
    (b) The person in charge of an alkyl ene oxide cargo transfer shall 
ensure that:
    (1) No alkylene oxide vapor or liquid is released to the atmosphere 
during cargo transfer;
    (2) No vapor return system connected to an alkylene oxide 
containment system is at the same time connected to another containment 
system;
    (3) Alkylene oxide is discharged only by an intank cargo pump or 
inert gas displacement;
    (4) Transfer hose is approved by the Commandant (G-MSO) under Sec. 
153.530(o) for alkylene oxide transfer and is marked ``For Alkylene 
Oxide Transfer Only''; and
    (5) A water hose is laid out on deck with water pressure to the 
nozzle, and all alkylene oxide spillages are washed away immediately.
    (c) While alkylene oxides are onboard the vessel, the master shall 
make sure that the oxygen content of the vapor space above the alkylene 
oxide and those spaces specified in Sec. 153.530 (k) and (l) is 
maintained below 2% by volume.
    (d) Tankships with independent piping for alkylene oxides must have 
onboard:
    (1) Alkylene oxide handling plans approved by the Coast Guard or the 
tankship's flag administration; and
    (2) Certification from the Coast Guard or the tankship's flag 
administration that the cargo piping for alkyl ene oxides is 
independent.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21211, May 17, 1982; CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 153.1011  Changing containment systems and hoses to and from alkylene 
oxide service.

    (a) The person in charge of cargo transfer shall make sure that:
    (1) No alkylene oxide is loaded into a containment system that last 
carried a cargo other than an alkylene oxide unless the containment 
system has been cleaned and inspected to make sure it is in good 
condition with no heavy rust accumulations or traces of previous 
cargoes;
    (2) No alkylene oxide is loaded into a containment system that 
within the previous three loadings carried a cargo listed in paragraph 
(b) of this section unless the containment system has been cleaned to 
the satisfaction of a Coast Guard Marine Inspector or a person 
specifically authorized by the Commandant (G-MSO) to approve alkylene 
oxide tank cleaning;
    (3) No cargo but an alkylene oxide is loaded into a containment 
system which last carried an alkylene oxide unless the containment 
system has been cleaned of alkylene oxide to the satisfaction of a Coast 
Guard Marine Inspector or person specifically authorized by the 
Commandant (G-MSO) to approve alkylene oxide tank cleaning; and
    (4) No hose marked ``For Alkylene Oxide Transfer Only'' is used for 
the transfer of a cargo other than an alkyl ene oxide.
    (b) The following cargoes are particularly reactive with alkylene 
oxides:
    (1) Non-oxidizing mineral acids (e.g. hydrochloric, phosphoric);
    (2) Sulfuric acid;
    (3) Nitric acid;
    (4) Organic acids (e.g. acetic, formic);
    (5) Halogenated organic acids (e.g. chloroacetic);
    (6) Sulfonic acids (e.g. alkyl benzene sulfonic);
    (7) Caustic alkalies (e.g. caustic soda, caustic potash; sodium 
hydrosulfide);
    (8) Ammonia and ammonia solutions;
    (9) Aliphatic amines;
    (10) Alkanolamines; and
    (11) Oxidizing substances.

[CGD 78-128, 47 FR 21211, May 17, 1982, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983; CGD 81-078, 50 FR 21174, May 22, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 153.1020  Unusually toxic cargoes.

    (a) No person may load or carry a cargo referenced to this section 
in Table 1 unless the cargo's piping and venting systems are separated 
from piping and venting systems carrying cargoes not referred to this 
section.
    (b) The master shall ensure that no heat transfer medium that has 
been circulated through a cargo referenced to this section in Table 1 is 
circulated through a cargo not referenced to this section unless he 
determines the medium to be uncontaminated with cargo.

[[Page 175]]

    (c) No person may discharge overboard condensed steam from the 
heating system of a cargo referenced to this section in Table 1 unless 
he first determines the condensate to be uncontaminated with cargo.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21212, May 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 153.1025  Motor fuel antiknock compounds.

    (a) No person may load or carry any other cargo in a containment 
system approved for motor fuel antiknock compounds containing lead 
alkyls except a cargo to be used solely in the manufacture of motor fuel 
antiknock compounds.
    (b) The master shall ensure that no person enter a pumproom or void 
space that contains piping from a containment system approved for motor 
fuel antiknock compounds containing lead alkyls unless:
    (1) The pumproom or void space atmosphere has been analyzed for its 
lead (as Pb) content and found to be less than 0.075 mg/m\3\; or
    (2) The person follows the procedures for entering a cargo tank 
described in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (c) No person may enter a cargo tank endorsed for motor fuel 
antiknock compounds containing lead alkyls without prior specific 
authorization from the Commandant (G-MSO). This authorization may be 
obtained by telephone ((202) 267-1217) if the person has previously 
obtained approval for the cargo tank entry procedure from the Commandant 
(G-MSO).
    (d) No person may enter a cargo tank endorsed for motor fuel 
antiknock compounds if he does not follow the conditions in the 
authorization under paragraph (c) of this section.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21212, May 17, 1982; CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 4782, Feb. 3, 1983; CGD 88-100, 
54 FR 40042, Sept. 29, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 153.1035  Acetone cyanohydrin or lactonitrile solutions.

    No person may operate a tankship carrying a cargo of acetone 
cyanohydrin or lactonitrile solutions, unless that cargo is stabilized 
with an inorganic acid.

[CGD 88-100, 54 FR 40042, Sept. 29, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 153.1040  Carbon disulfide.

    (a) No person may load, carry, or discharge carbon disulfide unless 
the cargo tank has a water pad over the cargo of at least one meter 
(approx. 40 in.).
    (b) The person in charge of a carbon disulfide transfer operation 
shall ensure that carbon disulfide is discharged only by displacement or 
intank cargo pump.
    (c) No person may remove a cargo pump for a containment system that 
carries carbon disulfide unless:
    (1) The containment system has a gas free certificate issued under 
the standards in Sec. 35.01-1 of this chapter; or
    (2) The vapor space in the pump well is filled with water.


<R05>
Sec. 153.1045  Inorganic acids.

    When Table 1 refers to this section, the person in charge of cargo 
transfer shall ensure that the legends ``NO SMOKING'' and ``NO OPEN 
LIGHTS'' are displayed on the warning sign required in Sec. 153.955(a) 
when cargo is transferred.


<R05>
Sec. 153.1046  Sulfuric acid.

    No person may liquefy frozen or congealed sulfuric acid other than 
by external tank heating coils.


<R05>
Sec. 153.1052  Carriage of other cargoes in acid tanks.

    No person shall load or carry other cargoes in a cargo containment 
system of a U.S. flag ship endorsed to carry sulfuric acid, hydrochloric 
acid, or phosphoric acid with out specific authorization from the 
Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 94-900, 59 FR 45139, Aug. 31, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 153.1060  Benzene.

    The person in charge of a Coast Guard inspected vessel must ensure 
that the provisions of part 197, subpart C, of this chapter are applied.

[CGD 88-040, 56 FR 65006, Dec. 13, 1991]

[[Page 176]]


<R05>
Sec. 153.1065  Sodium chlorate solutions.

    (a) No person may load sodium chlorate solutions into a containment 
system that previously carried another cargo unless the containment 
system is thoroughly washed before loading.
    (b) The person in charge of cargo transfer shall make sure that 
spills of sodium chlorate solutions are immediately washed away.

[CGD 81-078, 50 FR 21174, May 22, 1985]

 Approval of Surveyors and Handling of Categories A, B, C, and D Cargo 
                             and NLS Residue

    Source: CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7785, Mar. 12, 1987, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R05>
Sec. 153.1100  Responsibility of the person in charge.

    The person in charge of the ship shall ensure that--
    (a) The requirements of Sec.Sec. 153.1102 through 153.1132 are met; 
and
    (b) The procedures in the approved Procedures and Arrangements 
Manual are followed.


<R05>
Sec. 153.1101  Procedures for getting a Surveyor: Approval of Surveyors.

    (a) At least 24 hours before a Surveyor is needed, the person 
wishing the services of a Surveyor must contact the Captain of the Port 
or the Marine Safety Office that has jurisdiction over the port at which 
the Surveyor will be needed to--
    (1) Arrange for the Coast Guard to provide a Surveyor; or
    (2) Inform the Coast Guard of the selection of a Surveyor from one 
of the organizations accepted by the Coast Guard to provide Surveyors.
    (b) Organizations may be accepted by the Coast Guard to provide 
Surveyors if they--
    (1) Are engaged, as a regular part of their business, in performing 
inspections or tests of bulk liquid cargo tanks or bulk liquid cargo 
handling equipment;
    (2) Are familiar with the references in Sec. 153.0(b) and with the 
requirements of this part;
    (3) Are not controlled by the owners or operators of ships needing 
the services of the Surveyors or the facilities at which those ships 
would unload cargo;
    (4) Are not dependent on Coast Guard acceptance under this section 
to remain in business; and
    (5) Sign a Memorandum of Understanding with the Coast Guard.
    (c) Each application for acceptance as a Surveyor must be submitted 
to the Commandant (G-MSO) and must contain the following:
    (1) The name and address of the organization, including subsidiaries 
and divisions, requesting acceptance by the Coast Guard to provide 
Surveyors.
    (2) A statement that the organization is not controlled by the 
owners or operators of ships needing the services of Surveyors or the 
facilities at which these ships would unload, or a full disclosure of 
any ownership or controlling interest held by such parties.
    (3) A description of the experience and qualifications of the 
personnel who would be performing the function of Surveyor.
    (4) A statement that the persons who will be performing the function 
of Surveyor have been trained in and are familiar with the requirements 
of Annex II and the regulations in this part.
    (5) A statement that the Coast Guard may verify the information 
submitted in the application and may examine the persons who will be 
performing the function of Surveyor to determine their qualifications.
    (d) The acceptance of an organization may be terminated by the 
Commandant if the organization fails to properly perform or supervise 
the inspections required in this part.


<R05>
Sec. 153.1102  Handling and disposal of NLS residue: Cateqories A, B, C, and D.

    (a) Except those Category A NLS residues that must be discharged 
under paragraph (c) of this section, NLS residue from an NLS whose vapor 
pressure is 5 kPa (50 mbar) or less at 20 <deg>C (68 <deg>F) must be--

    Note to paragraph (a): The Marine Protection, Research, and 
Sanctuaries Act allows specific liquids to be discharged to the sea 
under permits issued by the EPA.

    (1) Unloaded to any consignee;
    (2) Returned to the shipper;
    (3) Discharged to a reception facility;

[[Page 177]]

    (4) Retained on the ship; or
    (5) Discharged to the sea under Sec. 153.1126 or Sec. 153.1128.
    (b) Except those Category A NLS residues that must be discharged 
under paragraph (c) of this section, NLS residue from an NLS whose vapor 
pressure is greater than 5 kPa (50 mbar) at 20 <deg>C must be--
    (1) Handled in the same way as the NLS residue under paragraph (a) 
of this section; or
    (2) Ventilated following a ventilation procedure in the approved 
Procedures and Arrangements Manual.

    Note: The Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401 et seq) allows states to 
regulate emissions from tank ventilation. There may be other 
regulations, both local and Federal, that affect the use of tank 
ventilation for safety or environmental purposes.

    (c) NLS residue containing Category A NLS in pumproom bilges and in 
spill trays at the manifold must be discharged to a reception facility.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7785, Mar. 12, 1987, as amended by CGD 81-101, 53 FR 
28975, Aug. 1, 1988 and 54 FR 12629, Mar. 28, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 153.1104  Draining of cargo hose: Categories A, B, C, and D.

    Before a cargo hose used in discharging an NLS from a ship's cargo 
tank is disconnected, the hose must be drained back to the transfer 
terminal unless the tank unloading the cargo has a waiver under Sec. 
153.483 or Sec. 153.491.

[CGD 81-101, 53 FR 28975, Aug. 1, 1988 and 54 FR 12629, Mar. 28, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 153.1106  Cleaning agents.

    No tank cleaning agent other than water or steam may be used to 
clean an NLS residue from a cargo tank except as prescribed in the 
approved Procedures and Arrangements Manual.


<R05>

Sec. 153.1108  Heated prewash for solidifying NLS, high viscosity NLS and 
required prewashes of NLS whose viscosity exceeds 25 mPa sec at 20 <deg>C: 
Categories 
          A, B, and C.

    (a) When a high viscosity or solidifying cargo is unloaded from a 
cargo tank, the cargo tank must be prewashed unless Sec. 153.1114 or 
paragraph (c) of this section allows the prewash to be omitted.
    (b) When a prewash is required for a tank that has unloaded a 
solidifying cargo or a cargo having a viscosity exceeding 25 mPa sec at 
20 <deg>C, the wash water used in the prewash must leave the tank 
washing machine at a temperature of at least 60 <deg>C (140 <deg>F).
    (c) The prewash required under paragraph (a) of this section may be 
omitted if the approved Procedures and Arrangements Manual contains a 
procedure for measuring the temperature of all interior cargo tank 
surfaces throughout unloading and under the measuring procedure the 
temperature of these surfaces remains above--
    (1) The temperature of the cargo's melting point if the cargo is a 
Category B or C solidifying NLS; or
    (2) The temperature at which the cargo's viscosity exceeds--
    (i) 25 mPa.s, if the cargo is a high viscosity Category B NLS; or
    (ii) 60 mPa.s, if the cargo is a high viscosity Category C NLS.

[81-101, 53 FR 28975, Aug. 1, 1988 and 54 FR 12629, Mar. 28, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 153.1112  Prewash for tanks containing Category A NLS residue.

    Unless Sec. 153.1114 allows the prewash to be omitted, a cargo tank 
that unloads a Category A NLS cargo must be prewashed following the 
procedures in Sec. 153.1120.


<R05>
Sec. 153.1114  Conditions under which a prewash may be omitted: Categories 
A, B, and C.

    A prewash required by this part may be omitted if one of the 
following requirements is met:
    (a) A Surveyor has signed a statement in the Cargo Record Book that 
the next cargo has been determined to be one that may be loaded without 
washing the tank, and the tank is not washed or ballasted before it is 
loaded with the next cargo.
    (b) A Surveyor has signed a statement in the Cargo Record Book that 
the approved Procedures and Arrangements Manual contains procedures for 
removing the NLS residue by ventilation, and the cargo tank is not 
washed or ballasted before being cleaned following the ventilation 
procedure.

    Note: The Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401 et seq.) allows states to 
regulate emissions from

[[Page 178]]

tank ventilation. There may be other regulations, both local and 
Federal, that affect the use of tank ventilation for safety or 
environmental purposes.

    (c) The tank requiring the prewash has a waiver issued under Sec. 
153.483 or Sec. 153.491 and the waiver states when the tank is to be 
prewashed.


<R05>
Sec. 153.1116  Prewash for tanks unloaded without following the approved 
Procedures and Arrangements Manual: Categories B and C.

    If for any reason more Category B or C NLS residue remains in a 
cargo tank and transfer piping of a ship after unloading than would 
remain after a normal discharge of the cargo when the unloading 
procedures in the approved Procedures and Arrangements Manual are 
followed, the tank must be prewashed following the procedures in Sec. 
153.1120 unless--
    (a) Section 153.1114 allows the prewash to be omitted; or
    (b) The residue is reduced using another procedure, and a Surveyor 
estimates and states in the Cargo Record Book that the cargo tank and 
transfer piping contain no more NLS residue than they would if 
discharged following the procedures in the approved Procedures and 
Arrangements Manual, and no other prewash is required by this part.


<R05>
Sec. 153.1118  Prewash of Categories B and C cargo tanks not meeting stripping 
standards: Categories B and C.

    (a) Unless Sec. 153.1114 allows the prewash to be omitted, a cargo 
tank from which a Category B NLS is unloaded must be prewashed using the 
procedures in Sec. 153.1120(b) if the tank--
    (1) Operates under the interim standard in Sec. 153.481(b); or
    (2) Has a waiver issued under Sec. 153.483.
    (b) Unless Sec. 153.1114 allows the prewash to be omitted, a cargo 
tank from which a Category C NLS is unloaded must be prewashed using the 
procedures in Sec. 153.1120(b) if the tank has a waiver issued under 
Sec. 153.483.


<R05>

Sec. 153.1119  When to prewash and discharge NLS residues from a prewash; 
unloading an NLS cargo in a country whose Administration is not signatory 
to MARPOL 
          73/78: Categories A, B, and C.

    (a) Except as allowed in paragraphs (b), (c), and (e) of this 
section, each prewash required by this subpart must be completed and all 
tank washings must be discharged to a reception facility before the ship 
leaves the unloading port.
    (b) NLS residue from the prewash following the unloading of a 
Category B NLS may be transferred to a slop tank for discharge under 
Sec. 153.1126 instead of being discharged under paragraph (a) of this 
section if the prewash is required solely under Sec. 153.1118(a)(1).
    (c) A tank that is required by this part to be prewashed may be 
prewashed in a port other than the unloading port if the following 
conditions are met:
    (1) The person in charge requests permission from the Commandant (G-
MSO) (tel num; 202-267-1217) if the prewash port is a foreign port, or 
the Captain of the Port having jurisdiction over the unloading port if 
the prewash port is a U.S. port.
    (2) The person in charge supplies with the request required under 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section--
    (i) The name of the ship;
    (ii) The name of the owner;
    (iii) The name of the NLS;
    (iv) The approximate date the tank will be prewashed if the 
relocation of the prewash port is for one time only;
    (v) A written agreement to receive the tank washings by a reception 
facility in the prewash port;
    (vi) When the prewash port or terminal is in a country whose 
Administration is signatory to MARPOL 73/78, a written attestation from 
the person in charge of each prewash port or terminal that the 
Administration has determined the port or terminal to have adequate 
reception facilities for the NLS residue;
    (vii) Written pledges from the person in charge that--
    (A) The tank to be prewashed will not be washed or ballasted before 
being prewashed; and

[[Page 179]]

    (B) The ship will be taken to the reception facility and the tank 
prewashed in accordance with the requirements in Sec. 153.1120; and
    (viii) Any additional information the Captain of the Port or 
Commandant (G-MSO) requests to evaluate granting the permission.
    (3) The Coast Guard or Commandant (G-MSO) has granted the permission 
in writing, the permission is carried aboard the ship, and the person in 
charge of the ship has made an entry in the Cargo Record Book stating 
that the permission has been granted.
    (d) Unless the permission granted under paragraph (c)(4) of this 
section includes alternate conditions of termination or revocation in 
writing, the permission is--
    (1) Terminated after the tank is prewashed as pledged in paragraph 
(c)(3)(vii) of this section or loaded with another cargo;
    (2) Revoked if either of the pledges in paragraph (c)(3)(vii) of 
this section is invalidated or the agreement in paragraph (c)(3)(v) of 
this section is repudiated; and
    (3) Revoked at any time the ship is not operated in accordance with 
the pledges in paragraph (c)(3)(vii) of this section and the conditions 
listed with the granted permission.
    (e) A U.S. ship that would otherwise be required by this part to 
prewash in a port without reception facilities must obtain permission 
from Commandant (G-MSO) to prewash in an alternate port.


<R05>
Sec. 153.1120  Procedures for tank prewash: Categories A, B, and C.

    Except where the approved Procedures and Arrangements Manual 
prescribes a different procedure, each of the following steps must be 
done in the order listed for the Coast Guard to consider the tanks 
prewashed under this part:
    (a) When this part requires a prewash of a tank containing Category 
A NLS residue and the alternative prewash procedure in paragraph (b) of 
this section is not used, the prewash must meet the following:
    (1) The prewash may not begin until--
    (i) A Surveyor is present; and
    (ii) Instrumentation or equipment is available that is capable of 
measuring the concentration of the Category A NLS in the NLS residue and 
determining whether it is below 0.1 per cent by weight.
    (2) The equipment specified in Sec. 153.484 must be used as 
prescribed in the approved Procedures and Arrangements Manual for the 
prewash.
    (3) The wash water must be heated if required by Sec. 153.1108, and 
water or tank washings must pass through the cargo pump and piping, 
including any stripping equipment, during washing or during discharge of 
tank washings.
    (4) The tank washing machine must be placed in all positions 
specified for the tank's Category A NLS prewash procedure in the 
approved Procedures and Arrangements Manual.
    (5) The tank must be pumped out each time there are enough tank 
washings collected in the bottom of the tank for the pump to gain 
suction, and if the NLS is immiscible with water or is a solidifying 
cargo, all floating and suspended NLS must be discharged.
    (6) The washing machine must be operated until samples of the 
discharged tank washings taken by the Surveyor are tested using the 
equipment required by paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section and the 
concentration of NLS is below 0.1 per cent by weight.
    (7) After the washing is stopped, the remaining tank washings must 
be pumped out.
    (8) The Cargo Record Book must have items 12 through 14 completed 
and must show the Surveyor's written certification of their accuracy.
    (9) The Cargo Record Book must have the Surveyor's written 
concurrence that the prewash procedures specified in the approved 
Procedures and Arrangements Manual were followed.
    (b) When this part requires a prewash of a tank containing Category 
B or C NLS residue or when the procedure in this paragraph is used as an 
alternative to the prewash procedure under paragraph (a) of this 
section, the prewash must meet the following:
    (1) If the prewash is for a Category A NLS, the prewash may not 
begin until a Surveyor is present.
    (2) The equipment specified in Sec. 153.484 must be used as 
prescribed in

[[Page 180]]

the approved Procedures and Arrangements Manual for the prewash.
    (3) The wash water must be heated if required by Sec. 153.1108, and 
water or tank washings must pass through the cargo pump and piping, 
including any stripping equipment, during washing or during discharge of 
tank washings.
    (4) Except as required in paragraph (b)(5) of this section, the 
number of washing machine cycles specified in Table 153.1120 must be 
completed. If a prewash is required by a section listed under Column 1 
of Table 153.1120 and another section listed under Column 2, the number 
of cycles in Column 1 must be completed but no additional cycles are 
necessary.
    (5) If the approved Procedures and Arrangements Manual specifies 
that a tank washing machine must be moved for the prewash of a tank from 
which a Category A NLS or a solidifying NLS has been unloaded, the 
number of washing machine cycles specified in Table 153.1120 must be 
completed at each position to which the washing machine is moved.
    (6) When the NLS is immiscible with water or is a solidifying cargo, 
the tank must be pumped out each time enough tank washings collect in 
the bottom of the tank for the pump to gain suction, or the procedures 
in paragraphs (b)(3), (b)(4), and (b)(5) of this section must be 
repeated two additional times with the tank pumped out each time, for a 
total of three washings.
    (7) Items 12 through 14 in the Cargo Record Book must be completed 
and, if the prewash is for a Category A NLS, verification that the 
procedures specified in the approved Procedures and Arrangements Manual 
were followed shown by the Surveyor's endorsement in the Cargo Record 
Book.

                    Table 153.1120--Number of Washing Machine Cycles in the Prewash Procedure
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                        Number of washing machine cycles
                                                               -------------------------------------------------
                                                                Column 1: Prewash under
                                                                 Sec. 153.1116 or for a    Column 2: Prewashes
                                                                 solidifying NLS under     except those listed
                                                                     Sec. 153.1108            under column 1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Category A NLS................................................                        2                        1
Category B or C NLS...........................................                        1                      1/2
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7785, Mar. 12, 1987, as amended by CGD 81-101, 53 FR 
28975, Aug. 1, 1988 and 54 FR 12629, Mar. 28, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 153.1122  Discharges of NLS residue from tank washing other than a 
prewash: Categories A, B, and C.

    Tank washings that do not result from a prewash and that contain 
Category A, B, or C NLS residues must be discharged to a reception 
facility or discharged to the sea under Sec. 153.1126 or Sec. 153.1128 
except those tank washings resulting from washing a tank that has been 
cleaned following a ventilation procedure in the approved Procedures and 
Arrangements Manual.


<R05>
Sec. 153.1124  Discharges of Category D NLS residue.

    NLS residue from Category D NLSs must be discharged to a reception 
facility or discharged to the sea using the following procedure:
    (a) Before discharge begins, drain or flush the NLS residue in the 
tank's piping systems into the tank.
    (b) After draining or flushing, discharge the NLS residue to the sea 
in accordance with Sec. 153.1128 or transfer it to a slop tank and 
discharge in accordance with Sec. 153.1126.


<R05>
Sec. 153.1126  Discharge of NLS residue from a slop tank to the sea: Categories 
A, B, C, and D.

    NLS residue in a slop tank may not be discharged into the sea 
unless--
    (a) The ship meets the conditions for discharging the NLS residue 
from a cargo tank in Sec. 153.1128; and
    (b) For Category B NLS residue transferred to the slop tank under 
Sec. 153.1119(b), the NLS is discharged--
    (1) Through an NLS residue discharge system with the flow recording 
equipment required in Sec. 153.481(b)(2) operating; and

[[Page 181]]

    (2) At a rate maintained at or below Q in the following:
    For tank contents that are miscible
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC13NO91.045
    
    For tank contents that are immiscible

Q=KU<SUP>1.4</SUP> L<SUP>1.6</SUP>x10<SUP>-5</SUP> m\3\/hr

where:

Q=maximum permissible slops discharge rate in cubic meters per hour.
V=volume of slops in the tank in cubic meters.
K=4.3, except K=6.45 if Q is distributed between two NLS residue 
discharge outlets on opposite sides of the ship (see Sec.Sec. 153.470(c) 
and 153.481(b)).
U=ship's speed in knots.
L=ship's length in meters.
N=number of tanks containing Category B NLS residue pumped into the slop 
tank.


<R05>
Sec. 153.1128  Discharge of NLS residue from a cargo tank to the sea: Categories 
A. B, C, and D.

    The discharge of NLS residue to the sea must be made with the ship 
at least 22.24 km (12 nautical miles) from the nearest land, and must 
meet the following additional conditions:
    (a) To discharge the following the ship must be in water at least 25 
m (76.2 ft) deep:
    (1) Category B or C NLS residue diluted to less than 1 ppm of the 
NLS.
    (2) Category B or C NLS residue resulting from washing a tank after 
the following washing procedure has been completed:
    (i) If the tank is not required to be prewashed under this part, the 
tank must be washed following the procedures that apply to a prewash of 
a Category B NLS in Sec. 153.1120 using one washing machine cycle, and 
the tank washings discharged to a reception facility or to the sea under 
Sec. 153.1126 or paragraph (a)(1), (c) or (d) of this section.
    (ii) After the tank has been prewashed or has been washed under 
paragraph (a)(2)(i) of this section, the tank must then be washed with 
one cycle of the tank washing machine, and the tank washings discharged 
to a reception facility or to the sea in accordance with Sec. 153.1126 
or paragraph (a)(1), (c), or (d) of this section.
    (b) To discharge a Category D NLS residue to which 10 times its 
volume in water is added and mixed, the ship must be--
    (1) If self-propelled, maintained at a speed of at least 12.97 km/hr 
(7 knots); and
    (2) If not self-propelled, maintained at a speed of at least 7.41 
km/hr (4 knots).
    (c) Each ship built before July 1, 1986 that discharges Category A, 
B or C NLS residues before January 1, 1988 must be--
    (1) In water at least 25 m (76.2 ft) deep;
    (2) If discharging the residue of a Category A NLS cargo, 
discharging only residue created by washing the Category A NLS's cargo 
tank after a prewash;
    (3) If discharging the residue of a Category B NLS cargo, 
discharging no more than the larger of 1 m<SUP>3</SUP> or 1/3000th the 
volume of the Category B cargo loaded;
    (4) If discharging the residue of a Category C NLS cargo, 
discharging no more than the larger of 3 m<SUP>3</SUP> of or

1/1000th the volume of the Category C cargo loaded;
    (5) If self-propelled, maintained at a speed of at least 12.97 km/hr 
(7 knots); and
    (6) If not self-propelled, maintained at a speed of at least 7.41 
km/hr (4 knots).
    (d) To discharge Category A, B, C, or D NLS residue other than as 
allowed under paragraphs (a) through (c) of this section, the ship must 
be--
    (1) In water at least 25 m (76.2 ft) deep;
    (2) Discharging at a rate not exceeding that used for Q<INF>d</INF> 
in Sec. 153.470;
    (3) If self-propelled, maintained at speed no less than the minimum 
specified in the approved Procedures and Arrangements Manual but at 
least 12.97 km/hr (7 knots);
    (4) If not self-propelled, maintained at a speed no less than the 
minimum specified in the approved Procedures and Arrangements Manual but 
at least 7.41 km/hr (4 knots);
    (5) If discharging the residue of a Category A NLS cargo, 
discharging only

[[Page 182]]

residue created by washing the Category A NLS's cargo tank after a 
prewash;
    (6) If discharging the residue of a Category B NLS cargo, 
discharging no more than the larger of 1 m<SUP>3</SUP> or 1/3000th the 
volume of the Category B cargo loaded;
    (7) If discharging the residue of a Category C NLS cargo, 
discharging no more than the larger of 3 m<SUP>3</SUP> of or

1/1000th the volume of the Category C cargo loaded;
    (8) Discharging through an NLS residue discharge system meeting Sec. 
153.470.

[CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7785, Mar. 12, 1987, as amended by CGD 81-101, 53 FR 
28976, Aug. 1, 1988 and 54 FR 12629, Mar. 28, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 153.1130  Failure of slops discharge recording equipment; operating with, 
reporting failures, and replacing pollution equipment: Category A, B, C, D.

    (a) If equipment required in Sec.Sec. 153.470 through 153.488 fails, 
the Coast Guard Marine Inspection Office, Marine Safety Office, or 
Captain of the Port must be notified within 24 hours after the failure.
    (b) No person shall replace a piece of equipment required by 
Sec.Sec. 153.470 through 153.488 unless the replacement is--
    (1) Identical to the original equipment; or
    (2) Allowed as an alternative under Sec. 153.10.
    (c) The following conditions apply when discharge recording 
equipment required under Sec. 153.481(b)(2) fails:
    (1) No NLS residue may be discharged unless the approved Procedures 
and Arrangements Manual contains procedures for discharging with 
incapacitated discharge recording equipment while meeting the discharge 
restrictions of Sec. 153.1126(b) and these procedures are followed.
    (2) The failure of the discharge recording equipment must be 
recorded in the Cargo Record Book within 24 hours after the failure.
    (3) If the ship operates under a Certificate of Inspection, the 
failed discharge recording equipment must be repaired or replaced within 
60 days after it fails, and the repair or replacement recorded in the 
Cargo Record Book and reported to the Coast Guard within 24 hours after 
it is completed.


<R05>
Sec. 153.1132  Reporting spills and non-complying discharges: Category A, B, C, 
and D.

    The following shall be reported following the procedures applying to 
oil in 33 CFR 151.15 (c), (d), (g), (h):
    (a) All discharges of the NLS that do not meet the requirements of 
this part.
    (b) All spills into the water.

                               Maintenance


<R05>
Sec. 153.1500  Venting system rupture disks.

    The master shall ensure that a relief valve exposed to a cargo after 
the failure of a rupture disk or breaking pin is cleaned and operates 
properly before the next cargo is loaded into the tank.


<R05>
Sec. 153.1502  Fixed ballast relocation.

    No person may remove or relocate fixed ballast unless:
    (a) The change is approved by the Commandant (G-MSO); or
    (b) The ballast is temporarily moved under the supervision of a 
Coast Guard Marine Inspector for examination or repair of the tankship.

[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 
FR 4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 153.1504  Inspection of personnel emergency and safety equipment.

    The master shall ensure that the personnel emergency and safety 
equipment required by Sec. 153.214 is inspected each 30 days and found 
to be in good condition and operating properly.


<R04>
  Subpart D--Test and Calculation Procedures for Determining Stripping 
          Quantity, Clingage NLS Residue, and Total NLS Residue

    Source: CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7788, Mar. 12, 1987, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R05>
Sec. 153.1600  Equipment required for conducting the stripping quantity test.

    The operator shall ensure the stripping quantity test is conducted 
with--

[[Page 183]]

    (a) Equipment that maintains a backpressure of at least 100 kPa (1 
atm) (gauge) at the connection of the discharge line of the tank to be 
tested to the cargo transfer hose, including, but not limited to, piping 
whose discharge is 10 m above the manifold or a constant pressure valve 
in the discharge line and set at 100 kPa;
    (b) A container for measuring the volume of water remaining in the 
tank to an accuracy of <plus-minus> 5%;
    (c) A squeegee or broom to collect standing water on the tank floor;
    (d) One or more containers for collecting and transferring water; 
and
    (e) One of the following for transferring the water remaining in the 
tank to the measuring container:
    (1) A wet vacuum.
    (2) A positive displacement pump.
    (3) An eductor with an air/water separator in line.


<R05>
Sec. 153.1602  Test procedure for determining the strippinq quantity.

    (a) The stripping quantity of a tank must be determined by testing 
the tank under the procedures in paragraph (b) of this section unless 
the Coast Guard agrees under the provisions of Sec. 153.10 to accept the 
stripping quantity, previously determined under paragraph (b) of this 
section, of a tank having similar geometry, internal structure, and 
piping system.
    (b) When testing a tank for stripping quantity, the owner or 
operator of the ship shall proceed as follows:
    (1) Make arrangements with the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, 
for a Coast Guard Marine Inspector to witness the stripping test.
    (2) Clean and gas free the tanks to be tested.
    (3) Determine the least favorable values of list and trim for 
drainage within the range allowed by the approved Procedures and 
Arrangements Manual.
    (4) Maintain the ship's list and trim during the test to that 
determined under paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
    (5) Load the tank with enough water so that unloading the water 
simulates the final stages of unloading a full tank of cargo.
    (6) Pump out the water and strip the tank using the procedures 
specified in the approved Procedures and Arrangements Manual.
    (7) After shutting the manifold valve, open any cargo pump foot 
valve to allow water trapped in the cargo pump to drain into the tank.
    (8) Open all valves in the piping system except the manifold valve 
and allow the water to drain into the tank.
    (9) Squeegee or sweep the water drained under paragraphs (b)(7) and 
(b)(8) of this section and any water that stands in puddles on the tank 
floor to the tank's low point or sump and collect in the container 
required by Sec. 153.1600(b) using the equipment required in Sec. 
153.1600(e).
    (10) With the manifold valve still closed, drain any water remaining 
in the piping system on the ship's side of the cargo transfer manifold 
valve into containers, and add this water to that collected from the 
tank under paragraph (b)(9) of this section. Water collected from a 
cargo line serving a block of tanks may be prorated between all the 
tanks it serves if--
    (i) The ship owner requests, under the provisions of Sec. 153.10, 
that the water be prorated; and
    (ii) The ship's approved Procedures and Arrangements Manual 
specifies that no tank in the block be washed until all the tanks in the 
block have been discharged.
    (c) Include any water that is trapped in dead end pipe sections, 
either by--
    (1) Draining the pipe sections and adding the water to that 
collected in the container under paragraphs (b)(9) and (b)(10) of this 
section; or
    (2) Adding an estimate of the water's volume to the sum calculated 
in paragraph (d) of this section using the pipe's dimensions, the ship's 
list and trim, and the geometry of the piping system.
    (d) Measure the volume of water collected in the container under 
paragraphs (b)(9), (b)(10), and (c)(1) of this section and add to that 
volume the volume, if any, estimated under paragraph (c)(2) of this 
section.


<R05>
Sec. 153.1604  Determining the stripping quantity from the test results.

    (a) For a single test, the stripping quantity is the volume of water 
calculated under Sec. 153.1602(d).

[[Page 184]]

    (b) If multiple tests are made on a tank without modifications to 
the tank, pumping system, or stripping procedure between the tests, the 
stripping quantity must be taken as the average of the stripping 
quantities for all of the tests.
    (c) If multiple tests are made on a tank with modifications to the 
tank, pumping system, or stripping procedure between the tests, the 
stripping quantity is the stripping quantity determined under paragraph 
(b) of this section using only those tests performed after the last 
modification.


<R05>
Sec. 153.1608  Calculation of total NLS residue and clingage NLS residue.

    (a) The total NLS residue for each tank is calculated by adding the 
stripping quantity and the clingage NLS residue.
    (b) The clingage NLS residue for each tank is calculated using the 
following formula:

Q<INF>clingage</INF>=1.1x10<SUP>-4</SUP> 
A<INF>d</INF>+1.5x10<SUP>-5</SUP> A<INF>w</INF>+4.5x10<SUP>-4</SUP> 
L<SUP>1/2</SUP> A<INF>b</INF>

where:

A<INF>b</INF>=Area of the tank bottom added to the area in square meters 
of tank structural components projected on a horizontal surface
A<INF>d</INF>=Area of the tank underdecks added to the area in square 
meters of tank structural components projected on a horizontal surface
A<INF>w</INF>=Area of the tank walls added to the area in square meters 
of tank structural components projected on a vertical surface
L=Length of tank in meters from fore to aft
Q<INF>clingage</INF>=volume of clingage in cubic meters

When using the formula in this paragraph, areas that are inclined more 
than 30<deg> from the horizontal may be assumed to be vertical.

    Note: The Commandant (G-MSO) (tel num;202-267-1217) has information 
that may be useful in approximating surface areas of typical structural 
members for the projected area calculations under Sec. 153.1608(b).

[[Page 185]]

          Table 1 to Part 153--Summary of Minimum Requirements

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 IMO Annex
                                     II                 Cargo       Vent                                  Fire       Special requirements    Electrical
           Cargo name            Pollution    Haz.   containment   height      Vent        Gauge       protection     in  46 CFR Part 153   hazard class
                                  Category              system                                           system                               and group
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
a.                                      b.       c.          d.        e.  f.           g.           h.             i.....................  j.
--------------------------------
Acetic acid....................      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .238(a), .409, .527,    I-D
                                                                                                                     .554, .933.
Acetic anhydride...............      D         S          II         4m    PV           Restr        A              .238(a), .409, .526,    I-D
                                                                                                                     .527, .554, .933.
Acetochlor.....................      A         P          II         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  NA
Acetone cyanohydrin............      A        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A              .238(a), .316, .336,    I-D
                                                                                                                     .408, .525, .526,
                                                                                                                     .527, .912(a)(2),
                                                                                                                     .933, .1002, .1004,
                                                                                                                     .1020, .1035.
Acetonitrile...................     III        S          II        B/3    PV           Restr        A              .409, .525, .526,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Acrylamide solution (50% or          D         S          II         NR    Open         Closed       NSR            .409, .525(a), (c),     NA
 less).                                                                                                              (d), (e), .912(a)(1),
                                                                                                                     .1002(a), .1004,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Acrylic acid...................      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .238(a), .409, .526,    I-D
                                                                                                                     .912(a)(1), .933,
                                                                                                                     .1002(a), .1004.
Acrylonitrile..................      B        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A              .236(a), (c), (d),      I-D
                                                                                                                     .316, .408, .525,
                                                                                                                     .526, .527,
                                                                                                                     .912(a)(1), .1004,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Adiponitrile...................      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .526..................  I-D
Alachlor.......................      B        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         A, C           .238(a), .409, .440,    NA
                                                                                                                     .488, .908(a), (b).
Alcohol (C6-C17) (secondary)         A         P          II         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  NA
 poly(3-6)ethoxylates.
Alcohol (C6-C17) (secondary)         B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .908(a),    NA
 poly(7-12)ethoxylates.                                                                                              (b).
Alcohol(C9-C11) poly(2.5-9)          B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .908(a)...  NA
 ethoxylate.
Alcohol(C12-C15)
 poly(...)ethoxylates, see
 Alcohol(C12-C16)
 poly(...)ethoxylates.
Alcohol(C12-C16) poly(1-             A         P          II         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  NA
 6)ethoxylates.
Alcohol(C12-C16) poly(7-             B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .908(a)...  NA
 19)ethoxylates.
Alcohol(C12-C16)                     C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  NA
 poly(20+)ethoxylates.
Alkanes(C6-C9) (all isomers)...      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Alkane(C14-C17) sulfonic acid,       B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .440, .908(a).........  NA
 sodium salt solution (65% or
 less).
Alkaryl polyether (C9-C20).....      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A, B           .409; (.440, .908(a))   NA
                                                                                                                     \1\.
Alkenyl(C16-C20) succinic            D         S         III        B/3    PV           Closed       NSR            .316, .408, .525,       NA
 anhydride.                                                                                                          .526, .1020.
Alkyl acrylate-Vinyl pyridine        C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  NA
 copolymer in Toluene.
Alkylaryl phosphate mixtures         A        S/P         I         B/3    PV           Closed       A, B, C        .316, .408, .525,       NA
 (more than 40% Diphenyl tolyl                                                                                       .526, .1020.
 phosphate, less than 0.02%
 ortho- isomer).
Alkyl(C3-C4)benzenes (all            A         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
 isomers).
Alkyl(C5-C8)benzenes (all            A         P          II         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  I-D
 isomers).
Alkylbenzene, Alkylindane,           A         P          II         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  NA
 Alkylindene mixture (each C12-
 C17).
Alkylbenzenesulfonic acid            C        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         A, B           .440, .908(a).........  NA
 (greater than 4%).

[[Page 186]]

 
Alkylbenzenesulfonic acid,           C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .440, .903, .908(a),    NA
 sodium salt solution.                                                                                               (b).
Alkyl(C7-C9) nitrates..........      B        S/P         II         NR    Open         Open         A, B           .409, .560, .1002.....  NA
Alkyl (C7-C11) phenol poly(4-        B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .488 \1\,   I-D
 12) ethoxylate.                                                                                                     .908(a), (b).
Alkyl(C8-C9) phenylamine in          A         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  NA
 aromatic solvent.
Alkyl(C10-C20, saturated and         C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  NA
 unsaturated) phosphite.
Alkyl(C8-C10) polyglucoside          C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .440, .908(a), (b)....  NA
 solution (65% or less).
Alkyl(C12-C14) polyglucoside         B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .409, .440, .908(a),    NA
 solution (55% or less).                                                                                             (b).
Alkyl(C8-C10)/(C12-C14): (40%        B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .409, .440, .908(a),    NA
 or less/60% or more)                                                                                                (b).
 polyglucoside solution (55% or
 less).
Alkyl(C8-C10)/(C12-C14): (50/        C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .440, .908(a), (b)....  NA
 50%) polyglucoside solution
 (55% or less).
Alkyl(C8-C10)/(C12-C14): (60%        C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .440, .908(a), (b)....  NA
 or more/40% or less)
 polyglucoside solution (55% or
 less).
Allyl alcohol..................      B        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A              .316, .408, .525,       I-C
                                                                                                                     .526, .527, .933,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Allyl chloride.................      B        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A              .316, .408, .525,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .526, .527, .1020.
Aluminum chloride (30% or            D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        NSR            .252, .526, .527,       I-B
 less), Hydrochloric acid (20%                                                                                       .554, .557, .933,
 or less) solution.                                                                                                  .1045, .1052.
2-(2-Aminoethoxy) ethanol......      D         S         III         NR    Open         Open         A, C, D        .236(b), (c), .409....  NA
Aminoethylethanolamine.........      D         S         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .236(a), (b), (c), (g)  NA
N-Aminoethylpiperazine.........      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .236(b), (c), .409,     I-C
                                                                                                                     .526.
2-Amino-2-methyl-1-propanol          D         S         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .236(a), (b), (c), (g)  I-D
 (90% or less).
Ammonia aqueous (28% or less),
 see Ammonium hydroxide (28% or
 less NH3).
Ammonium bisulfite solution          D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        No             .238(e), .526, .933,    NA
 (70% or less).                                                                                                      .1002.
Ammonium hydroxide (28% or less      C        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A, B, C        .236(b), (c), (f),      I-D
 NH3).                                                                                                               .526, .527.
Ammonium nitrate solution            D         S          II         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .238(d), .252, .336,    NA
 (greater than 45% and less                                                                                          .409, .554(a), (b).
 than 93%).
Ammonium sulfide solution (45%       B        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, C           .236(a), (b), (c),      I-D
 or less).                                                                                                           (g), .316, .408,
                                                                                                                     .525, .526, .527,
                                                                                                                     .933, .1002, .1020.
Ammonium thiocyanate (25% or         C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            None..................  NA
 less), Ammonium thiosulfate
 (20% or less) solution.

[[Page 187]]

 
Ammonium thiosulfate solution        C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .440, .908(b).........  NA
 (60% or less).
Amyl acetate (all isomers).....      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
tert-Amyl methyl ether.........      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  NA
Aniline........................      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A              .316, .408, .525,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .526, .933, .1020.
Anthracene oil (Coal tar
 fraction), see Coal tar.
Aviation alkylates.............      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        B              .409..................  I-C
 (C8 paraffins and iso-
 paraffins, b. pt. 95-120 deg.
 C).
Barium long chain (C11-C50)          B        S/P         II         NR    Open         Open         A, D           .408, .440, .525(a),    NA
 alkaryl sulfonate.                                                                                                  (c), (e), (d),
                                                                                                                     .908(a), .1020.
Barium long chain alkyl (C8-        [A]        P          II         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  NA
 C14) phenate sulfide.
Benzene hydrocarbon mixtures       C \2\      S/P        III        B/3    PV           Closed       A, B           .316, .409, .440,       I-D
 \2\ (having 10% Benzene or                                                                                          .526, .908(b), .933,
 more).                                                                                                              .1060.
Benzenesulfonyl chloride.......      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A, B, D        .236(a), (b), (c),      I-D
                                                                                                                     (g), .409, .526.
Benzene, Toluene, Xylene           @C \2\     S/P        III        B/3    PV           Closed       B              .316, .409, .440,       I-D
 mixtures \2\ (having 10%                                                                                            .526, .908(b), .1060.
 Benzene or more).
Benzyl acetate.................      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  I-D
Benzyl alcohol.................      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  I-D
Benzyl chloride................      B        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, B           .316, .408, .525,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .526, .527,
                                                                                                                     .912(a)(2), .1004,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Bromochloromethane.............      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        NSR            .236(a), (b), (d),      NA
                                                                                                                     .526, .933.
Butene oligomer................      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  NA
Butyl acetate (all isomers)....      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Butyl acrylate (all isomers)...      B        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .526,             I-D
                                                                                                                     .912(a)(1), .1002(a),
                                                                                                                     (b), .1004.
Butylamine (all isomers).......      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Restr        A              .236(b), (c), .316,     I-D
                                                                                                                     .408, .525, .526,
                                                                                                                     .527, .1020.
Butylbenzene (all isomers), see      A         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
 Alkyl(C3-C4)benzenes (all
 isomers).
Butyl benzyl phthalate.........      A         P          II         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  I-D
n-Butyl butyrate, see Butyl
 butyrate (all isomers).
Butyl butyrate (all isomers)...      B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
1,2-Butylene oxide.............      C        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A, C           .372, .409, .440,       I-B
                                                                                                                     .500, .526, .530(a),
                                                                                                                     (c), (e)-(g), (m)-
                                                                                                                     (o), .1010, .1011.
n-Butyl ether..................      C        S/P        III        B/3    PV           Restr        A, D           .409, .500, .525,       I-C
                                                                                                                     .526, .1020.
Butyl heptyl ketone............     [C]        P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  NA
iso-Butyl isobutyrate, see
 Butyl butyrate (all isomers).
Butyl methacrylate.............      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A, D           .409, .526,             I-D
                                                                                                                     .912(a)(1), .1002(a),
                                                                                                                     (b), .1004.
Butyl methacrylate, Decyl            D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A, C, D        .912(a)(1), .1002(a),   I-D
 methacrylate, Cetyl-Eicosyl                                                                                         (b), .1004.
 methacrylate mixture.
n-Butyl propionate.............      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Butyl toluene..................      @A        P          II         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  I-D
Butyraldehyde (all isomers)....      C        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .526............  I-C
Butyric acid...................      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .238(a), .554.........  I-D
Calcium alkyl(C9)phenol              A         P          II         NR    Open         Open         A, B           .409..................  NA
 sulfide, polyolefin
 phosphorosulfide mixture.
Calcium bromide, Zinc bromide
 solution, see Drilling brine
 (containing Zinc salts).

[[Page 188]]

 
Calcium hypochlorite solution        C        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        NSR            .236(a), (b)..........  NA
 (15% or less).
Calcium hypochlorite solution        B        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        NSR            .236(a), (b), .409....  NA
 (more than 15%).
Calcium long chain alkyl(C5-         C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  NA
 C10) phenate.
Calcium long chain alkyl             C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A, B           (.440, .903, .908(a))   NA
 salicylate (C13+).                                                                                                  \1\.
Camphor oil....................      B        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        A, B           .409..................  I-D
Carbolic oil...................      A        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A              .408, .440, .525,       NA
                                                                                                                     .526, .908(b), .933,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Carbon disulfide...............      B        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       C              .236(c), .252, .408,    I-A
                                                                                                                     .500, .515, .520,
                                                                                                                     .525, .526, .527,
                                                                                                                     .1020, .1040.
Carbon tetrachloride...........      B        S/P        III        B/3    PV           Closed       NSR            .316, .409, .525,       NA
                                                                                                                     .526, .527, .1020.
Cashew nut shell oil                 D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A, B           .526, .933............  NA
 (untreated).
Caustic potash solution........      C        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .236(a), (c), (g),      NA
                                                                                                                     .933.
Caustic soda solution..........      D         S         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .236(a), (c), (g),      NA
                                                                                                                     .933.
Cetyl-Eicosyl methacrylate          III        S         III         NR    Open         Open         A, C, D        .912(a)(1), .1002(a),   NA
 mixture.                                                                                                            (b), .1004.
Chlorinated paraffins (C10-C13)      A         P          I          NR    Open         Open         A              .408..................  NA
Chloroacetic acid (80% or less)      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       NSR            .238(e), .408, .440,    I-D
                                                                                                                     .554, .908(b).
Chlorobenzene..................      B        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A, B           .409, .526............  I-D
Chloroform.....................      B        S/P        III        B/3    PV           Restr        NSR            .409, .525, .526,       NA
                                                                                                                     .527, .1020.
(crude) Chlorohydrins..........      D         S          II        B/3    PV           Closed       A              .408, .525, .526,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .1020.
4-Chloro-2-methylphenoxyacetic       C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .236(a), (b), (c), (g)  NA
 acid, dimethylamine salt
 solution.
o-Chloronitrobenzene                 B        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, B, C, D     .316, .336, .408,       NA
                                                                                                                     .440, .525, .526,
                                                                                                                     .908(a), (b), .933,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
1-(4-Chlorophenyl)-4,4-dimethyl      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A, B, D        .409, .440, .488,       NA
 pentan-3-one.                                                                                                       .908(a), (b).
2- or 3-Chloropropionic acid...      C        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         A              .238(a), (b), .440,     NA
                                                                                                                     .554, .908(a), (b).
Chlorosulfonic acid............      C        S/P         I         B/3    PV           Closed       NSR            .408, .525, .526,       I-B
                                                                                                                     .527, .554, .555,
                                                                                                                     .602, .933, .1000,
                                                                                                                     .1020, .1045.
o-Chlorotoluene................      A        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A, B, C        .409, .526............  I-D
m-Chlorotoluene................      B        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A, B, C        .409, .526............  I-D
p-Chlorotoluene................      B        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        A, B, C        .409, .440, .526,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .908(b).
Chlorotoluenes (mixed isomers).      A        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        A, B, C        .409, .526............  I-D
Coal tar.......................      A        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        B, D           .409, .933, .1060.....  I-D
Coal tar naphtha solvent.......      B        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A, D           .409, .526, .933,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .1060.
Coal tar pitch (molten)........      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        B, D           .252, .409, .933,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .1060.
Cobalt naphthenate in solvent        A        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        A, D           .409, .526............  I-D
 naphtha.
Coconut oil, fatty acid........      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .440, .903, .908(a),    NA
                                                                                                                     (b).
Cottonseed oil, fatty acid.....     [C]        P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .440, .903, .908(a)...  NA
Creosote (coal tar)............      A        S/P         II         NR    Open         Open         A, B, D        .409..................  I-D
Creosote (wood)................      A        S/P         II         NR    Open         Open         A, B, D        .409..................  NA

[[Page 189]]

 
Cresols (all isomers)..........      A        S/P         II         NR    Open         Open         A, B           .409, .440, .908(b)...  I-D
Cresols with less than 5%
 Phenol, see Cresols (all
 isomers)
Cresols with 5% or more Phenol,
 see Phenol
Cresylate spent caustic              A        S/P         II         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .236(a), (c), .409,     NA
 (mixtures of Cresols and                                                                                            .933.
 Caustic soda solutions).
Cresylic acid, dephenolized....      A        S/P         II         NR    Open         Open         A, B           .409..................  NA
Cresylic acid, sodium salt
 solution, see Cresylate spent
 caustic.
Crotonaldehyde.................      A        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Restr        A              .316, .409, .525,       I-C
                                                                                                                     .526, .527, .1020.
Cumene (isopropylbenzene), see
 Propylbenzene (all isomers).
1,5,9-Cyclododecatriene........      A        S/P         I          4m    PV           Restr        A              .236(b), (c), .408,     I-D
                                                                                                                     .526, .912(a)(1),
                                                                                                                     .1002(a), (b), .1004.
Cycloheptane...................      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Cyclohexane....................      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .440, .908(b)...  I-D
Cyclohexanone..................      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .236(a), (b), .409,     I-D
                                                                                                                     .526.
Cyclohexanone, Cyclohexanol          D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .236(a), (b), .526....  I-D
 mixture.
Cyclohexyl acetate.............      B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Cyclohexylamine................      C        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A, C, D        .236(a), (b), (c),      I-D
                                                                                                                     (g), .409, .526.
1,3-Cyclopentadiene dimer            B         P          II         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .440, .488,       I-C
 (molten).                                                                                                           .908(a), (b).
Cyclopentane...................      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Cyclopentene...................      B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
p-Cymene.......................      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
iso-Decaldehyde................      @C        P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  I-C
n-Decaldehyde..................      @B        P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  I-C
Decanoic acid..................      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .440, .903, .908(a),    NA
                                                                                                                     (b).
Decene.........................      B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Decyl acetate..................      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  NA
(iso-, n-) Decyl acrylate......      A        S/P         II         NR    Open         Open         A, C, D        .236(a), (b), (c),      I-D
                                                                                                                     .409, .912(a)(1),
                                                                                                                     .1002(a), (b), .1004.
Decyl alcohol (all isomers)....      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .908(b)...  I-D
Decyloxytetrahydro-thiophene         A        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Restr        A              .409, .526............  NA
 dioxide.
Dibromomethane.................      C        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        NSR            .236(a), (b), (d),      NA
                                                                                                                     .408, .525(a), (c),
                                                                                                                     (d), (e), .526, .933,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Dibutylamine...................      C        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A, B, C, D     .236(b), (c), .409,     I-C
                                                                                                                     .526.
Dibutyl hydrogen phosphonate...      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .908(a)...  NA
ortho-Dibutyl phthalate........      A         P          II         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  I-D
Dichlorobenzene (all isomers)        B        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        A, B, D        .236(a), (b), .409,     I-D
 \1\.                                                                                                                .440, .488 \1\, .526,
                                                                                                                     .908(a), (b) \1\.
3,4-Dichloro-1-butene..........      B        S/P        III        B/3    PV           Closed       A, B, C        .316, .409, .525(a),    I-D
                                                                                                                     (c), (d), (e), .526,
                                                                                                                     .527, .933, .1020.
1,1-Dichloroethane.............      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A, B           .409, .526, .527......  I-D
2,2'-Dichloroethyl ether.......      B        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        A              .236(a), (b), .409,     I-C
                                                                                                                     .526.
1,6-Dichlorohexane.............      B        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        A, B           .409, .526............  NA
2,2'-Dichloroisopropyl ether...      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Restr        A, B, C, D     .236(a), (b), .316,     I-D
                                                                                                                     .408(a), .440, .525,
                                                                                                                     .526, .1020.
Dichloromethane................      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        NSR            .526..................  I-D
2,4-Dichlorophenol \4\.........      A        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        A, B, C, D     .236(a), (b), (c),      I-D
                                                                                                                     (g), .409, .440,
                                                                                                                     .500, .501, .526,
                                                                                                                     .908(b), .933.
2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid,      A        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .236(a), (b), (c),      NA
 diethanolamine salt solution.                                                                                       (g), .409.

[[Page 190]]

 
2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid,      A        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .236(a), (b), (c),      NA
 dimethylamine salt solution.                                                                                        (g), .409.
2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid,      A        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .236(a), (b), (c),      NA
 triisopropanolamine salt                                                                                            (g), .409.
 solution.
1,1-Dichloropropane............      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Restr        A, B           .409, .525, .526,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .1020.
1,2-Dichloropropane............      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Restr        A, B           .409, .525, .526,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .1020.
1,3-Dichloropropane............      D         S          II        B/3    PV           Restr        A, B           .409, .525, .526,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .1020.
1,3-Dichloropropene............      B        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, B           .316, .336, .408,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .525, .526, .527,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Dichloropropene,                     B        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, B, C, D     .316, .336, .408,       I-D
 Dichloropropane mixtures.                                                                                           .526, .527.
2,2-Dichloropropionic acid.....      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .238(e), .266, .500,    NA
                                                                                                                     .501, .554, .933.
Diethanolamine.................      D         S         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .236(b), (c)..........  NA
Diethylamine...................      C        S/P        III        B/3    PV           Restr        A              .236(a), (b), (c),      I-C
                                                                                                                     (g), .409, .525,
                                                                                                                     .526, .527, .1020.
Diethylaminoethanol, see
 Diethylethanolamine
2,6-Diethylaniline.............      C        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         B, C, D        .236(b), .409, .440,    NA
                                                                                                                     .908(b).
Diethylbenzene.................      A         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Diethylenetriamine.............      D         S         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .236(b), (c)..........  NA
Diethylethanolamine............      C        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A, C           .236(a), (b), (c),      I-C
                                                                                                                     (g), .409, .526.
Diethyl ether, see Ethyl ether
Di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric         C        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         A, B, C, D     .236(b), (c)..........  I-D
 acid.
Diethyl phthalate..............      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  I-D
Diethyl sulfate................      B        S/P         II         4m    PV           Closed       A, D           .236(a), (c), (d),      I-D
                                                                                                                     .409, .526, .933.
Diglycidyl ether of Bisphenol A      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .908(a)...  NA
Diglycidyl ether of Bisphenol F      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .908(a)...  NA
Di-n-hexyl adipate.............      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  NA
Diisobutylamine................      C        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        A, B, C, D     .236(a), (b), (c),      I-C
                                                                                                                     (g), .409, .525(a),
                                                                                                                     (c), (d), (e), .526,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Diisobutylcarbinol.............      @C        P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  I-D
Diisobutylene..................      B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Diisobutyl phthalate...........      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .908(a)...  I-D
Diisopropanolamine.............      C        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         A              .236(b), (c), .440,     I-D
                                                                                                                     .908(a), (b).
Diisopropylamine...............      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A              .236(b), (c), .408,     I-C
                                                                                                                     .525, .526, .527,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Diisopropylbenzene (all              A         P          II         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  I-D
 isomers).
N,N-Dimethylacetamide..........      D         S         III        B/3    PV           Restr        B              .236(b), .316, .525,    I-D
                                                                                                                     .526, .527, .1020.
N,N-Dimethylacetamide solution       D         S         III        B/3    PV           Restr        B              .236(b), .316, .526...  I-D
 (40% or less).
Dimethyl adipate...............      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .908(b)...  NA
Dimethylamine solution (45% or       C        S/P        III        B/3    PV           Restr        A, C, D        .236(a), (b), (c),      I-C
 less).                                                                                                              (g), .409, .525,
                                                                                                                     .526, .527, .1020.
Dimethylamine solution (over         C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, C, D        .236(a), (b), (c),      I-C
 45% but not over 55%).                                                                                              (g), .316, .408,
                                                                                                                     .525, .526, .527,
                                                                                                                     .1020.

[[Page 191]]

 
Dimethylamine solution (over         C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, C, D        .236(a), (b), (c),      I-C
 55% but not over 65%).                                                                                              (g), .316, .372,
                                                                                                                     .408, .525, .526,
                                                                                                                     .527, .1020.
2,6-Dimethylaniline............     [C]       S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         B, C, D        .236(b), .409, .440,    I-D
                                                                                                                     .908(b).
N,N-Dimethylcyclohexylamine....      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Restr        A, C           .236(a), (b), (c),      NA
                                                                                                                     (g), .316, .409,
                                                                                                                     .525, .526, .527,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
N,N-Dimethyldodecylamine.......      A        S/P         I          NR    Open         Open         B              .236(b), .408.........  NA
Dimethylethanolamine...........      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A, D           .236(b), (c), .409,     I-C
                                                                                                                     .526.
Dimethylformamide..............      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A, D           .236(b), .409, .526...  I-D
Dimethyl glutarate.............      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  NA
Dimethyl hydrogen phosphite....      B        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A, D           .526..................  NA
Dimethyl naphthalene sulfonic       [A]        P         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .409..................  NA
 acid, sodium salt solution.
Dimethyloctanoic acid..........      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .440, .903, .908(b)...  I-D
Dimethyl phthalate.............      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  I-D
Dimethyl succinate.............      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .440, .908(b).........  NA
Dinitrotoluene (molten)........      A        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A              .316, .408, .525,       I-C
                                                                                                                     .526, .527, .1003,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
1,4-Dioxane....................      D         S          II        B/3    PV           Closed       A              .408, .525, .526,       I-C
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Dipentene......................      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Diphenyl.......................      A         P          I          NR    Open         Open         B              .408..................  I-D
Diphenylamine (molten).........      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         B, D           .236(b), .409, .440,    NA
                                                                                                                     .488, .908(b).
Diphenylamines, alkylated......      A         P          II         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  NA
Diphenylamine, reaction product      A        S/P         I          NR    Open         Open         A              .408..................  NA
 with 2,2,4-Trimethylpentene.
Diphenyl, Diphenyl ether             A         P          I          NR    Open         Open         B              .408..................  I-D
 mixtures.
Diphenyl ether.................      A         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  I-D
Diphenyl ether, Biphenyl phenyl      A         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A, B           .409..................  NA
 ether mixture.
Diphenylmethane diisocyanate         B        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, B, C \6\,   .236(a), (b), .316,     NA
 \6\.                                                                                                 D              .409, .440, .500,
                                                                                                                     .501, .525, .526,
                                                                                                                     .602, .908(a), .1000,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Diphenylol propane-                  B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A, B           .409, .440, .908(a)...  NA
 epichlorohydrin resins.
Di-n-propylamine...............      C        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .236(b), (c), .409,     I-C
                                                                                                                     .525, .526, .1020.
Dithiocarbamate ester (C7-C35).      A         P          II         NR    Open         Open         A, D           .409..................  NA
Dodecanol......................      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .488,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .908(a), (b).
Dodecene (all isomers).........      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  I-D
Dodecyl alcohol, see Dodecanol.
Dodecylamine, Tetradecylamine        A        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        A, D           .236(b), (c), .409,     NA
 mixture.                                                                                                            .526.
Dodecyldimethylamine,                A        S/P         II         NR    Open         Open         B, C, D        .236(b), .409.........  NA
 Tetradecyldimethylamine
 mixture.
Dodecyl diphenyl ether               A        S/P         II         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .409..................  NA
 disulfonate solution.
Dodecyl hydroxypropyl sulfide..      A         P          I          NR    Open         Open         A              .408..................  NA
Dodecyl methacrylate...........     III        S         III         NR    Open         Open         A, C           .236(b), (c),           I-D
                                                                                                                     .912(a)(1), .1004.
Dodecyl-Octadecyl methacrylate       D         S         III         NR    Open         Restr        A, D           .236(b), .912(a)(1),    NA
 mixture.                                                                                                            .1002(a), (b), .1004.
Dodecyl-Pentadecyl methacrylate     III        S         III         NR    Open         Open         A, C, D        .912(a)(1), .1002(a),   NA
 mixture.                                                                                                            (b), .1004.
Dodecyl phenol.................      A         P          I          NR    Open         Open         A              .408..................  I-D
Drilling brine (containing Zinc      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .409..................  NA
 salts).
Epichlorohydrin................      A        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A              .316, .408, .525,       I-C
                                                                                                                     .526, .527, .1020.
Ethanolamine...................      D         S         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .236(b), (c), .526....  I-D
2-Ethoxyethyl acetate..........      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-C
Ethyl acrylate.................      A        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .526, .527,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .912(a)(1), .1002(a),
                                                                                                                     (b), .1004.
Ethylamine.....................      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       C, D           .236(b), (c), .252,     I-D
                                                                                                                     .372, .409, .525,
                                                                                                                     .526, .527, .1020.

[[Page 192]]

 
Ethylamine solution (72% or          C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, C           .236(a), (b), (c),      I-D
 less).                                                                                                              (g), .372, .408,
                                                                                                                     .525(a), (c), (d),
                                                                                                                     (e), .526, .527,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Ethyl amyl ketone..............      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Ethylbenzene...................      B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
N-Ethylbutylamine..............      C        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .236(a), (b), (c),      I-C
                                                                                                                     (g), .409, .525(a),
                                                                                                                     (c), (d), (e), .526,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Ethyl tert-butyl ether.........      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-C
Ethyl butyrate.................      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Ethylcyclohexane...............      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
N-Ethylcyclohexylamine.........      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A, C           .236(a), (b), (c),      I-C
                                                                                                                     (g), .409, .526.
S-Ethyl dipropylthiocarbamate..      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  NA
Ethylene chlorohydrin..........      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, D           .316, .408, .525,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .526, .527, .933,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Ethylene cyanohydrin...........      D         S         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  NA
Ethylenediamine................      C        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        A              .236(b), (c), .409,     I-D
                                                                                                                     .440, .526, .908(b).
Ethylene dibromide.............      B        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       NSR            .408, .440, .525,       NA
                                                                                                                     .526, .527, .908(b),
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Ethylene dichloride............      B        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        A, B           .236(b), .408, .526...  I-D
Ethylene glycol butyl ether          C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  I-C
 acetate.
Ethylene glycol diacetate......      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  I-D
Ethylene glycol ethyl ether
 acetate, see 2-Ethoxyethyl
 acetate
Ethylene glycol methyl ether         C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  I-C
 acetate.
Ethylene glycol monoalkyl ether      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-C
 Including:
 2-Ethoxyethanol
 Ethylene glycol butyl ether
 Ethylene glycol tert-butyl
 ether
 Ethylene glycol ethyl ether
 Ethylene glycol hexyl ether
 Ethylene glycol methyl ether
 Ethylene glycol n-propyl ether
 Ethylene glycol isopropyl
 ether
Ethylene oxide (30% or less),        C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, C           .252, .372, .408,       I-B
 Propylene oxide mixture.                                                                                            .440, .500, .525,
                                                                                                                     .526, .530, .1010,
                                                                                                                     .1011, .1020.
Ethyl ether....................     III        S          II         4m    PV           Closed       A              .236(g), .252, .372,    I-C
                                                                                                                     .408, .440, .500,
                                                                                                                     .515, .526, .527.
Ethyl-3-ethoxypropionate.......      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  NA
2-Ethylhexanol.................      @C        P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  I-D
2-Ethylhexyl acrylate..........      B        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .912(a)(1),       I-D
                                                                                                                     .1002(a), (b), .1004.
2-Ethylhexylamine..............      B        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Restr        A              .236(b), (c), .409,     I-D
                                                                                                                     .525, .526, .1020.
Ethyl hexyl phthalate..........      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  NA
Ethylidene norbornene..........      B        S/P        III        B/3    PV           Restr        A, B, C, D     .236(b), .409, .526...  NA
Ethyl methacrylate.............      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A, B, D        .409, .526,             I-D
                                                                                                                     .912(a)(1), .1002(a),
                                                                                                                     (b), .1004.

[[Page 193]]

 
Ethylphenol....................      A        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         B              .409..................  I-D
2-Ethyl-3-propylacrolein.......      A        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .526............  I-C
Ethyl toluene..................      B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Ferric chloride solutions......      C        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .409, .440, .554,       I-B
                                                                                                                     .555, .908(b), .1045.
Ferric nitrate, Nitric acid          C        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        NSR            .408, .526, .527,       I-B
 solution.                                                                                                           .554, .555, .559,
                                                                                                                     .933, .1045.
Fluorosilicic acid (30% or           C        S/P        III        B/3    PV           Restr        NSR            .252, .526, .527,       I-B
 less).                                                                                                              .554, .555, .933,
                                                                                                                     .1045.
Formaldehyde (50% or more),          #        S/P        III         4m    PV           Closed       A              .409, .526, .527......  I-B
 Methanol mixtures.
Formaldehyde solution (37% to        C        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .440, .526,       I-B
 50%).                                                                                                               .527, .908(b).
Formic acid....................      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .238(b), (c), .409,     I-D
                                                                                                                     .526, .527, .554,
                                                                                                                     .933.
Fumaric adduct of rosin, water       B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .409, .440, .908(a)...  NA
 dispersion.
Furfural.......................      C        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .526............  I-C
Furfuryl alcohol...............      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  I-C
Glutaraldehyde solution (50% or      D         S         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            None..................  NA
 less).
Glycidyl ester of C10 Trialkyl
 acetic acid, see Glycidyl
 ester of Tridecyl acetic acid.
Glycidyl ester of Tridecyl           B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  NA
 acetic acid.
Glyoxylic acid solution (50% or      D         S         III         NR    Open         Open         A, C, D        .238(e), .554(a), (b),  NA
 less).                                                                                                              (c), .933, .1002.
Heptane (all isomers), see           C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
 Alkanes(C6-C9) (all isomers).
Heptanol (all isomers).........      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Heptene (all isomers)..........      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Heptyl acetate.................      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  NA
Hexamethylenediamine (molten)..      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       C              .236(a), (b), (c),      NA
                                                                                                                     (g), .316, .336,
                                                                                                                     .409, .440, .525,
                                                                                                                     .526, .527, .908(a),
                                                                                                                     (b), .933, .1020.
Hexamethylenediamine solution..      C        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .236(b), (c), .409,     I-D
                                                                                                                     .440, .526, .908(b).
Hexamethylene diisocyanate \6\.      B        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, C \6\, D    .238(d), .252, .316,    NA
                                                                                                                     .336, .408, .500,
                                                                                                                     .501, .525, .526,
                                                                                                                     .527, .602, .1000,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Hexamethyleneimine.............      C        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        A, C           .236(a), (b), (c),      I-C
                                                                                                                     (g), .409, .526.
Hexane (all isomers), see            C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
 Alkanes(C6-C9).
Hexene (all isomers)...........      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Hexyl acetate..................      B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Hydrochloric acid..............      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        NSR            .252, .526, .527,       I-B
                                                                                                                     .554, .557, .933,
                                                                                                                     .1045, .1052.
Hydrogen peroxide solutions          C        S/P        III        B/3    PV           Closed       NSR            .238(a), (c), .355,     NA
 (over 8% but not over 60%).                                                                                         .409, .440(a)(1)&(2),
                                                                                                                     .500, .933,
                                                                                                                     .1004(a)(2), .1500.
Hydrogen peroxide solutions          C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       NSR            .238(a), (c), .355,     NA
 (over 60% but not over 70%).                                                                                        .409, .440(a)(1)&(2),
                                                                                                                     .500, .933,
                                                                                                                     .1004(a)(2), .1500.
2-Hydroxyethyl acrylate........      B        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A              .408, .525, .526,       NA
                                                                                                                     .912(a)(1), .933,
                                                                                                                     .1002(a), (b), .1004,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
N,N-bis(2-Hydroxyethyl)              B         P          II         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .440, .488,       NA
 oleamide.                                                                                                           .908(a), (b).
2-Hydroxy-4-                         C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .440, .903, .908(a)...  NA
 (methylthio)butanoic acid.
alpha-hydro-omega-
 Hydroxytetradeca(oxytetra
 methylene), see
 Poly(tetramethylene ether)
 glycols (mw 950-1050).
Icosa (oxypropane-2,3-diyl)s...      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .908(a)...  NA
Isophorone diamine.............      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .236(b), (c), .526....  NA

[[Page 194]]

 
Isophorone diisocyanate \6\....      B        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, B, C \6\,   .236(a), (b), .316,     NA
                                                                                                      D              .409, .500, .501,
                                                                                                                     .525, .526, .602,
                                                                                                                     .1000, .1020.
Isoprene.......................      C        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        B              .372, .409, .440,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .912(a)(1), .1002(a),
                                                                                                                     (b), .1004.
Isopropylbenzene, see
 Propylbenzene (all isomers)
Lactonitrile solution (80% or        B        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, C, D        .238(d), .252, .316,    I-D
 less).                                                                                                              .336, .408, .440,
                                                                                                                     .525, .526, .527,
                                                                                                                     .908(a), .912(a)(2),
                                                                                                                     .1002, .1004, .1020,
                                                                                                                     .1035.
Lauric acid....................      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .488,       NA
                                                                                                                     .908(a), (b).
Lauryl polyglucose (50% or
 less), see Alkyl(C12-C14)
 polyglucoside solution (55% or
 less).
Long chain alkaryl polyether         C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A, B           (.440, .903, .908(a))   NA
 (C11-C20).                                                                                                          \1\.
Long chain polyetheramine in         C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .440, .903,       I-D
 alkyl(C2-C4)benzenes.                                                                                               .908(a).
Magnesium long chain alkyl           C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A, B           (.440, .903, .908(a))   NA
 salicylate (C11+).                                                                                                  \1\.
Maleic anhydride \7\...........      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        \7\A, C        None..................  I-D
Mercaptobenzothiazol, sodium
 salt solution, see Sodium-2-
 mercaptobenzothiazol solution
Mesityl oxide..................      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .236(b), (c), .409,     I-D
                                                                                                                     .526.
Metam sodium solution..........      A        S/P         II         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .236(a), (b), (c),      NA
                                                                                                                     (g), .409.
Methacrylic acid...............      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .238(a), .526,          NA
                                                                                                                     .912(a)(1), .1002(a),
                                                                                                                     .1004.
Methacrylic resin in Ethylene        B        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        A, B           .236(b), .408, .440,    I-D
 dichloride.                                                                                                         .526, .908(a).
Methacrylonitrile..............      D         S          II        B/3    PV           Closed       A              .236(b), .316, .408,    NA
                                                                                                                     .525, .526, .527,
                                                                                                                     .912(a)(1), .1002(a),
                                                                                                                     .1004, .1020.
N-(2-Methoxy-1-methyl ethyl)-2-
 ethyl-6-methyl
 chloroacetanilide, see
 Metolachlor
Methyl acrylate................      B        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        A, B           .409, .526, .527,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .912(a)(1), .1002(a),
                                                                                                                     (b), .1004.
Methylamine solution (42% or         C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, C, D        .236(a), (b), (c),      I-D
 less).                                                                                                              (g), .316, .408,
                                                                                                                     .525, .526, .527,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Methylamyl acetate.............      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Methylamyl alcohol.............      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Methyl butyrate................      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Methylcyclohexane..............      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Methylcyclopentadiene dimer....      B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        B              .409..................  I-B
Methyl diethanolamine..........      D         S         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .236(b), (c)..........  I-C
Methylene chloride, see
 Dichloromethane
2-Methyl-6-ethylaniline........      C        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         A, B, C, D     None..................  NA
2-Methyl-5-ethylpyridine.......      B        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         A, D           .236(b), .409.........  I-D
Methyl formate.................      D         S          II        B/3    PV           Restr        A              .372, .408, .440,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .525, .526, .527,
                                                                                                                     .1020.

[[Page 195]]

 
Methyl heptyl ketone...........      B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
2-Methyl-2-hydroxy-3-butyne....     III        S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A, B, C, D     .236(b), (d), (f),      I-D
                                                                                                                     (g), .409, .526.
Methyl methacrylate............      D         S          II         4m    PV           Restr        A, B           .409, .526,             I-D
                                                                                                                     .912(a)(1), .1002(a),
                                                                                                                     (b), .1004.
Methyl naphthalene (molten)....      A        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        A, D           .409..................  I-D
2-Methyl-1-pentene (Hexene (all
 isomers)), see Alkanes(C6-C9).
4-Methyl-1-pentene (Hexene (all
 isomers)), see Alkanes(C6-C9).
Methyl tert-pentyl ether, see
 tert-Amyl methyl ether.
2-Methylpyridine...............      D         S          II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, C           .236(b), .408,          I-D
                                                                                                                     .525(a), (c), (d),
                                                                                                                     (e), .1020.
3-Methylpyridine...............      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, C           .236(b), .408,          I-D
                                                                                                                     .525(a), (c), (d),
                                                                                                                     (e), .1020.
4-Methylpyridine...............      D         S          II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, C, D        .236(b), .408, .440,    I-D
                                                                                                                     .525(a), (c), (d),
                                                                                                                     (e), .526, .908(b),
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Methyl salicylate..............      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  I-D
alpha-Methylstyrene............      A        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A, D           .409, .526,             I-D
                                                                                                                     .912(a)(1), .1002(a),
                                                                                                                     (b), .1004.
3-(Methylthio) propionaldehyde.      B        S/P        III        B/3    PV           Closed       B, C           .238(e), .316, .408,    NA
                                                                                                                     .525, .526, .527,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Metolachlor....................      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  NA
Morpholine.....................      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .236(b), (c), .409....  I-C
Motor fuel anti-knock compounds      A        S/P         I         B/3    PV           Closed       A, B, C        .252, .316, .336,       I-D
 (containing lead alkyls).                                                                                           .408, .525, .526,
                                                                                                                     .527, .933, .1020,
                                                                                                                     .1025.
Naphthalene (molten)...........      A        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        A, D           .409, .440, .908(b)...  I-D
Naphthalene sulfonic acid,          [A]        P         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .409..................  NA
 sodium salt solution (40% or
 less).
Naphthenic acid................      A         P          II         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  NA
Naphthenic acid, sodium salt        [A]        P          II         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .409..................  NA
 solution.
Neodecanoic acid...............      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  NA
Nitrating acid (mixture of           C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       NSR            .316, .408, .526,       I-B
 sulfuric and nitric acids).                                                                                         .527, .554, .555,
                                                                                                                     .556, .559, .602,
                                                                                                                     .933, .1000, .1045.
Nitric acid (70% or less)......      C        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        NSR            .408, .526, .527,       I-B
                                                                                                                     .554, .555, .559,
                                                                                                                     .933, .1045.
Nitrobenzene...................      B        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, D           .316, .336, .408,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .440, .525, .526,
                                                                                                                     .908(b), .933, .1020.
Nitroethane \7\................      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        \7\A, C        .236(b), .409, .526,    I-C
                                                                                                                     .1002(a), (b), .1003.
Nitroethane, 1-Nitropropane          D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        \7\A           .236(b), .409, .526,    I-C
 (each 15% or more) mixture \7\.                                                                                     .1002.
o-Nitrophenol (molten).........      B        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, C, D        .409, .440, .525,       NA
                                                                                                                     .526, .908(a), (b),
                                                                                                                     .1020.
1- or 2-Nitropropane \7\.......      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        \7\A, C        .409, .526............  I-C
Nitropropane (60%), Nitroethane      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        \7\A, C        .236(b), .409, .526...  I-C
 (40%) mixture \7\.
Nitropropane (20%), Nitroethane      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        \7\A, C        .236(b), .409, .526,    I-C
 (80%) mixture \7\.                                                                                                  .1002(a), (b), .1003.
(o-, p-) Nitrotoluene..........      B        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, B           .316, .408, .440,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .525, .526, .908(b),
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Nonane (all isomers), see            C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        B, C           .409..................  I-D
 Alkanes(C6-C9).
Nonene (all isomers)...........      B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Nonyl acetate..................      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  I-D
Nonyl alcohol (all isomers)....      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  I-D
Nonyl phenol...................      A         P          II         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  I-D
Nonyl phenol                         B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .488 \1\,   I-D
 poly(4+)ethoxylates.                                                                                                .908(a), (b).

[[Page 196]]

 
Noxious liquid, N.F., (1)            A         P          I          NR    Open         Open         A              .408..................  NA
 n.o.s. (``trade name''
 contains ``principal
 components'') ST 1, Cat A.
Noxious liquid, F., (2) n.o.s.       A         P          I          4m    PV           Restr        A              .408..................  NA
 (``trade name'' contains
 ``principal components'') ST
 1, Cat A.
Noxious liquid, N.F., (3)            A         P          II         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  NA
 n.o.s. (``trade name''
 contains ``principal
 components'') ST 2, Cat A.
Noxious liquid, F., (4) n.o.s.       A         P          II         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  NA
 (``trade name'' contains
 ``principal components'') ST
 2, Cat A.
Noxious liquid, N.F., (5)            B         P          II         NR    Open         Open         A              .409; (.440, .908) \1\  NA
 n.o.s. (``trade name''
 contains ``principal
 components'') ST 2, Cat B.
Noxious liquid, N.F., (6)            B         P          II         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .488,       NA
 n.o.s. (``trade name''                                                                                              .908(b); (.908(a))
 contains ``principal                                                                                                \1\.
 components'') ST 2, Cat B, mp.
 equal to or greater than 15
 deg. C.
Noxious liquid, F., (7) n.o.s.       B         P          II         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409; (.440, .908) \1\  NA
 (``trade name'' contains
 ``principal components'') ST
 2, Cat B.
Noxious liquid, F., (8) n.o.s.       B         P          II         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .440, .488,       NA
 (``trade name'' contains                                                                                            .908(b); (.908(a))
 ``principal components'') ST                                                                                        \1\.
 2, Cat B, mp. equal to or
 greater than 15 deg. C.
Noxious liquid, N.F., (9)            A         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  NA
 n.o.s. (``trade name''
 contains ``principal
 components'') ST 3, Cat A.
Noxious liquid, F., (10) n.o.s.      A         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  NA
 (``trade name'' contains
 ``principal components'') ST
 3, Cat A.
Noxious liquid, N.F., (11)           B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              (.409, .440, .908) \1\  NA
 n.o.s. (``trade name''
 contains ``principal
 components'') ST 3, Cat B.
Noxious liquid, N.F., (12)           B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .488,       NA
 n.o.s. (``trade name''                                                                                              .908(b); (.908(a))
 contains ``principal                                                                                                \1\.
 components'') ST 3, Cat B, mp.
 equal to or greater than 15
 deg. C.
Noxious liquid, F., (13) n.o.s.      B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409; (.440, .908) \1\  NA
 (``trade name'' contains
 ``principal components'') ST
 3, Cat B.

[[Page 197]]

 
Noxious liquid, F., (14) n.o.s.      B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .440, .488,       NA
 (``trade name'' contains                                                                                            .908(b); (.908(a))
 ``principal components'') ST                                                                                        \1\.
 3, Cat B, mp. equal to or
 greater than 15 deg. C.
Noxious liquid, N.F., (15)           C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              (.440, .903, .908) \1\  NA
 n.o.s. (``trade name''
 contains ``principal
 components'') ST 3, Cat C.
Noxious liquid, F., (16) n.o.s.      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              (.440, .903, .908) \1\  NA
 (``trade name'' contains
 ``principal components'') ST
 3, Cat C.
Octane (all isomers), see            C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
 Alkanes(C6-C9).
Octanol (all isomers)..........      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  I-D
Octene (all isomers)...........      B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Octyl acetate..................      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  I-D
Octyl aldehydes................      B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .440, .908(b)...  I-C
Octyl nitrates (all isomers),
 see Alkyl(C7-C9) nitrates.
Olefin mixtures (C5-C7)........      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Olefin mixtures (C5-C15).......      B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
alpha-Olefins (C6-C18) mixtures      B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .440, .908(a),    I-D
                                                                                                                     (b).
Oleum..........................      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       NSR            .316, .408, .440,       I-B
                                                                                                                     .526, .527, .554,
                                                                                                                     .555, .556, .602,
                                                                                                                     .908(a), .933, .1000,
                                                                                                                     .1045, .1052.
Oleylamine.....................      A        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .526............  NA
Palm kernel acid oil...........      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A, B           .440, .903, .908(a),    NA
                                                                                                                     (b).
Paraldehyde....................      C        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .440, .908(b)...  I-C
Paraldehyde-ammonia reaction         C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A              .236 (a), (b), (c),     NA
 product.                                                                                                            (g), .525(a), (c),
                                                                                                                     (e), .408, .526,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Pentachloroethane..............      B        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Restr        NSR            .316, .409, .525,       NA
                                                                                                                     .526, .1020.
1,3-Pentadiene.................      C        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A, B           .409, .526,             I-D
                                                                                                                     .912(a)(1), .1002,
                                                                                                                     .1004.
Pentane (all isomers)..........      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .372, .409............  I-D
n-Pentanoic acid (64%), 2-           D         S          II        B/3    Open         Closed       A, D           .238(a), .408,          I-D
 Methyl butyric acid (36%)                                                                                           .525(a), (c), (e),
 mixture.                                                                                                            .554, .933, .1020.
Pentene (all isomers)..........      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
n-Pentyl propionate............      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Perchloroethylene..............      B        S/P        III        B/3    PV           Restr        NSR            .409, .526............  NA
Phenol (or solutions with 5% or      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A              .408, .440, .488,       I-D
 more Phenol).                                                                                                       .525, .526, .908(a),
                                                                                                                     (b), .933, .1020.
1-Phenyl-l-xylyl ethane........      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A, B           None..................  NA
Phosphate esters, alkyl(C12-         B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  NA
 C14)amine.
Phosphoric acid................      D         S         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .554, .555, .558,       I-B
                                                                                                                     .1045, .1052, .933.
Phthalic anhydride (molten)....      C        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A, D           .440, .908(a), (b)....  I-D
Pinene, see the alpha- or beta-
 isomers.
alpha-Pinene...................      A         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
beta-Pinene....................      B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Pine oil.......................      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .440, .908(a).........  I-D
Polyalkyl(C18-C22) acrylate in       C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .440, .903,       NA
 Xylene.                                                                                                             .908(a).
Polyalkylene oxide polyol......      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .440, .903, .908(a)...  NA
Poly(2+)cyclic aromatics.......      A         P          II         4m    PV           Restr        A, D           .409..................  I-D
Polyethylene polyamines........      C        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         A              .236(b), (c), .400,     NA
                                                                                                                     .440, .908(b).
Polyferric sulfate solution....      C        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .238(d)...............  NA

[[Page 198]]

 
Polyisobutenamine in aliphatic       C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .903..................  NA
 (C10-C14) solvent.
Polymethylene polyphenyl             D         S          II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, C \6\, D    .236(a), (b), .409,     NA
 isocyanate \6\.                                                                                                     .500, .501, .525,
                                                                                                                     .526, .602, .1000,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Polyolefinamine (C28-C250).....      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  NA
Polyolefinamine in alkyl(C2-         C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .440, .903,       I-D
 C4)benzenes.                                                                                                        .908(a).
Polyolefin phosphorosulfide,         C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A, B           (.440, .903, .908(a))   NA
 barium derivative (C28-C250).                                                                                       \1\.
Poly(tetramethylene ether)           B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A, D           .409, .440, .488,       NA
 glycols (mw 950-1050).                                                                                              .908(a), (b).
Potassium hydroxide solution,
 see Caustic potash solution
Potassium oleate...............      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  NA
Potassium thiosulfate (50% or        C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            None..................  NA
 less).
iso-Propanolamine..............      C        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         A              .236(b), (c), .440,     I-D
                                                                                                                     .526, .903, .908(b).
n-Propanolamine................      C        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         A, D           .236(b), (c), .440,     NA
                                                                                                                     .526, .908(b).
Propionaldehyde................      C        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .316, .409, .526, .527  I-C
Propionic acid.................      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .238(a), .409, .527,    I-D
                                                                                                                     .554, .933.
Propionic anhydride............      C        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .238(a), .526.........  I-D
Propionitrile..................      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, D           .252, .316, .336,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .408, .525, .526,
                                                                                                                     .527, .1020.
iso-Propylamine................      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       C, D           .236(b), (c), .372,     I-D
                                                                                                                     .408, .440, .525,
                                                                                                                     .526, .527, .1020.
iso-Propylamine solution (70%        C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       C, D           .236(a), (b), (c),      I-D
 or less).                                                                                                           (g), .408, .440,
                                                                                                                     .525, .526, .527,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
n-Propylamine..................      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, C, D        .236(b), (c), .408,     I-D
                                                                                                                     .500, .525, .526,
                                                                                                                     .527, .1020.
n-Propylbenzene, see
 Propylbenzene (all isomers).
Propylbenzene (all isomers)....      A         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
n-Propyl chloride..............      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A, B           .409..................  I-D
iso-Propylcyclohexane..........      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .440, .903,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .908(a).
Propylene dimer................      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  NA
Propylene oxide................      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, C           .372, .408, .440,       I-B
                                                                                                                     .500, .526, .530,
                                                                                                                     .1010, .1011.
Propylene tetramer.............      B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Propylene trimer...............      B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
iso-Propyl ether...............      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .500, .515,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .912(a)(1).
Pyridine.......................      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .236(b), .409.........  I-D
Rosin, see Rosin oil...........
Rosin oil......................      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .488,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .908(a), (b).
Rosin soap (disproportionated)       B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  NA
 solution.
Sodium alkyl (C14-C17)
 sulfonates 60-65% solution,
 see Alkane (C14-C17) sulfonic
 acid, sodium salt solution.
Sodium aluminate solution......      D         S         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .236(a), (b), (c),      NA
                                                                                                                     (g), .933.

[[Page 199]]

 
Sodium borohydride (15% or           C        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .236(a), (b), (c),      NA
 less), Sodium hydroxide                                                                                             (g), .440, .908(a),
 solution.                                                                                                           .933.
Sodium chlorate solution (50%       III        S         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .409, .933, .1065.....  NA
 or less).
Sodium dichromate solution (70%      C        S/P         II        B/3    Open         Closed       NSR            .236(b), (c), .408,     NA
 or less).                                                                                                           .525, .933, .1020.
Sodium dimethyl naphthalene
 sulfonate solution, see
 Dimethyl naphthalene sulfonic
 acid, sodium salt solution.
Sodium hydrogen sulfide (6% or       B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .409..................  NA
 less), Sodium carbonate (3% or
 less) solution.
Sodium hydrogen sulfite              D         S         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            None..................  NA
 solution (45% or less).
Sodium hydrosulfide solution         B        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        NSR            .409, .440, .526,       NA
 (45% or less).                                                                                                      .908(b), .933.
Sodium hydrosulfide, Ammonium        B        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, C           .236(a), (b), (c),      NA
 sulfide solution.                                                                                                   (g), .316, .372,
                                                                                                                     .408, .525, .526,
                                                                                                                     .527, .933, .1002,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Sodium hydroxide solution, see
 Caustic soda solution
Sodium hypochlorite solution         C        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        NSR            .236(a), (b), .933....  NA
 (15% or less).
Sodium long chain alkyl             [C]        P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              (.440, .903, .908(a))   NA
 salicylate (C13+).                                                                                                  \1\.
Sodium-2-mercaptobenzothiazol        B        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .236(a), (b), (c),      NA
 solution.                                                                                                           (g), .409, .440,
                                                                                                                     .908(b), .933.
Sodium N-methyldithiocarbamate
 solution, see Metam sodium
 solution.
Sodium naphthalene sulfonate
 solution (40% or less), see
 Naphthalene sulfonic acid,
 sodium salt solution (40% or
 less).
Sodium naphthenate solution,
 see Naphthenic acid, sodium
 salt solution.
Sodium nitrite solution........      B        S/P         II         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .408, .525(a), (c),     NA
                                                                                                                     (d), (e), .1020.
Sodium petroleum sulfonate.....      B        S/P         II         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .908(a)...  NA
Sodium silicate solution.......      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  NA
Sodium sulfide solution (15% or      B        S/P        III        B/3    PV           Closed       NSR            .236(a), (b), .409,     NA
 less).                                                                                                              .440, .526, .908(b).
Sodium sulfite solution (25% or      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .409, .440, .908(b)...  NA
 less).
Sodium tartrates, Sodium             D         S         III         NR    Open         Open         A, B           .238(e)...............  NA
 succinates solution.
Sodium thiocyanate solution          B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .238(a), .409.........  NA
 (56% or less).
Styrene monomer................      B        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A, B           .236(b), .409,          I-D
                                                                                                                     .912(a)(1), .1002(a),
                                                                                                                     (b), .1004.
Sulfohydrocarbon, long chain         B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A, B           .409; (.440, .908(a))   NA
 (C18+) alkylamine mixture.                                                                                          \1\.
Sulfur (molten)................     III        S         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .252, .440, .526, .545  I-C
Sulfuric acid..................      C        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            .440, .554, .555,       I-B
                                                                                                                     .556, .602, .908(a),
                                                                                                                     (b), .933, .1000,
                                                                                                                     .1045, .1046, .1052.
Tall oil (crude and distilled).      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .488,       NA
                                                                                                                     .908(a), (b).
Tall oil, fatty acid (resin          C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .440, .908(a), (b)....  NA
 acids less than 20%).
Tall oil fatty acid, barium          B        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .908(a)...  NA
 salt.
Tall oil soap                        B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .908(a),    NA
 (disproportionated) solution.                                                                                       (b).
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane......      B        S/P        III        B/3    PV           Restr        NSR            .316, .409, .525,       NA
                                                                                                                     .526, .1020.
Tetraethylenepentamine \3\.....      D         S         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .236(b), (c), (g).....  I-C
Tetrahydrofuran................      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A, D           .409, .526,             I-C
                                                                                                                     .912(a)(2), .1004.

[[Page 200]]

 
Tetrahydronaphthalene..........      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  I-D
Tetramethylbenzene (all              A         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  I-D
 isomers).
Toluene........................      C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Toluenediamine.................      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, B, C, D     .236(a), (b), (c),      NA
                                                                                                                     (g), .316, .408,
                                                                                                                     .440, .525, .526,
                                                                                                                     .527, .908(a), (b),
                                                                                                                     .933, .1020.
Toluene diisocyanate \6\.......      C        S/P         II         4m    PV           Closed       A, C \6\, D    .236(b), .316, .408,    I-D
                                                                                                                     .440, .500, .501,
                                                                                                                     .525, .526, .527,
                                                                                                                     .602, .908(b), .1000,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
o-Toluidine....................      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, C           .316, .408, .525,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .526, .933, .1020.
Tributyl phosphate.............      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  I-D
1,2,3-Trichlorobenzene (molten)      A        S/P         I         B/3    PV           Closed       A, C, D        .316, .408, .440,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .526, .908(b), .933.
1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene.........      B        S/P         II         4m    PV           Restr        A, B,C,        .409, .440, .526,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .908(b),.
1,1,1-Trichloroethane..........      C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  I-D
1,1,2-Trichloroethane..........      C        S/P        III        B/3    PV           Restr        NSR            .409, .525, .526,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .933, .1020.
Trichloroethylene..............      C        S/P        III        B/3    PV           Restr        NSR            .316, .409, .525,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .526, .1020.
1,2,3-Trichloropropane.........      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, B, C, D     .316, .408, .525,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .526, .933, .1020.
1,1,2-Trichloro-1,2,2-               C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         NSR            None..................  NA
 trifluoroethane.
Tricresyl phosphate (less than       A         P          II         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  I-D
 1% of the ortho isomer).
Tricresyl phosphate (1% or more      A        S/P         I          4m    PV           Closed       A, B           .408, .525(a), (c),     I-D
 of the ortho isomer).                                                                                               (d), (e), .1020.
Tridecanoic acid...............      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .488,       NA
                                                                                                                     .908(a), (b).
Triethanolamine................      D         S         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .236(a), (b), (c), (g)  I-C
Triethylamine..................      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Restr        A, B, C        .236(b), (c), .409,     I-C
                                                                                                                     .525, .526, .527,
                                                                                                                     .1020.
Triethylbenzene................      A         P          II         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  I-D
Triethylene glycol di-(2-           [C]        P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  I-C
 ethylbutyrate).
Triethylenetetramine...........      D         S         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .236(a), (b), (c).....  I-C
Triethyl phosphite.............      B        S/P        III        B/3    PV           Restr        A, B, D        .409, .526............  NA
Triisopropylated phenyl              A         P          II         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  NA
 phosphates.
Trimethylacetic acid...........      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A, C           .238(a), .266, .554...  I-D
Trimethylamine solution (30% or      C        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, C           .236(a), (b), (c),      I-C
 less).                                                                                                              (g), .372, .408,
                                                                                                                     .440, .525, .526,
                                                                                                                     .527, .908(b), .1020.
Trimethylbenzene (all isomers).      A         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Trimethylhexamethylenediamine        D         S         III         NR    Open         Open         A, C           .236(a), (b), (c),      NA
 (2,2,4- and 2,4,4- isomers).                                                                                        (g), .409.
Trimethylhexamethylene               B        S/P         II        B/3    PV           Closed       A, C \6\       .316, .409, .500,       NA
 diisocyanate (2,2,4- and 2,4,4-                                                                                     .501, .525, .526,
  isomers) \6\.                                                                                                      .602, .1000, .1020.
2,2,4-Trimethyl-1,3-pentanediol-     C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              None..................  I-D
 1-isobutyrate.
Trimethyl phosphite............      #         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A, D           .409, .526, .602,       I-D
                                                                                                                     .1000.
1,3,5-Trioxane.................      D         S         III         4m    PV           Restr        A, D           .409..................  I-C
Trixylenyl phosphate...........      A         P          I          NR    Open         Open         A              .408..................  NA

[[Page 201]]

 
Trixylyl phosphate, see
 Trixylenyl phosphate.
Turpentine.....................      B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  I-D
Undecanoic acid................      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .440, .908(a), (b)....  NA
1-Undecene.....................      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409..................  I-D
1- Undecyl alcohol.............      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A              .409, .440, .908(b)...  I-D
Urea, Ammonium nitrate solution      C        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .236(b), .526.........  I-D
 (containing more than 2% NH3).
Valeraldehyde (all isomers)....      C        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .500, .526......  I-C
Vinyl acetate..................      C        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .912(a)(1),       I-D
                                                                                                                     .1002(a), (b), .1004.
Vinyl ethyl ether..............      C        S/P         II         4m    PV           Closed       A              .236(b), (d), (f),      I-C
                                                                                                                     (g), .252, .372,
                                                                                                                     .408, .440, .500,
                                                                                                                     .515, .526, .527,
                                                                                                                     .912(a)(1), .1002(a),
                                                                                                                     (b), .1004.
Vinylidene chloride............      D         S          II         4m    PV           Restr        B              .236(a), (b), .372,     I-D
                                                                                                                     .409, .440, .500,
                                                                                                                     .526, .527,
                                                                                                                     .912(a)(1), .1002(a),
                                                                                                                     (b), .1004.
Vinyl neodecanate..............      B        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         A, B           .409, .912(a)(1),       NA
                                                                                                                     .1002(a), (b), .1004.
Vinyltoluene...................      A        S/P        III         4m    PV           Restr        A, B, D        .236(a), (b), (c),      I-D
                                                                                                                     (g), .409,
                                                                                                                     .912(a)(1), .1002(a),
                                                                                                                     (b), .1004.
White spirit (low (15-20%)           B         P          II         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  NA
 aromatic).
Xylenes \8\ (ortho-, meta-,          C         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409, .440, .908(b)     I-D
 para-).                                                                                                             \8\.
Xylenes, Ethylbenzene (10% or        B         P         III         4m    PV           Restr        A              .409..................  NA
 more) mixture.
Xylenol........................      B        S/P        III         NR    Open         Open         A, B           .409, .440, .908(a),    NA
                                                                                                                     (b).
Zinc alkaryl dithiophosphate         C         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A, B           (.440, .903, .908(a))   NA
 (C7-C16).                                                                                                           \1\.
Zinc alkyl dithiophosphate (C3-      B         P         III         NR    Open         Open         A, B           .409; (.440, .908(a))   NA
 C14).                                                                                                               \1\.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Column Heading Footnotes:
a. The cargo name must be as it appears in this column (see 153.900, 153.907). Words in italics are not part of the cargo name but may be used in
  addition to the cargo name. When one entry references another entry by use of the word ``see'', and both names are in roman type, either name may be
  used as the cargo name (e.g., Diethyl ether, see Ethyl ether). However, the referenced entry is preferred.
The provisions contained in 46 CFR part 197, subpart C, apply to liquid cargoes containing 0.5% or more benzene by volume.
b. This column lists the IMO Annex II Pollution Category.
 A, B, C, D--NLS Category of Annex II of MARPOL 73/78.
 III--Appendix III of Annex II (non-NLS cargoes) of MARPOL 73/78.
 #--No determination of NLS status. For shipping on an oceangoing vessel, see 46 CFR 153.900(c).
 [ ]--A NLS category in brackets indicates that the product is provisionally categorized and that further data are necessary to complete the evaluation
  of its pollution hazards. Until the hazard evaluation is completed, the pollution category assigned is used.
 @--The NLS category has been assigned by the U.S. Coast Guard, in absence of one assigned by the IMO. The category is based upon a GESAMP Hazard
  Profile or by analogy to a closely related product having an NLS assigned.
c. This column lists the hazard(s) of the commodity:
 S--The commodity is included because of its safety hazards.
 P--The commodity is included because of its pollution hazards.
 S/P--The commodity is included because of both its safety and pollution hazards.
d. This column lists the type of containment system the cargo must have (see 153.230 through 153.232).
e. This column lists the height of any vent riser required (see 153.350 and 153.351).
f. This column lists any vent control valve required (see 153.355).
g. This column lists the type of gauging system required (see 153.400 through 153.406).
h. This column lists the type of fire protection system required. Where more than one system is listed, any listed system may be used. A dry chemical
  system may not be substituted for either type of foam system unless the dry chemical system is listed as an alternative or the substitution is
  approved by Commandant (G-MSO) (see 153.460). The types are as follows:
 A is a foam system for water soluble cargoes (polar solvent foam).
 B is a foam system for water insoluble cargoes (non-polar solvent foam).
 C is a water spray system.
 D is a dry chemical system.
 NSR means there is no special requirement applying to fire protection systems.
i. This column lists sections that apply to the cargo in addition to the general requirements of this part. The 153 Part number is omitted.

[[Page 202]]

 
j. This column lists the electrical hazard class and group used for the cargo when determining requirements for electrical equipment under Subchapter J
  (Electrical Engineering) of this chapter.
A number of electrical hazard class and group assignments are based upon that which appears in ``Classification of Gases, Liquids and Volatile Solids
  Relative to Explosion-Proof Electrical Equipment'', Publication NMAB 353-5, National Academy Press, 1982, when not appearing in NFPA 497M, ``Manual
  for Classification of Gases, Vapors and Dusts for Electrical Equipment in Hazardous (Classified) Locations.''
The I-B electrical hazard does not apply to weather deck locations (see 46 CFR Part 111) for inorganic acids: Chlorosulfonic acid; Hydrochloric acid;
  Nitrating acid; Nitric acid (70% or less); Oleum; Phosphoric acid; Sulfuric acid.
Abbreviations used in the Table:
 NR--No requirement.
 NA--Not applicable.
Abbreviations for Noxious Liquid cargoes:
 N.F.--non-flammable (flash point greater than 60 deg C (140 deg F) closed cup (cc)).
 F.--flammable (flash point less than or equal to 60 deg C (140 deg F) closed cup (cc)).
 n.o.s.--not otherwise specified.
 ST--Ship type.
 Cat--Pollution category.
Footnotes for Specific Cargoes:
1. Special applicability:
 153.440 and .908(a) apply to the chemical, and mixtures containing the chemical, with a viscosity of 25 mPa.s at 20 deg C (68 deg F).
 153.440 and .908(b) apply to the chemical, and mixtures containing the chemical, with a melting point of 0 deg C (32 deg F) and above.
 153.488 applies to the chemical, and mixtures containing the chemical, with a melting point of 15 deg C (59 deg F) and above.
2. Benzene containing cargoes.
 Applies to mixtures containing no other components with safety hazards and where the pollution category is C or less.
3. Diammonium salt of Zinc ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid solution; Tetraethylenepentamine.
 Aluminum is a questionable material of construction with this cargo since pitting and corrosion has been reported. The IMO Chemical Code prohibits
  aluminum as a material of construction for this cargo.
4. 2,4-Dichlorophenol.
 Some tank pitting has been reported when this cargo is contaminated with water, including moisture in the air. The IMO Chemical Code requires that the
  vapor space over this cargo be kept dry.
5. Reserved.
6. Diphenylmethane diisocyanate; Hexamethylene diisocyanate; Isophorone diisocyanate; Polymethylene polyphenyl isocyanate; Toluene diisocyanate;
  Trimethylhexamethylene diisocyanate (2,2,4- and 2,4,4- isomers).
 Water is effective in extinguishing open air fires but will generate hazardous quantities of gas if put on the cargo in enclosed spaces.
7. Maleic anhydride; Nitroethane; Nitroethane, 1-Nitropropane mixtures; 1- or 2-Nitropropane; Nitropropane, Nitroethane mixtures.
 Dry chemical extinguishers should not be used on fires involving these cargoes since some dry chemicals may react with the cargo and cause an
  explosion.
8. Xylenes.
 Special requirement .908(b) only applies to the para- (p-) isomer, and mixtures containing the para-isomer having a melting point of 0 deg C (32 deg F)
  or more.


[USCG 2000-7079, 65 FR 67196, Nov. 8, 2000]

[[Page 203]]

 Table 2 to Part 153--Cargoes Not Regulated Under Subchapters D or O of 
       This Chapter When Carried in Bulk on Non-oceangoing Barges

    The cargoes listed in this table are not regulated under subchapter 
D or O of this title when carried in bulk on non-oceangoing barges. 
Category A, B, or C noxious liquid substance (NLS) cargo, as defined in 
Sec. 153.2 of this chapter, listed in this table, or any mixture 
containing one or more of these cargoes, must be carried under this 
subchapter if carried in bulk on an oceangoing ship. Requirements for 
Category D NLS cargoes and mixtures of non-NLS cargoes with Category D 
NLS cargoes are in 33 CFR part 151.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Pollution
                          Cargoes                             Category
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2-Amino-2-hydroxymethyl-1,3-propanediol solution..........          III
Ammonium hydrogen phosphate solution......................        D
Ammonium lignosulfonate solution, see also Lignin liquor..       III
Ammonium nitrate solution (45% or less)...................            D
Ammonium nitrate, Urea solution (2% or less NH 3), see                D
 also Urea, Ammonium nitrate solution (2% or less NH3)....
Ammonium phosphate, Urea solution, see also Urea, Ammonium            D
 phosphate solution.......................................
Ammonium polyphosphate solution...........................            D
Ammonium sulfate solution (20% or less)...................            D
Ammonium thiosulfate solution (60% or less)...............             C
Apple juice...............................................          III
Calcium bromide solution..................................          III
Calcium carbonate slurry..................................          III
Calcium chloride solution.................................          III
Calcium hydroxide slurry..................................            D
Calcium lignosulfonate solution, see also Lignin liquor...          III
Calcium nitrate, Magnesium nitrate, Potassium chloride              III
 solution.................................................
Caramel solutions.........................................          III
Chlorinated paraffins (C14-C17) (with 52% Chlorine).......          III
2-Chloro-4-ethylamino-6-isopropylamino-5-triazine solution            #
Choline chloride solution.................................            D
Clay slurry...............................................          III
Coal slurry...............................................          III
Dextrose solution, see Glucose solution...................  ............
Diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid, pentasodium salt               III
 solution.................................................
1,4-Dihydro-9,10-dihydroxy anthracene, disodium salt                  D
 solution.................................................
Dodecenylsuccinic acid, dipotassium salt solution.........            D
Drilling brine (containing Calcium, Potassium, or Sodium            III
 salts) (see also Potassium chloride solution (10% or
 more))...................................................
Drilling brine (containing Zinc salts)....................            B
Drilling mud (low toxicity) (if non-flammable and non-            [III]
 combustible).............................................
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, tetrasodium salt solution            D
Ethylene-Vinyl acetate copolymer (emulsion)...............          III
Ferric hydroxyethylethylenediamine triacetic acid,                    D
 trisodium salt solution..................................
Fish solubles (water based fish meal extracts)............          III
Fructose solution.........................................            #
Glucose solution..........................................          III
Glycine, sodium salt solution.............................          III
Hexamethylenediamine adipate solution.....................            D
N-(Hydroxyethyl)ethylenediamine triacetic acid, trisodium             D
 salt solution............................................
Kaolin clay solution......................................          III
Kaolin slurry.............................................          III
Kraft pulping liquor (free alkali content, 1% or less)                #
 including: Black, Green, or White liquor.................
Lignin liquor (free alkali content, 1% or less)                       #
  including:..............................................
    Ammonium lignosulfonate solution......................          III
    Calcium lignosulfonate solution.......................          III
    Sodium lignosulfonate solution........................          III
Lignin sulfonic acid, sodium salt solution, see also                III
 Lignin liquor or Sodium lignosulfonate solution..........
Magnesium chloride solution...............................          III
Magnesium hydroxide slurry................................          III
Milk......................................................          III
Molasses..................................................          III
Molasses residue (from fermentation)......................        [III]
Naphthenic acid, sodium salt solution.....................          [A]
Noxious liquid, N.F., (1) n.o.s. (``trade name'' contains             A
 ``principle components'') ST 1, Cat A (if non-flammable
 or non-combustible)......................................
Noxious liquid, N.F., (3) n.o.s. (``trade name'' contains             A
 ``principle components'') ST 2, Cat A (if non-flammable
 or non-combustible)......................................
Noxious liquid, N.F., (5) n.o.s. (``trade name'' contains             B
 ``principle components'') ST 2, Cat B (if non-flammable
 or non-combustible)......................................
Noxious liquid, N.F., (6) n.o.s. (``trade name'' contains             B
 ``principle components'') ST 2, Cat B, mp. equal to or
 greater than 15 deg. C (if non-flammable or non-
 combustible).............................................
Noxious liquid, N.F., (9) n.o.s. (``trade name'' contains             A
 ``principle components'') ST 3, Cat A (if non-flammable
 or non-combustible)......................................
Noxious liquid, N.F., (11) n.o.s. (``trade name'' contains            B
 ``principle components'') ST 3, Cat B (if non-flammable
 or non-combustible)......................................
Noxious liquid, N.F., (12) n.o.s. (``trade name'' contains            B
 ``principle components'') ST 3, Cat B, mp. equal to or
 greater than 15 deg. C (if non-flammable or non-
 combustible).............................................
Noxious liquid, N.F., (15) n.o.s. (``trade name'' contains             C
 ``principle components'') ST 3, Cat C (if non-flammable
 or non-combustible)......................................
Noxious liquid, n.o.s. (17) (``trade name,'' contains                 D
 ``principal components''), Category D (if non-flammable
 or non-combustible)......................................
Non-noxious liquid, n.o.s. (18) (``trade name,'' contains           III
 ``principal components''), Appendix III (if non-flammable
 or non-combustible)......................................
Pentasodium salt of Diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid     ............
 solution, see Diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid,
 pentasodium salt solution................................
Polyaluminum chloride solution............................          III
Potassium chloride solution (10% or more)(see also the              III
 drilling brines entry)...................................
Sewage sludge, treated (treated so as to pose no                      #
 additional decompositional and fire hazard; stable, non-
 corrosive, non-toxic, non-flammable).....................
Silica slurry.............................................        [III]
Sludge, treated (treated so as to pose no additional                  #
 decompositional and fire hazard; stable, non-corrosive,
 non-toxic, non-flammable)................................
Sodium acetate, Glycol, Water mixture (containing 1% or               #
 less, Sodium hydroxide) (if non-flammable or non-
 combustible).............................................
Sodium aluminosilicate slurry.............................          III
Sodium carbonate solution.................................            D

[[Page 204]]

 
Sodium lignosulfonate solution, see also Lignin liquor....          III
Sodium naphthenate solution (free alkali content, 3% or     ............
 less), see Naphthenic acid, sodium salt solution.........
Sodium poly(4+)acrylate solution..........................          III
Sodium silicate solution..................................             C
Sodium sulfate solution...................................          III
Sorbitol solution.........................................          III
Sulfonated polyacrylate solution..........................          III
Tetrasodium salt of Ethylenediaminetetraaacetic acid        ............
 solution, see Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid,
 tetrasodium salt solution................................
Titanium dioxide slurry...................................          III
1,1,1-Trichloroethane.....................................             C
1,1,2-Trichloro-1,2,2-trifluoroethane.....................             C
Trisodium salt of N-(Hydroxyethyl)ethylenediamine           ............
 triacetic acid solution, see N-
 (Hydroxyethyl)ethylenediamine triacetic acid, trisodium
 salt solution............................................
Urea, Ammonium mono- and di-hydrogen phosphate, Potassium             D
 chloride solution........................................
Urea, Ammonium nitrate solution (2% or less NH3), see also            D
 Ammonium nitrate, Urea solution (2% or less).............
Urea, Ammonium phosphate solution, see also Ammonium                  D
 phosphate, Urea solution.................................
Urea solution.............................................          III
Vanillan black liquor (free alkali content, 1% or less)...            #
Vegetable protein solution (hydrolysed)...................          III
Water.....................................................          III
Zinc bromide, Calcium bromide solution, see Drilling brine
 (containing Zinc salts)..................................
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Explanation of Symbols: As used in this table, the following stand for:
A, B, C, D--NLS Category of Annex II of MARPOL 73/78.
I--Considered an ``oil'' under Annex I of MARPOL 73/78.
III--Appendix III of Annex II (non-NLS cargoes) of MARPOL 73/78.
LFG--Liquefied flammable gas.
#--No determination of NLS status. For shipping on an oceangoing vessel,
  see 46 CFR 153.900(c).
[ ]--A NLS category in brackets indicates that the product is
  provisionally categorized and that further data are necessary to
  complete the evaluation of its pollution hazards. Until the hazard
  evaluation is completed, the pollution category assigned is used.
@The NLS category has been assigned by the U.S. Coast Guard, in absence
  of one assigned by the IMO. The category is based upon a GESAMP Hazard
  Profile or by analogy to a closely related product having an NLS
  assigned.
 
Abbreviations for Noxious liquid Cargoes:
N.F.--non-flammable (flash point greater than 60 degrees C (140 degrees
  F) cc).
n.o.s.--not otherwise specified.
ST--Ship type.
Cat--Pollution category.


[CGD 88-100, 54 FR 43584, Oct. 26, 1989; CGD 92-100, 59 FR 17044, Apr. 
11, 1994, as amended by CGD 94-900, 59 FR 45142, Aug. 31, 1994; CGD 94-
902, 60 FR 34043, June 29, 1995; CGD 95-900, 60 FR 34052, June 29, 1995; 
USCG 2000-7079, 65 FR 67213, Nov. 8, 2000]

                    Appendix I to Part 153 [Reserved]

         Appendix II to Part 153--Metric Units Used in Part 153

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                          Equivalent to English
              Parameter                    Metric (SI unit)           Abbreviation           or common metric
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Force................................  Newton.................  N......................  0.225 lbs.
Length...............................  Meter..................  m......................  39.37 in.
                                       Centimeter.............  cm.....................  .3937 in.
Pressure.............................  Pascal.................  Pa.....................  1.450x10-4 lbs/in \2\.
                                       Kilo-Pascal (1,000       kPa....................  0.145 lbs/in \2\.
                                        Pascals).
                                       Kilo-Pascal............  kPa....................  1.02x10-2 kg/cm\2\.
                                       ......do...............  kPa....................  1x10 \3\ N/m \2\.
Temperature..........................  Degree Celsius.........  <deg>C.................  5/9 (<deg>F-32).
Viscosity............................  milli-Pascal second....  mPa. sec...............  1.0 centipoise.
Volume...............................  Cubic meter............  m \3\..................  264 gallons (gal).
                                       ......do...............  m \3\..................  35.3 ft\3\.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[CGD 73-96, 42 FR 49027, Sept. 26, 1977, as amended by CGD 78-128, 47 FR 
21212, May 17, 1982; CGD 81-101, 52 FR 7799, Mar. 12, 1987. Redesignated 
by CGD 92-100, 59 FR 17045, Apr. 11, 1994]


<R03>
PART 154--SAFETY STANDARDS FOR SELF-PROPELLED VESSELS CARRYING BULK LIQUEFIED 
GASES--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
154.1 Incorporation by reference.
154.3 Purpose.
154.5 Applicability.
154.7 Definitions, acronyms, and terms.
154.9 Issuance of documents.
154.12 Existing gas vessel: Endorsements and requirements.
154.15 U.S. flag vessel: Endorsement application.
154.17 U.S. flag vessel: Certificate of Inspection endorsement.
154.19 U.S. flag vessel: IMO certificate issuance.
154.22 Foreign flag vessel: Certificate of Compliance endorsement 
          application.
154.24 Foreign flag vessel: IMO Certificate.
154.30 Liquefied gases not included in table 4.
154.32 Equivalents.
154.34 Special approval: Requests.
154.36 Correspondence and vessel information: Submission.
154.40 Right of appeal.

[[Page 205]]

                    Subpart B--Inspections and Tests

            Examination Requirements for Foreign Flag Vessels

154.150 Examination required for a Certificate of Compliance.
154.151 Procedures for having the Coast Guard examine a vessel for a 
          Certificate of Compliance.

             Subpart C--Design, Construction, and Equipment

                             Hull Structure

154.170 Outer hull steel plating.
154.172 Contiguous steel hull structure.
154.174 Transverse contiguous hull structure.
154.176 Longitudinal contiguous hull structure.
154.178 Contiguous hull structure: Heating system.
154.180 Contiguous hull structure: Welding procedure.
154.182 Contiguous hull structure: Production weld test.
154.188 Membrane tank: Inner hull steel.
154.195 Aluminum cargo tank: Steel enclosure.

            Ship Survival Capability and Cargo Tank Location

154.200 Stability requirements: General.
154.235 Cargo tank location.

                            Ship Arrangements

154.300 Segregation of hold spaces from other spaces.
154.305 Segregation of hold spaces from the sea.
154.310 Cargo piping systems.
154.315 Cargo pump and cargo compressor rooms.
154.320 Cargo control stations.
154.325 Accommodation, service, and control spaces.
154.330 Openings to accommodation, service, or control spaces.
154.340 Access to tanks and spaces in the cargo area.
154.345 Air locks.
154.350 Bilge and ballast systems in the cargo area.
154.355 Bow and stern loading piping.
154.356 Cargo emergency jettisoning piping.

                        Cargo Containment Systems

154.401 Definitions.
154.405 Design vapor pressure (P<INF>o</INF>) of a cargo tank.
154.406 Design loads for cargo tanks and fixtures: General.
154.407 Cargo tank internal pressure head.
154.408 Cargo tank external pressure load.
154.409 Dynamic loads from vessel motion.
154.410 Cargo tank sloshing loads.
154.411 Cargo tank thermal loads.
154.412 Cargo tank corrosion allowance.

                             Integral Tanks

154.418 General.
154.419 Design vapor pressure.
154.420 Tank design.
154.421 Allowable stress.

                             Membrane Tanks

154.425 General.
154.426 Design vapor pressure.
154.427 Membrane tank system design.
154.428 Allowable stress.
154.429 Calculations.
154.430 Material test.
154.431 Model test.
154.432 Expansion and contraction.

                           Semi-Membrane Tanks

154.435 General.
154.436 Design vapor pressure.

                         Independent Tank Type A

154.437 General.
154.438 Design vapor pressure.
154.439 Tank design.
154.440 Allowable stress.

                         Independent Tank Type B

154.444 General.
154.445 Design vapor pressure.
154.446 Tank design.
154.447 Allowable stress.
154.448 Calculations.
154.449 Model test.

          Independent Tank Type C and Process Pressure Vessels

154.450 General.
154.451 Design vapor pressure.
154.452 External pressure.
154.453 Failure to meet independent tank type C standards.

                            Secondary Barrier

154.459 General.
154.460 Design criteria.

                               Insulation

154.465 General.
154.466 Design criteria.
154.467 Submission of insulation information.

                             Support System

154.470 General.
154.471 Design criteria.
154.476 Cargo transfer devices and means.

                    Cargo and Process Piping Systems

154.500 Cargo and process piping standards.
154.503 Piping and piping system components: Protection from movement.

[[Page 206]]

154.506 Mechanical expansion joint: Limits in a piping system.
154.512 Piping: Thermal isolation.
154.514 Piping: Electrical bonding.
154.516 Piping: Hull protection.
154.517 Piping: Liquid pressure relief.
154.519 Piping relief valves.
154.520 Piping calculations.
154.522 Materials for piping.
154.524 Piping joints: Welded and screwed couplings.
154.526 Piping joints: Flange connection.
154.528 Piping joints: Flange type.
154.530 Valves: Cargo tank MARVS 69 kPa gauge (10 psig) or lower.
154.532 Valves: Cargo tank MARVS greater than 69 kPa gauge (10 psig).
154.534 Cargo pumps and cargo compressors.
154.536 Cargo tank gauging and measuring connections.
154.538 Cargo transfer connection.
154.540 Quick-closing shut-off valves: Emergency shut-down system.
154.544 Quick-closing shut-off valves.
154.546 Excess flow valve: Closing flow.
154.548 Cargo piping: Flow capacity.
154.550 Excess flow valve: Bypass.

                               Cargo Hose

154.551 Cargo hose: General.
154.552 Cargo hose: Compatibility.
154.554 Cargo hose: Bursting pressure.
154.556 Cargo hose: Maximum working pressure.
154.558 Cargo hose: Marking.
154.560 Cargo hose: Prototype test.
154.562 Cargo hose: Hydrostatic test.

                                Materials

154.605 Toughness test.
154.610 Design temperature not colder than 0 <deg>C (32 <deg>F).
154.615 Design temperature below 0 <deg>C (32 <deg>F) and down to -55 
          <deg>C (-67 <deg>F).
154.620 Design temperature below -55 <deg>C (-67 <deg>F) and down to -
          165 <deg>C (-265 <deg>F).
154.625 Design temperature below 0 <deg>C (32 <deg>F) and down to -165 
          <deg>C (-265 <deg>F).
154.630 Cargo tank material.

                              Construction

154.650 Cargo tank and process pressure vessel welding.
154.655 Stress relief for independent tanks type C.
154.660 Pipe welding.
154.665 Welding procedures.

                 Cargo Pressure and Temperature Control

154.701 Cargo pressure and temperature control: General.
154.702 Refrigerated carriage.
154.703 Methane (LNG).
154.705 Cargo boil-off as fuel: General.
154.706 Cargo boil-off as fuel: Fuel lines.
154.707 Cargo boil-off as fuel: Ventilation.
154.708 Cargo boil-off as fuel: Valves.
154.709 Cargo boil-off as fuel: Gas detection equipment.

                           Cargo Vent Systems

154.801 Pressure relief systems.
154.802 Alternate pressure relief settings.
154.804 Vacuum protection.
154.805 Vent masts.
154.806 Capacity of pressure relief valves.

            Atmospheric Control in Cargo Containment Systems

154.901 Atmospheric control within cargo tanks and cargo piping systems.
154.902 Atmospheric control within hold and interbarrier spaces.
154.903 Inert gas systems: General.
154.904 Inert gas system: Controls.
154.906 Inert gas generators.
154.908 Inert gas generator: Location.
154.910 Inert gas piping: Location.
154.912 Inerted spaces: Relief devices.

                               Electrical

154.1000 Applicability.
154.1002 Definition.
154.1005 Equipment approval.
154.1010 Electrical equipment in gas-dangerous space or zone.
154.1015 Lighting in gas-dangerous space.
154.1020 Emergency power.

                              Firefighting

                Firefighting System: Exterior Water Spray

154.1105 Exterior water spray system: General.
154.1110 Areas protected by system.
154.1115 Discharge.
154.1120 Nozzles.
154.1125 Pipes, fittings, and valves.
154.1130 Sections.
154.1135 Pumps.

                    Firefighting System: Dry Chemical

154.1140 Dry chemical system: General.
154.1145 Dry chemical supply.
154.1150 Distribution of dry chemical.
154.1155 Hand hose line: Coverage.
154.1160 Monitor coverage of system.
154.1165 Controls.
154.1170 Hand hose line: General.

                Cargo Area: Mechanical Ventilation System

154.1200 Mechanical ventilation system: General.
154.1205 Mechanical ventilations system: Standards.
154.1210 Hold space, void space, cofferdam, and spaces containing cargo 
          piping.

                             Instrumentation

154.1300 Liquid level gauging system: General.

[[Page 207]]

154.1305 Liquid level gauging system: Standards.
154.1310 Closed gauge shut-off valve.
154.1315 Restricted gauge excess flow valve.
154.1320 Sighting ports, tubular gauge glasses, and flat plate type 
          gauge glasses.
154.1325 Liquid level alarm system: All cargo tanks.
154.1330 Liquid level alarm system: Independent tank type C.
154.1335 Pressure and vacuum protection.
154.1340 Temperature measuring devices.
154.1345 Gas detection.
154.1350 Flammable gas detection system.
154.1360 Oxygen analyzer.
154.1365 Audible and visual alarms.
154.1370 Pressure gauge and vacuum gauge marking.
154.1375 Readout for temperature measuring device: Marking.

                            Safety Equipment

154.1400 Safety equipment: All vessels.
154.1405 Respiratory protection.
154.1410 Decontamination shower.
154.1415 Air compressor.
154.1420 Stretchers and equipment.
154.1430 Equipment locker.
154.1435 Medical first aid guide.
154.1440 Antidotes.

          Subpart D--Special Design and Operating Requirements

154.1700 Purpose.
154.1702 Materials of construction.
154.1705 Independent tank type C.
154.1710 Exclusion of air from cargo tank vapor spaces.
154.1715 Moisture control.
154.1720 Indirect refrigeration.
154.1725 Ethylene oxide.
154.1730 Ethylene oxide: Loading and off-loading.
154.1735 Methyl acetylene-propadiene mixture.
154.1740 Vinyl chloride: Inhibiting and inerting.
154.1745 Vinyl chloride: Transferring operations.
154.1750 Butadiene or vinyl chloride: Refrigeration system.
154.1755 Nitrogen.
154.1760 Liquid ammonia.

                          Subpart E--Operations

154.1800 Special operating requirements under Part 35 of this chapter.
154.1801 Certificates, letters, and endorsements: U.S. flag vessels.
154.1802 Certificates, letters, and endorsements: Foreign flag vessels.
154.1803 Expiration of Certificates of Compliance.
154.1804 Document posted in wheelhouse.
154.1806 Regulations on board.
154.1808 Limitations in the endorsement.
154.1809 Loading and stability manual.
154.1810 Cargo manual.
154.1812 Operational information for terminal personnel.
154.1814 Cargo information cards.
154.1816 Cargo location plan.
154.1818 Certification of inhibition.
154.1820 Shipping document.
154.1822 Shipping document: Copy for transfer terminal.
154.1824 Obstruction of pumproom ladderways.
154.1826 Opening of cargo tanks and cargo sampling.
154.1828 Spaces containing cargo vapor: Entry.
154.1830 Warning sign.
154.1831 Persons in charge of transferring liquid cargo in bulk or 
          preparing cargo tanks.
154.1834 Cargo transfer piping.
154.1836 Vapor venting as a means of cargo tank pressure and temperature 
          control.
154.1838 Discharge by gas pressurization.
154.1840 Protective clothing.
154.1842 Cargo system: Controls and alarms.
154.1844 Cargo tanks: Filling limits.
154.1846 Relief valves: Changing set pressure.
154.1848 Inerting.
154.1850 Entering cargo handling spaces.
154.1852 Air breathing equipment.
154.1854 Methane (LNG) as fuel.
154.1858 Cargo hose.
154.1860 Integral tanks: Cargo colder than -10 <deg>C (14 <deg>F).
154.1862 Posting of speed reduction.
154.1864 Vessel speed within speed reduction.
154.1866 Cargo hose connection: Transferring cargo.
154.1868 Portable blowers in personnel access openings.
154.1870 Bow and stern loading.
154.1872 Cargo emergency jettisoning.

Table 4--Summary of Minimum Requirements
Appendix A to Part 154--Equivalent Stress
Appendix B to Part 154--Stress Analyses Definitions

    Authority: 46 U.S.C. 3703, 9101; 49 CFR 1.46.

    Source: CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, unless otherwise 
noted.

    Editorial Note: Nomenclature changes affecting Part 154 appear at 
CGD 95-072, 60 FR 50466, Sept. 29, 1995 and at CGD 96-041, 61 FR 50732, 
Sept. 27, 1996.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General

    Source: CGD 77-069, 52 FR 31626, Aug. 21, 1987, unless otherwise 
noted.

[[Page 208]]


<R05>
Sec. 154.1  Incorporation by reference.

    (a) Certain materials are incorporated by reference into this part 
with approval of the Director of the Federal Register in accordance with 
5 U.S.C. 552(a). The Office of the Federal Register publishes a list 
``Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference,'' which appears in 
the Finding Aids section of this volume. To enforce any edition other 
than the one listed in paragraph (b) of this section, notice of change 
must be published in the Federal Register and the material made 
available. All approved material is on file at the Office of the Federal 
Register, Washington, DC 20408, and at the Commandant (G-MSO), U.S. 
Coast Guard, 2100 Second Street SW. Washington, DC 20593-0001.
    (b) The materials approved for incorporation by reference in this 
part are:

                    American Bureau of Shipping (ABS)

ABS Plaza, 16855 Northchase Drive, Houston, TX 77060
Rules for Building and Classing Steel Vessels, 1981

                  American National Standards Institute

11 West 42nd Street, New York, NY 10036
ANSI Z89.1-69 Safety Requirements for Industrial Head Protection, 1969
ANSI Z87.1-79 Practice for Occupational and Educational Eye and Face 
Protection, 1979

            American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)

100 Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959.
ASTM A 20/A 20M-97a, Standard Specification for General Requirements for 
Steel Plates for Pressure Vessels--154.610
ASTM F 1014-92, Standard Specification for Flashlights on Vessels--
          154.1400

    Note: All other documents referenced in this part are still in 
effect.

                   International Maritime Organization

Publications Section, 4 Albert Embankment, London SE1 7SR, United 
Kingdom
Resolution A.328(IX), Code for the Construction and Equipment of Ships 
Carrying Liquefied Gases in Bulk, 1976
Code For Existing Ships Carrying Liquefied Gases in Bulk, 1976
Medical First Aid Guide for Use in Accidents Involving Dangerous Goods

                     Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.

12 Laboratory Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709-3995
UL No. 783-79 Standard for Safety, Electric Flashlights for Use in 
Hazardous Locations, Class 1, Groups C and D, 1979.

[CGD 77-069, 52 FR 31626, Aug. 21, 1987, as amended by CGD 82-042, 53 FR 
17705, May 18, 1988; CGD 82-042, 53 FR 18949, May 25, 1988; CGD 88-070, 
53 FR 34535, Sept. 7, 1988; CGD 96-041, 61 FR 50732, Sept. 27, 1996; CGD 
97-057, 62 FR 51048, Sept. 30, 1997; USCG-1999-5151, 64 FR 67183, Dec. 
1, 1999; USCG-2000-7790, 65 FR 58463, Sept. 29, 2000]


<R05>
Sec. 154.3  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to prescribe rules for new and existing 
gas vessels.


<R05>
Sec. 154.5  Applicability.

    This part applies to each self-propelled vessel that has on board 
bulk liquefied gases as cargo, cargo residue or vapor, except subpart C 
does not apply if the vessel meets Sec. 154.12 (b), (c), or (d).


<R05>
Sec. 154.7  Definitions, acronyms, and terms.

    As used in this part:
     ``A'' Class Division means a division as defined in Regulation 3 of 
Chapter II-2 of the 1974 Safety Convention.
    Accommodation spaces means public spaces, corridors, lavatories, 
cabins, offices, hospitals, cinemas, game and hobby rooms, pantries 
containing no cooking appliances, and spaces used in a similar fashion.
    Boiling point means the temperature at which a substance's vapor 
pressure is equal to the atmospheric barometric pressure.
    Breadth (B) means the maximum width of the vessel in meters measured 
amidships to the molded line of the frame in a ship with a metal shell 
and to the outer surface of the hull in a ship with a shell of any other 
material.
    Cargo area means that part of the vessel that contains the cargo 
containment system, cargo pump rooms, cargo compressor rooms, and the 
deck areas over the full beam and the length of the vessel above them, 
but does not include the cofferdams, ballast spaces, or void spaces at 
the after end of the aftermost hold space or the forward end of the 
forwardmost hold space.

[[Page 209]]

    Cargo containment system means the arrangement for containment of 
the cargo including a primary and secondary barrier, associated 
insulation and any intervening spaces, and adjacent structure that is 
necessary for the support of these elements.
    Cargo service space means space within the cargo area that is more 
than 2 m<SUP>2</SUP> (21.5 ft.<SUP>2</SUP>) in deck area and used for 
work shops, lockers, or store rooms.
    Cargo tank means the liquid tight shell that is the primary 
container of the cargo.
    Certificate of Compliance means a certificate issued by the Coast 
Guard to a foreign flag vessel after it is examined and found to comply 
with regulations in this chapter.
    Cofferdam means the isolating space between two adjacent steel 
bulkheads or decks, which could be a void space or a ballast space.
    Contiguous hull structure includes the inner deck, the inner bottom 
plating, longitudinal bulkhead plating, transverse bulkhead plating, 
floors, webs, stringers, and attached stiffeners.
    Control space means those spaces in which the vessel's radio, main 
navigating equipment, or the emergency source of power is located or in 
which the fire control equipment, other than firefighting control 
equipment under Sec. 154.1140 to Sec. 154.1170, is centralized.
    Design temperature means the minimum cargo temperature the Coast 
Guard allows for loading, unloading, or carriage.
    Design vapor pressure (P<INF>o</INF>) means the maximum gauge 
pressure at the top of the cargo tank for the design of the cargo tank.
    Document means a Certificate of Inspection for a U.S. flag vessel or 
a Certificate of Compliance for a foreign flag vessel.
    Existing gas vessel means a self-propelled vessel that--
    (a) Is delivered on or before October 31, 1976; or
    (b) Is delivered between October 31, 1976 and June 30, 1980, and is 
not a new gas vessel.
    Flammable cargoes includes the following liquefied gases from Table 
4 (follows Sec. 154.1872):

Acetaldehyde
Butadiene
Butane
Butylene
Dimethylamine
Ethane
Ethylamine
Ethyl chloride
Ethylene
Ethylene oxide
Methane (LNG)
Methyl acetylene-propadiene mixture
Methyl bromide
Methyl chloride
Propane
Propylene
Vinyl chloride

    Gas-dangerous space includes the following spaces:
    (a) A space in the cargo area without arrangements to provide a safe 
atmosphere at all times.
    (b) An enclosed space outside the cargo area through which any 
piping that may contain liquid or gaseous cargo passes, or within which 
that piping terminates, without arrangements to prevent gas from 
escaping into the space.
    (c) A cargo containment system and cargo piping.
    (d) A hold space where cargo is carried in a cargo containment 
system:
    (1) With a secondary barrier; or
    (2) Without a secondary barrier.
    (e) A space separated from a hold space under paragraph (d)(1) of 
this definition by a single gastight boundary.
    (f) A cargo pumproom and a cargo compressor room.
    (g) A zone on the weather deck or a semi-enclosed space on the 
weather deck within 3.05 m (10 ft) of any cargo tank outlet, gas or 
vapor outlet, cargo pipe flange, cargo valve, or of entrances and 
ventilation openings to a cargo pump room or a cargo compressor room.
    (h) Except for existing gas vessels, the weather deck over the cargo 
area and 3.05 m (10 ft) forward and aft of the cargo area on the weather 
deck to 2.4 m (8 ft) above the weather deck.
    (i) A zone within 2.4 m (8 ft) of the outer surface of a cargo 
containment system where the surface is exposed to the weather.
    (j) An enclosed or semi-enclosed space in which there is piping 
containing cargo, except those--
    (1) With gas sampling lines for gas detection equipment under Sec. 
154.1350(n); or

[[Page 210]]

    (2) In which boil-off gas is used as fuel under Sec. 154.703.
    (k) A space for storage of cargo hoses.
    (l) An enclosed or semi-enclosed space having an opening into any 
gas-dangerous space or zone.
    Gas-safe space means a space that is not a gas-dangerous space.
    Hold space means the space enclosed by the vessel's structure in 
which there is a cargo containment system.
    IMO stands for the lnternational Maritime Organization.
    IMO Certificate means a Certificate of Fitness for the Carriage of 
Liquefied Gases in Bulk issued under the IMO--
    (a) ``Code for the Construction and Equipment of Ships Carrying 
Liquefied Gases in Bulk'', adopted November 12, 1975 by Assembly 
Resolution A.328(IX), as amended;
    (b) ``Code for Existing Ships Carrying Liquefied Gases in Bulk'', 
adopted November 12, 1975, as amended; or
    (c) ``Recommendations Concerning Ships Not Covered by the Code for 
the Construction and Equipment of Ships Carrying Liquefied Gases in 
Bulk'', (Resolution A.328(IX)), adopted November 12, 1975 by Assembly 
Resolution A.329(IX).
    Independent tank is a cargo tank that is permanently affixed to the 
vessel, is self-supporting, and is not part of the hull or essential to 
the strength or integrity of the hull.
    Independent tank type A is an independent cargo tank designed 
primarily using classification society classical ship structural 
analysis procedures.
    Independent tank type B is an independent cargo tank designed from 
model tests, refined analytical tools, and analysis methods to determine 
stress levels, fatigue life, and crack propagation characteristics.
    Independent tank type C (pressure tank) is an independent cargo tank 
meeting pressure vessel criteria where the dominant stress producing 
load is design vapor pressure.
    Insulation space means a space, that could be an interbarrier space, 
occupied wholly or in part by insulation.
    Integral tank means a cargo tank that is a structural part of the 
vessel's hull and is influenced in the same manner and by the same loads 
that stress the adjacent hull structure.
    Interbarrier space means the space between a primary and a secondary 
barrier, with or without insulation or other material.
    Length (L) is ninety-six percent of the total length in meters on a 
waterline at eighty-five percent of the least molded depth measured from 
the top of the keel or the length from the foreside of the stem to the 
axis of the rudder stock on the waterline, whichever is greater. In 
vessels having a rake of keel, the waterline is parallel to the design 
waterline.
    Liquefied gas means a cargo having a vapor pressure of 172 kPa (25 
psia) or more at 37.8 <deg>C (100 <deg>F).
    MARVS stands for the Maximum Allowable Relief Valve Setting.
    Membrane tank is a cargo tank that is not self-supporting and 
consists of a thin layer (membrane) supported through insulation by the 
adjacent hull structure.
    New gas vessel means a self-propelled vessel that--
    (a) Is constructed under a building contract awarded after October 
31, 1976;
    (b) In the absence of a building contract, has a keel laid or is at 
a similar stage of construction after December 31, 1976;
    (c) Is delivered after June 30, 1980; or
    (d) Has undergone a major conversion for which--
    (1) The building contract is awarded after October 31, 1976;
    (2) In the absence of a building contract, conversion is begun after 
December 31, 1976; or
    (3) Conversion is completed after June 30, 1980.
    Primary barrier means the inner boundary that contains the cargo 
when the cargo containment system includes two boundaries.
    Process pressure vessel means a pressure vessel that is used in a 
reliquefaction, cargo heating, or other system that processes cargo.
    Remote group alarm means an audible and visual alarm that alerts 
when an alarm condition exists but does not identify that condition.

[[Page 211]]

    Secondary barrier means the liquid resisting outer boundary of a 
cargo containment system when the cargo containment system includes two 
boundaries.
    Semi-membrane tank is a cargo tank that is not self-supporting and 
that can expand and contract due to thermal, hydrostatic, and pressure 
loadings. It consists of flat surfaces, supported through insulation by 
the adjacent hull structure, and shaped corners that connect the flat 
surfaces.
    Service space means a space outside the cargo area that is used for 
a galley, pantry containing cooking appliances, locker or store room, 
workshop except those in machinery spaces, and similar spaces and trunks 
to those spaces.
    Shut-off valve is a valve that closes a pipeline and provides 
nominal metal to metal contact between the valve operating parts, 
including the disc and gate, and the valve body.
    Specific gravity (p) means the ratio of the density of the cargo at 
the design temperature to the density of water at 4 <deg>C (39 <deg>F).
    Tank cover is the structure protecting those parts of the cargo 
containment system that protrude through the weather deck and providing 
continuity to the deck structure.
    Tank dome means the uppermost portion of the cargo tank. For below 
deck cargo containment systems, it means the uppermost portion of the 
cargo tank that protrudes through the weather deck or through the tank 
cover.
    Toxic cargoes includes the following liquefied gases from Table 4 
(follows Sec. 154.1872):

Acetaldehyde
Ammonia, anhydrous
Dimethylamine
Ethylamine
Ethyl chloride
Ethylene oxide
Methyl bromide
Methyl chloride
Sulfur dioxide
Vinyl chloride

    Vapor pressure means the absolute equilibrium pressure of the 
saturated vapor above the liquid, expressed in kPa (psia), at a specific 
temperature.
    Void space means an enclosed space in the cargo area outside of the 
cargo containment system, except a hold space, ballast space, fuel oil 
tank, cargo pump or compressor room, or any space used by personnel.
    1974 Safety Convention stands for the International Convention on 
Safety of Life at Sea, 1974, done at London, November 1, 1974.


<R05>
Sec. 154.9  Issuance of documents.

    The Coast Guard issues an endorsed Certificate of Inspection to a 
U.S. flag vessel or an endorsed Certificate of Compliance to a foreign 
flag vessel that meets this part.


<R05>
Sec. 154.12  Existing gas vessel: Endorsements and requirements.

    (a) Except an existing gas vessel under paragraph (b), (c), or (d) 
of this section, an existing gas vessel must meet subpart C of this part 
if the owner desires a document endorsed for the carriage of a cargo 
listed in Table 4 (follows Sec. 154.1872).
    (b) If an existing gas vessel is issued a document by the Coast 
Guard before November 1, 1987 that is endorsed for the carriage of a 
cargo listed in Table 4 (follows Sec. 154.1872), and the owner desires 
the same endorsement on a reissued document, the vessel must--
    (1) Continue to meet the same design and construction standards 
under which the Coast Guard issued the original document; and
    (2) Meet paragraph (e) of this section.
    (c) If an existing gas vessel is issued a document by the Coast 
Guard before November 1, 1987 that is endorsed for the carriage of a 
cargo listed in Table 4 (follows Sec. 154.1872), and the owner desires 
an endorsement for a different cargo listed in that table, the vessel 
must--
    (1) Continue to meet the same design and construction standards 
under which the Coast Guard issued the original document;
    (2) Meet paragraph (e) of this section;
    (3) Meet subpart D for the different cargo; and
    (4) Meet any additional requirements of this part that the 
Commandant (G-MSO) determines to be necessary for safety.
    (d) If an existing gas vessel does not meet paragraph (b) or (c) of 
this section and the owner desires a document

[[Page 212]]

endorsed for the carriage of a cargo listed in Table 4 (follows Sec. 
154.1872), the vessel must--
    (1) Have a letter from the Coast Guard dated before November 1, 1987 
stating that--
    (i) Review of the vessel's plans for the carriage of that cargo is 
completed; or
    (ii) The vessel's IMO Certificate endorsed for the carriage of that 
cargo is accepted;
    (2) Meet the plans that were reviewed and marked ``Examined'' or 
``Approved'' by the Coast Guard, or meet the standards under which the 
IMO Certificate was issued;
    (3) Meet paragraph (e) of this section; and
    (4) Meet any additional requirements of this part that the 
Commandant (G-MSO) determines to be necessary for safety.
    (e) If the owner of a vessel desires any document endorsement 
described in paragraph (b), (c), or (d) of this section, the existing 
gas vessel must meet the requirements in each of the following:
    (1) Section 154.310 (d) and (e).
    (2) Section 154.320 (b) and (c).
    (3) Section 154.330 (a) through (e).
    (4) Section 154.340(d).
    (5) Section 154.345 (a), (b)(1) through (b)(5), (b)(7) and (c).
    (6) Section 154.476(a).
    (7) Section 154.519(a)(2).
    (8) Section 154.534.
    (9) Section 154.538.
    (10) Section 154.540 (c) and (d).
    (11) Section 154.556.
    (12) Section 154.558.
    (13) Section 154.560.
    (14) Section 154.562.
    (15) Section 154.703.
    (16) Section 154.705.
    (17) Section 154.706.
    (18) Section 154.707.
    (19) Section 154.708.
    (20) Section 154.709.
    (21) Section 154.904.
    (22) Section 154.906.
    (23) Section 154.908(a), unless the space is separated from the 
accommodation, service, or control space by a steel door that--
    (i) Is watertight when tested with a firehose at not less than 207 
kPa gauge (30 psig);
    (ii) Has a means to self-close and does not have latches or other 
devices designed to hold it open; and
    (iii) Has an audible and visual alarm on both sides of the door 
which is actuated when the door is open.
    (24) Section 154.910.
    (25) Section 154.912.
    (26) Sections 154.1110 through 154.1130, except Sec.Sec. 
154.1115(b), 154.1120(b), and 154.1125 (c) and (f).
    (27) Section 154.1145, except an existing gas vessel with a cargo 
carrying capacity of less than 2500 m \3\ (88,200 ft \3\) may have only 
one self-contained dry chemical storage unit if that unit--
    (i) is installed before November 1, 1987; and
    (ii) Has the capacity to meet Sec. 154.1145 (d) and (e), and Sec. 
154.1170(e).
    (28) Section 154.1150 (a) and (b).
    (29) Section 154.1155.
    (30) Section 154.1160.
    (31) Section 154.1165 (a), (b), (d), and (f).
    (32) Section 154.1170 (b) through (f).
    (33) Section 154.1200 (a), (b)(1), and (b)(2).
    (34) Section 154.1205(f).
    (35) Section 154.1325.
    (36) Section 154.1335(e).
    (37) Section 154.1350 (e), (f), (i), (o), and (u).


<R05>
Sec. 154.15  U.S. flag vessel: Endorsement application.

    (a) A person who desires the endorsement required under Sec. 
154.1801 for a U.S. flag vessel must submit an application for an 
endorsement of the vessel's Subchapter D Certificate of Inspection under 
the procedures in Sec. 91.55-15 of this chapter.
    (b) The person requesting an endorsement under paragraph (a) of this 
section must submit to the Coast Guard, if requested--
    (1) Calculations for hull design required by Sec. 172.175 of this 
chapter;
    (2) The plans and information listed in Sec.Sec. 54.01-18, 56.01-10, 
91.55-5 (a), (b), (d), (g), and (h), and 110.25-1 of this chapter;
    (3) Plans for the dry chemical supply and distribution systems, 
including the controls; and
    (4) Any other vessel information, including, but not limited to 
plans, design calculations, test results, certificates, and 
manufacturer's data, needed

[[Page 213]]

to determine whether or not the vessel meets the standards of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 154.17  U.S. flag vessel: Certificate of Inspection endorsement.

    The Certificate of Inspection for a U.S. flag vessel allowed to 
carry a liquefied gas listed in Table 4 has the following endorsement 
for each cargo, with the corresponding carriage requirement data 
inserted:

    Inspected and approved for the carriage of ___ at a maximum 
allowable relief valve setting of ___ kPa gauge (___ psig) with an F 
factor of ___, a maximum external pressure of ___ kPa gauge (___ psig), 
a minimum service temperature of___ <deg>C (___ <deg>F), and a maximum 
specific gravity of ___. Hull type ___.


<R05>
Sec. 154.19  U.S. flag vessel: IMO certificate issuance.

    (a) Either a classification society authorized under 46 CFR part 8, 
or the Coast Guard Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, issues an IMO 
Certificate to a U.S. flag vessel when requested by the owner or 
representative, if--
    (1) The vessel meets the requirements of this part; and
    (2) It is a new gas vessel, it meets the IMO Resolution A.328(IX), 
``Code for the Construction and Equipment of Ships Carrying Liquefied 
Gases in Bulk, 1975''; or
    (3) It is an existing gas vessel, it meets the IMO ``Code for 
Existing Ships Carrying Liquefied Gases in Bulk, 1975''.
    (b) The IMO Certificate expires on the same date that the vessel's 
Certificate of Inspection expires.

[CGD 77-069, 52 FR 31626, Aug. 21, 1987, as amended by CGD 95-010, 62 FR 
67537, Dec. 24, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 154.22  Foreign flag vessel: Certificate of Compliance endorsement 
application.

    (a) A person who desires an endorsed Certificate of Compliance to 
meet Sec. 154.1802(a) for a foreign flag vessel, whose flag 
administration issues IMO Certificates, must submit to the Commanding 
Officer, U.S. Coast Guard Marine Safety Center (G-MSC), 400 Seventh St., 
SW., Washington, DC 20590-0001, an application that includes the 
following:
    (1) The vessel's valid IMO Certificate.
    (2) A description of the vessel.
    (3) Specifications for the cargo containment system.
    (4) A general arrangement plan of the vessel.
    (5) A midship section plan of the vessel.
    (6) Schematic plans of the liquid and vapor cargo piping.
    (7) A firefighting and safety plan.
    (8) If the applicant is requesting an endorsement for the carriage 
of ethylene oxide, a classification society certification that the 
vessel meets Sec. 154.1725(a) (4), (5), and (7).
    (9) If the vessel is a new gas vessel, or an existing vessel that 
does not meet Sec. 154.12 (b), (c), or (d)--
    (i) A certification from a classification society that the vessel--
    (A) Has enhanced grades of steel meeting Sec. 154.170 (b)(1) and 
(b)(2) for crack arresting purposes in the deck stringer, sheer strake, 
and bilge strake; and
    (B) Meets Sec. 154.701, or if the vessel carries methane, meets Sec. 
154.703, by having the capability of cargo tank pressure and temperature 
control without venting; and
    (ii) The vessel's valid SOLAS Cargo Ship Safety Construction 
Certificate and Cargo Ship Safety Equipment Certificate.
    (10) Any additional plans, certificates, and information needed by 
the Commanding Officer, Marine Safety Center to determine whether or not 
the vessel meets this part.
    (b) A person who desires an endorsed Certificate of Compliance to 
meet Sec. 154.1802(b) for a foreign flag vessel, whose flag 
administration does not issue IMO Certificates, must submit to the 
Commanding Officer, Marine Safety Center the plans, calculations, and 
information under Sec. 154.15(b).

[CGD 77-069, 52 FR 31626, Aug. 21, 1987, as amended by CGD 88-070, 53 FR 
34535, Sept. 7, 1988; CGD 89-025, 54 FR 19571, May 8, 1989; CGD 95-072, 
60 FR 50466, Sept. 29, 1995; 60 FR 54106, Oct. 19, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 154.24  Foreign flag vessel: IMO Certificate.

    (a) An IMO Certificate issued under the IMO Resolution 
A.328(IX),''Code for the Construction and Equipment of

[[Page 214]]

Ships Carrying Liquefied Gases in Bulk, 1975'' is usually sufficient 
evidence of compliance with this part for the Coast Guard to endorse a 
foreign flag vessel's Certificate of Compliance with the name of each 
cargo in Table 4 (follows Sec. 154.1872) that is listed on the IMO 
Certificate, if the information listed in item 3 of the IMO Certificate 
shows that--
    (1) The design ambient temperatures meet Sec. 154.174 and Sec. 
154.176;
    (2) The cargo tank design stress factors and resulting MARVS of 
independent tanks type B or C meet Sec. 154.447 or Sec. 154.450; and
    (3) The cargo tank MARVS of a type IIPG ship meets Sec. 172.175(c) 
of this chapter.
    (b) If a foreign flag existing gas vessel meets Sec. 154.12 (b), 
(c), or (d), the vessel's IMO Certificate issued under the IMO ``Code 
for Existing Ships Carrying Liquefied Gases in Bulk, 1975'' is usually 
sufficient evidence of compliance with the requirements of Sec. 
154.12(e) for the Coast Guard to endorse the Certificate of Compliance 
with the name of each cargo in Table 4 (follows Sec. 154.1872) that is 
listed on the IMO Certificate; however if a foreign flag existing gas 
vessel does not meet Sec. 154.12 (b), (c), or (d), an IMO Certificate 
issued under the IMO ``Code for Existing Ships Carrying Liquefied Gases 
in Bulk, 1975'' is not acceptable evidence of compliance with the 
requirements of this part for the endorsement of a Certificate of 
Compliance.


<R05>
Sec. 154.30  Liquefied gases not included in table 4.

    (a) A liquefied gas not appearing in table 4 (follows Sec. 154.1872) 
must be specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO) to be carried in 
bulk in U.S. waters.
    (b) A person who desires to ship a liquefied gas in bulk that is not 
listed in table 4 must submit to the Commandant (G-MSO) a completed form 
CG-4355. This form may be obtained from the Commandant (G-MSO) or any 
Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection (OCMI).
    (c) The Commandant (G-MSO) notifies the submitter by letter whether 
or not the liquefied gas is specially approved for carriage in bulk in 
U.S. waters and the minimum requirements for that carriage. If the 
liquefied gas is not specially approved, the reasons why the special 
approval is not granted are included.


<R05>
Sec. 154.32  Equivalents.

    (a) A vessel that fails to meet the standards in this part for an 
endorsement on a Certificate of Inspection or a Certificate of 
Compliance may meet an alternate standard if the Commandant (G-MSO) 
finds that the alternate standard provides an equivalent or greater 
level of protection for the purpose of safety.
    (b) The Commandant (G-MSO) considers issuance of a finding of 
equivalence to the standard required by this part if the person 
requesting the finding submits a written application to the Commandant 
(G-MSO) that includes--
    (1) A detailed explanation of the vessel's characteristics that do 
not meet the requirements in this part; and
    (2) An explanation of how each substituted standard would enable the 
vessel to meet a level of safety that would be equivalent to or greater 
than the standard in this part.
    (c) Operational methods or procedures may not be substituted for a 
particular fitting, material, appliance, apparatus, item, or type of 
equipment required in this part.


<R05>
Sec. 154.34  Special approval: Requests.

    Each request for special approval must be in writing and submitted 
to the Commandant (G-MSO), U.S. Coast Guard, 2100 Second Street SW., 
Washington, DC 20593-0001.


<R05>
Sec. 154.36  Correspondence and vessel information: Submission.

    Correspondence to the Coast Guard and all vessel information 
submitted to the Coast Guard must be in English, except--
    (a) IMO Certificates may be in French; and
    (b) SOLAS Certificates may be in the official language of the flag 
administration.


<R05>
Sec. 154.40  Right of appeal.

    Any person directly affected by a decision or action taken under 
this part,

[[Page 215]]

by or on behalf of the Coast Guard, may appeal therefrom in accordance 
with subpart 1.03 of this chapter.

[CGD 88-033, 54 FR 50381, Dec. 6, 1989]


<R04>
                    Subpart B--Inspections and Tests

            Examination Requirements for Foreign Flag Vessels


<R05>
Sec. 154.150  Examination required for a Certificate of Compliance.

    Before a vessel receives an initial or reissued Certificate of 
Compliance endorsed with the name of a cargo from Table 4 of this part, 
the vessel must call at a United States port for an examination, during 
which the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, determines whether or 
not the vessel meets the requirements of this chapter.

[CGD 81-052, 50 FR 8734, Mar. 5, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 154.151  Procedures for having the Coast Guard examine a vessel for a 
Certificate of Compliance.

    To have the Coast Guard examine the vessel for a Certificate of 
Compliance, as required in Sec. 154.150, the owner of a foreign flag 
vessel must proceed as follows:
    (a) After submitting an application under Sec. 154.22, await 
notification by the Commanding Officer, Marine Safety Center that review 
of the vessel's plans or IMO Certificate and supporting documents is 
complete.
    (b) Except when paragraph (c) of this section applies,
    (1) After receiving notification from Commanding Officer, Marine 
Safety Center that review is complete and the application is acceptable, 
dispatch the vessel to a United States port;
    (2) Notify the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, for the port 
where the vessel is to be inspected at least seven days before the 
vessel arrives and arrange the exact time and other details of the 
examination. This notification is in addition to any other pre-arrival 
notice to the Coast Guard required by other regulations and must 
include:
    (i) The name of the vessel's first U.S. port of call;
    (ii) The date the vessel is scheduled to arrive;
    (iii) The name and telephone number of the owner's local agent; and
    (iv) The names of all cargoes listed in Table 4 of this part that 
are on board the vessel;
    (3) Make sure that the following items are available on board the 
vessel for the use of the Marine Inspector before beginning the 
examination required by Sec. 154.150:
    (i) A general arrangement (including the location of firefighting, 
safety, and lifesaving gear); and
    (ii) The cargo manual required by Sec. 154.1810.
    (c) If the vessel was accepted for U.S. service on the basis of 
Coast Guard plan review under Sec. 154.5(b), the vessel owner must 
notify Commanding Officer, Marine Safety Center fourteen days prior to 
the vessel's arrival at a U.S. port. This notification must include:
    (1) The name of the vessel's first U.S. port of call;
    (2) The date the vessel is scheduled to arrive;
    (3) The name and telephone number of the owner's local agent; and
    (4) The names of all cargoes listed in Table 4 of this part that are 
on board the vessel.

[CGD 81-052, 50 FR 8734, Mar. 5, 1985; 50 FR 15895, Apr. 23, 1985; CGD 
77-069, 52 FR 31630, Aug. 21, 1987; CGD 95-072, 60 FR 50466, Sept. 29, 
1995; 60 FR 54106, Oct. 19, 1995]


<R04>
              Subpart C--Design, Construction and Equipment

                             Hull Structure


<R05>
Sec. 154.170  Outer hull steel plating.

    (a) Except as required in paragraph (b) of this section, the outer 
hull steel plating, including the shell and deck plating must meet the 
material standards of the American Bureau of Shipping published in 
``Rules for Building and Classing Steel Vessels'' 1981.
    (b) Along the length of the cargo area, grades of steel must be as 
follows:
    (1) The deck stringer and sheer strake must be at least Grade E 
steel or a grade of steel that has equivalent chemical properties, 
mechanical properties, and heat treatment, and that is specially 
approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).

[[Page 216]]

    (2) The strake at the turn of the bilge must be Grade D, Grade E, or 
a grade of steel that has equivalent chemical properties, mechanical 
properties, and heat treatment, and that is specially approved by the 
Commandant (G-MSO).
    (3) The outer hull steel of vessels must meet the standards in Sec. 
154.172 if the hull steel temperature is calculated to be below -5 
<deg>C (23 <deg>F) assuming:
    (i) For any waters in the world, the ambient cold conditions of 
still air at 5 <deg>C (41 <deg>F) and still sea water at 0 <deg>C (32 
<deg>F);
    (ii) For cargo containment systems with secondary barriers, the 
temperature of the secondary barrier is the design temperature; and
    (iii) For cargo containment systems without secondary barriers, the 
temperature of the cargo tank is the design temperature.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983; CGD 77-069, 52 FR 31630, Aug. 21, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 154.172  Contiguous steel hull structure.

    (a) Except as allowed in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, 
plates, forgings, forged and rolled fittings, and rolled and forged bars 
and shapes used in the construction of the contiguous steel hull 
structure must meet the thickness and steel grade in Table 1 for the 
temperatures under Sec.Sec. 154.174(b) and 154.176(b).
    (b) for a minimum temperature, determined under Sec.Sec. 154,174(b) 
and 154.176(b), below -25 <deg>C (-13 <deg>F ), the contiguous steel 
hull structure must meet Sec. 54.25-10 for that minimum temperature.
    (c) If a steel grade that is not listed in Table 1 has the 
equivalent chemical properties, mechanical properties, and heat 
treatment of a steel grade that is listed, the steel grade not listed 
may be specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO), for use in the 
contiguous hull structure.

 Table 1--Minimum Temperature, Thickness, and Steel Grades in Contiguous
                             Hull Structures
------------------------------------------------------------------------
       Minimum temperature          Steel thickness     Steel \1\ grade
------------------------------------------------------------------------
0 <deg>C (32 <deg>F)............  All...............  Standards of the
                                                       American Bureau
                                                       of Shipping
                                                       published in
                                                       ``Rules for
                                                       Building and
                                                       Classing Steel
                                                       Vessels'', 1981
-10 <deg>C (14 <deg>F)..........  T[le]112.5 mm (\1/  B
                                   2\ in.).
                                  12.5< t[le]25.5 mm  D
                                   (1 in.).
                                  >25.5 mm (1 in.)..  E
-25 <deg>C (-13 <deg>F).........  t[le]112.5 mm (\1/  D
                                   2\ in.).
                                  >12.5 mm (\1/2\     E
                                   in.).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Steel grade of the American Bureau of Shipping published in ``Rules
  for Building and Classing Steel Vessels'', 1981.


[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983; CGD 77-069, 52 FR 31630, Aug. 21, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 154.174  Transverse contiguous hull structure.

    (a) The transverse contiguous hull structure of a vessel having 
cargo containment systems without secondary barriers must meet the 
standards of the American Bureau of Shipping published in ``Rules for 
Building and Classing Steel Vessels'', 1981.
    (b) The transverse contiguous hull structure of a vessel having 
cargo containment systems with secondary barriers must be designed for a 
temperature that is:
    (1) Colder than the calculated temperature of this hull structure 
when:
    (i) The temperature of the secondary barrier is the design 
temperature, and
    (ii) The ambient cold condition under Sec. 154.176(b)(1)(ii) and 
(iii) are assumed; or
    (2) Maintained by the heating system under Sec. 154.178.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 77-069, 52 FR 
31630, Aug. 21, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 154.176  Longitudinal contiguous hull structure.

    (a) The longitudinal contiguous hull structure of a vessel having 
cargo containment systems without secondary

[[Page 217]]

barriers must meet the standards of the American Bureau of Shipping 
published in ``Rules for Building and Classing Steel Vessels'', 1981.
    (b) The longitudinal contiguous hull structure of a vessel having 
cargo containment systems with secondary barriers must be designed for a 
temperature that is:
    (1) Colder than the calculated temperature of this hull structure 
when:
    (i) The temperature of the secondary barrier is the design 
temperature; and
    (ii) For any waters in the world except Alaskan waters, the ambient 
cold condition of:
    (A) Five knots air at -18 <deg>C (0 <deg>F); and
    (B) Still sea water at 0 <deg>C (32 <deg>F); or
    (iii) For Alaskan waters the ambient cold condition of:
    (A) Five knots air at -29 <deg>C (-20 <deg>F); and
    (B) Still sea water at -2 <deg>C (28 <deg>F); or
    (2) Maintained by the heating system under Sec. 154.178, if, without 
heat, the contiguous hull structure is designed for a temperature that 
is colder than the calculated temperature of the hull structure assuming 
the:
    (i) Temperature of the secondary barrier is the design temperature; 
and
    (ii) Ambient cold conditions of still air at 5 <deg>C (41 <deg>F) 
and still sea water at 0 <deg>C (32 <deg>F).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 77-069, 52 FR 
31630, Aug. 21, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 154.178  Contiguous hull structure: Heating system.

    The heating system for transverse and longitudinal contiguous hull 
structure must:
    (a) Be shown by a heat load calculation to have the heating capacity 
to meet Sec. 154.174(b)(2) or Sec. 154.176(b)(2);
    (b) Have stand-by heating to provide 100% of the required heat load 
and distribution determined under paragraph (a); and
    (c) Meet Parts 52, 53, and 54 of this chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 154.180  Contiguous hull structure: Welding procedure.

    Welding procedure tests for contiguous hull structure designed for a 
temperature colder than -18 <deg>C (0 <deg>F) must meet Sec. 54.05-15 
and subpart 57.03 of this chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 154.182  Contiguous hull structure: Production weld test.

    If a portion of the contiguous hull structure is designed for a 
temperature colder than -34 <deg>C (-30 <deg>F) and is not part of the 
secondary barrier, each 100m (328 ft.) of full penetration butt welded 
joints in that portion of the contiguous hull structure must pass the 
following production weld tests in the position that the joint is 
welded:
    (a) Bend tests under Sec. 57.06-4 of this chapter.
    (b) A Charpy V-notch toughness test under Sec. 57.06-5 of this 
chapter on one set of 3 specimens alternating the notch location on 
successive tests between the center of the weld and the most critical 
location in the heat affected zone. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ The most critical location in the heat affected zone of the weld 
is based on procedure qualification results, except austenitic stainless 
steel need have notches only in the center of the weld.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) If the contiguous hull structure does not pass the test under 
paragraph (b) of this section, the retest procedures under Sec. 54.05-
5(c) must be met.


<R05>
Sec. 154.188  Membrane tank: Inner hull steel.

    For a vessel with membrane tanks, the inner hull plating thickness 
must meet the deep tank requirements of the American Bureau of Shipping 
published in ``Rules for Building and Classing Steel Vessels'', 1981.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 77-069, 52 FR 
31630, Aug. 21, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 154.195  Aluminum cargo tank: Steel enclosure.

    (a) An aluminum cargo tank and its dome must be enclosed by the 
vessel's hull structure or a separate steel cover.
    (b) The steel cover for the aluminum cargo tank must meet the steel 
structural standards of the American Bureau of Shipping published in 
``Rules for Building and Classing Steel Vessels'', 1981.
    (c) The steel cover for the aluminum tank dome must be:

[[Page 218]]

    (1) At least 3.2 mm (\1/8\ in.) thick;
    (2) Separated from the tank dome, except at the support points; and
    (3) Thermally isolated from the dome.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 77-069, 52 FR 
31630, Aug. 21, 1987]

            Ship Survival Capability and Cargo Tank Location


<R05>
Sec. 154.200  Stability requirements: General.

    Each vessel must meet the applicable requirements in subchapter S of 
this chapter.

[CGD 79-023, 48 FR 51009, Nov. 4, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.235  Cargo tank location.

    (a) For type IG hulls, cargo tanks must be located inboard of:
    (1) The transverse extent of damage for collision penetration 
specified in Table 172.180 of this chapter;
    (2) The vertical extent of damage for grounding penetration 
specified in Table 172.180 of this chapter; and
    (3) 30 inches (760 mm) from the shell plating.
    (b) For type IIG, IIPG, and IIIG hulls, cargo tanks must be located 
inboard of:
    (1) The vertical extent of damage for grounding penetration 
specified in Table 172.180 of this chapter; and
    (2) 30 inches (760 mm) from the shell plating.
    (c) In vessels having membrane and semi-membrane tanks, the vertical 
and transverse extents of damage must be measured to the inner hull.
    (d) For type IIG, IIPG, and IIIG hulls, cargo tank suction wells may 
penetrate into the area of bottom damage specified as the vertical 
extent of damage for grounding penetration in Table 172.180 of this 
chapter if the penetration is the lesser of 25% of the double bottom 
height or 13.8 in. (350 mm).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 79-023, 48 FR 
51010, Nov. 4, 1983]

                            Ship Arrangements


<R05>
Sec. 154.300  Segregation of hold spaces from other spaces.

    Hold spaces must be segregated from machinery and boiler spaces, 
accommodation, service and control spaces, chain lockers, potable, 
domestic and feed water tanks, store rooms and spaces immediately below 
or outboard of hold spaces by a:
    (a) Cofferdam, fuel oil tank, or single gastight A-60 Class Division 
of all welded construction in a cargo containment system not required by 
this part to have a secondary barrier;
    (b) Cofferdam or fuel oil tank in a cargo containment system 
required by this part to have a secondary barrier; or
    (c) If there are no sources of ignition or fire hazards in the 
adjoining space, single gastight A-O Class Division of all welded 
construction.


<R05>
Sec. 154.305  Segregation of hold spaces from the sea.

    In vessels having cargo containment systems required by this part to 
have a secondary barrier, hold spaces must be segregated from the sea 
by:
    (a) A double bottom if the cargo tanks meet this part for design 
temperatures colder than -10 <deg>C (14 <deg>F); and
    (b) Wing tanks if the cargo tanks meet this part for design 
temperatures colder than -55 <deg>C (-67 <deg>F).


<R05>
Sec. 154.310  Cargo piping systems.

    Cargo liquid or vapor piping must:
    (a) Be separated from other piping systems, except where an 
interconnection to inert gas or purge piping is required by Sec. 
154.901(a);
    (b) Not enter or pass through any accommodation, service, or control 
space;
    (c) Except as allowed under Sec. 154.703, not enter or pass through 
a machinery space other than a cargo pump or compressor room;
    (d) Be in the cargo area except:
    (1) As allowed under Sec. 154.703;
    (2) Bow and stern loading piping; and
    (3) Emergency jettisoning piping.
    (e) Be above the weather deck except:
    (1) As allowed under Sec. 154.703;
    (2) Pipes in a trunk traversing void spaces above a cargo 
containment system; and
    (3) Pipes for draining, venting, or purging interbarrier and hold 
spaces;

[[Page 219]]

    (f) Connect into the cargo containment system above the weather deck 
except:
    (1) Pipes in a trunk traversing void spaces above a cargo 
containment system; and
    (2) Pipes for draining, venting, or purging interbarrier and hold 
spaces.
    (g) Be inboard of the transverse cargo tank location required by 
Sec. 154.235, except for athwartship shore connection manifolds not 
subject to internal pressure at sea.


<R05>
Sec. 154.315  Cargo pump and cargo compressor rooms.

    (a) Cargo pump rooms and cargo compressor rooms must be above the 
weather deck and must be within the cargo area.
    (b) Where pumps and compressors are driven by a prime mover in an 
adjacent gas safe space:
    (1) The bulkhead or deck must be gastight; and
    (2) The shafting passing through the bulkhead or deck must be sealed 
by a fixed oil reservoir gland seal, a pressure grease seal, or another 
type of positive pressure seal specially approved by the Commandant (G-
MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.320  Cargo control stations.

    (a) Cargo control stations must be above the weather deck.
    (b) If a cargo control station is in accommodation, service, or 
control spaces or has access to such a space, the station must:
    (1) Be a gas safe space;
    (2) Have an access to the space that meets Sec. 154.330; and
    (3) Have indirect reading instrumentation, except for gas detectors.
    (c) Cargo control stations, including a room or area, must contain 
all alarms, indicators, and remote controls associated with each cargo 
tank that the station controls.


<R05>
Sec. 154.325  Accommodation, service, and control spaces.

    (a) Accommodation, service, and control spaces must be outside the 
cargo area.
    (b) If a hold space having a cargo containment system, required by 
this part to have a secondary barrier, is separated from any 
accommodation, service, or control space by a cruciform joint, there 
must be a cofferdam providing at least 760 mm (30 inches) by 760 mm (30 
inches) clearance on one side of the cruciform joint.


<R05>
Sec. 154.330  Openings to accommodation, service, or control spaces.

    (a) Entrances, forced or natural ventilation intakes and exhausts, 
and other openings to accommodation, service, or control spaces, except 
as allowed in paragraph (c) of this section, must be:
    (1) At least L/25 or 3.05m (10 ft) from the athwartship bulkhead 
facing the cargo area, whichever is farther, except that the distance 
need not exceed 5m (16.4 ft); and
    (2) On a house athwartship bulkhead not facing the cargo area or on 
the outboard side of the house.
    (b) Each port light, located on the athwartship bulkhead of a house 
facing the cargo area or the house sides within the distance specified 
in paragraph (a)(1) of this section, must be a fixed type.
    (c) Wheelhouse doors and windows that are not fixed may be within 
the distance specified in paragraph (a)(1) of this section from the 
athwartship bulkhead of a house facing the cargo area, if they have 
gaskets and pass a tightness test with a fire hose at not less than 207 
kPa gauge (30 psig).
    (d) Port lights in the hull plating below the uppermost continuous 
deck and in the first tier of the superstructure must be a fixed type.
    (e) Air intakes and openings into accommodation, service, and 
control spaces must have metal closures that pass a tightness test with 
a fire hose at not less than 207 kPa gauge (30 psig).
    (f) On liquefied toxic gas vessels, the closures required in 
paragraph (e) of this section must be capable of being closed from 
inside the space.


<R05>
Sec. 154.340  Access to tanks and spaces in the cargo area.

    (a) Each cargo tank must have a manhole from the weather deck, the

[[Page 220]]

clear opening of which is at least 600 mm by 600 mm (23.6 in. by 23.6 
in.).
    (b) Each access into and through a void space or other gas-dangerous 
space in the cargo area, except spaces described in paragraph (e) of the 
definition for ``gas-dangerous space'' in Sec. 154.7, must--
    (1) Have a clear opening of at least 600 mm by 600 mm (23.6 in. by 
23.6 in.) through horizontal openings, hatches, or manholes;
    (2) Have a clear opening of at least 600 mm by 800 mm (23.6 in. by 
31.5 in.) through bulkheads, frames or other vertical structural 
members; and
    (3) Have a fixed ladder if the lower edge of a vertical opening is 
more than 600 mm (23.6 in.) above the deck or bottom plating.
    (c) Each access trunk in the cargo area must be at least 760 mm (30 
in.) in diameter.
    (d) The lower edge of each access from the weather deck to gas-safe 
spaces in the cargo area must be at least 2.4 m (7.9 ft.) above the 
weather deck or the access must be through an air lock that meets Sec. 
154.345.
    (e) The inner hull in the cargo area must be accessible for 
inspection from at least one side without the removal of any fixed 
structure or fitting.
    (f) The hold space insulation in the cargo area must be accessible 
for inspection from at least one side from within the hold space or 
there must be a means, that is specially approved by the Commandant, of 
determining from outside the hold space whether or not the hold space 
insulation meets this part.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 77-069, 52 FR 
31630, Aug. 21, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 154.345  Air locks.

    (a) An air lock may be used for access from a gas-dangerous zone on 
the weather deck to a gas-safe space.
    (b) Each air lock must:
    (1) Consist of two steel doors, at least 1.5 m (4.9 ft.) but not 
more than 2.5 m (8.2 ft.) apart, each gasketed and tight when tested 
with a fire hose at not less 207 kPa gauge (30 psig);
    (2) Have self-closing doors with no latches or other devices for 
holding them open;
    (3) Have an audible and visual alarm on both sides which are 
actuated when both door securing devices are in other than the fully 
closed position at the same time;
    (4) Have mechanical ventilation in the space between the doors from 
a gas-safe area;
    (5) Have a pressure greater than that of the gas-dangerous area on 
the weather deck;
    (6) Have the rate of air change in the space between the doors of at 
least 8 changes per hour; and
    (7) Have the space between the doors monitored for cargo vapor leaks 
under Sec. 154.1350.
    (c) In addition to the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (b) of 
this section, no gas-safe space on a liquefied flammable gas carrier may 
have an air lock unless the space:
    (1) Is mechanically ventilated to make the pressure in the space 
greater than that in the air lock; and
    (2) Has a means of automatically de-energizing all electrical 
equipment that is not explosion-proof in the space when the pressure in 
the space falls to or below the pressure in the air lock.


<R05>
Sec. 154.350  Bilge and ballast systems in the cargo area.

    (a) Hold, interbarrier, and insulation spaces must have a means of 
sounding the space or other means of detecting liquid leakage specially 
approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).
    (b) Each hold and insulation space must have a bilge drainage 
system.
    (c) Interbarrier spaces must have an eductor or pump for removing 
liquid cargo and returning it to the cargo tanks or to an emergency 
jettisoning system meeting Sec. 154.356.
    (d) Spaces in the cargo containment portion of the vessel, except 
ballast spaces and gas-safe spaces, must not connect to pumps in the 
main machinery space.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.355  Bow and stern loading piping.

    (a) Bow and stern loading piping must:
    (1) Meet Sec. 154.310;

[[Page 221]]

    (2) Be installed in an area away from the accommodation, service, or 
control space on type IG hulls;
    (3) Be clearly marked;
    (4) Be segregated from the cargo piping by a removable spool piece 
in the cargo area or by at least two shut-off valves in the cargo area 
that have means of locking to meet Sec. 154.1870(a);
    (5) Have a means for checking for cargo vapor between the two valves 
under paragraph (a)(4) of this section;
    (6) Have fixed inert gas purging lines; and
    (7) Have fixed vent lines for purging with inert gas to meet Sec. 
154.1870(b).
    (b) Entrances, forced or natural ventilation intakes, exhausts, and 
other openings to accommodation, service, or control spaces that face 
the bow or stern loading area must meet Sec. 154.330.


<R05>
Sec. 154.356  Cargo emergency jettisoning piping.

    Emergency jettisoning piping must:
    (a) Meet Sec. 154.355(a);
    (b) Be designed to allow cargo discharge without the outer hull 
steel temperature falling below the minimum temperatures under Sec.Sec. 
154.170 and 154.172; and
    (c) Be specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]

                        Cargo Containment Systems


<R05>
Sec. 154.401  Definitions.

    As used in Sec.Sec.154.440 and 154.447:
    ``[sigma]Y'' means the minimum yield strength of the tank material, 
including weld metal, at room temperature.
    ``[sigma]B'' means minimum tensile strength of the tank material, 
including weld metals, at room temperature.


<R05>
Sec. 154.405  Design vapor pressure (P<INF>o</INF>) of a cargo tank.

    (a) The design vapor pressure (P<INF>o</INF>) of a cargo tank must 
be equal to or greater than the MARVS.
    (b) The P<INF>o</INF> of a cargo tank must be equal to or greater 
than the vapor pressure of the cargo at 45 <deg>C (113 <deg>F) if:
    (1) The cargo tank has no temperature control for the cargo; and
    (2) The vapor pressure of the cargo results solely from ambient 
temperature.
    (c) The P<INF>o</INF> of a cargo tank may be exceeded under harbor 
conditions if specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.406  Design loads for cargo tanks and fixtures: General.

    (a) Calculations must show that a cargo tank and its fixtures are 
designed for the following loads:
    (1) Internal pressure head.
    (2) External pressure load.
    (3) Dynamic loads resulting from the motion of the vessel.
    (4) Transient or stationary thermal loads if the design temperature 
is colder that -55 <deg>C (-67 <deg>F) or causes thermal stresses in 
cargo tank supports.
    (5) Sloshing loads, if the cargo tank is designed for partial loads.
    (6) Loads resulting from vessel's deflection.
    (7) Tank weight, cargo weight, and corresponding support reaction.
    (8) Insulation weight.
    (9) Loads of a pipe tower and any other attachments to the cargo 
tank.
    (10) Vapor pressure loads in harbor conditions allowed under Sec. 
154.405.
    (11) Gas pressurization if the cargo tank is designed for gas 
pressurization as a means of cargo transfer.
    (b) A cargo tank must be designed for the most unfavorable static 
heel angle within a 0<deg> to 30<deg> range without exceeding the 
allowable stress of the material.
    (c) A hydrostatic or hydropneumatic test design load must be 
specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.407  Cargo tank internal pressure head.

    (a) For the calculation required under Sec. 154.406(a)(1) and (b), 
the internal pressure head (h<INF>eq</INF>), must be determined from the 
following formula:

h<INF>eq</INF>=10 P<INF>o</INF>+(h<INF>gd</INF>)<INF>max</INF>

where:


[[Page 222]]


h<INF>gd</INF> (the value of internal pressure, in meters of fresh 
water, resulting from the combined effects of gravity and dynamic 
accelerations of a full tank)=a[beta] Z[beta] Y;

where:

a[beta]=dimensionless acceleration relative to the acceleration of 
gravity resulting from gravitational and dynamic loads in the [beta] 
direction (see figure 1);
Z[beta]=largest liquid height (m) above the point where the pressure is 
to be determined in the [beta] direction (see figure 2);
Y=maximum specific weight of the cargo (t/m\3\) at the design 
temperature.

[[Page 223]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02FE91.083


[[Page 224]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02FE91.084

    (b) The (h<INF>gd</INF>) <INF>max</INF> is determined for the [beta] 
direction, on the ellipse in Figure 1, which gives the maximum value for 
h<INF>gd</INF>.
    (c) When the longitudinal acceleration is considered in addition to 
the vertical transverse acceleration, an ellipsoid must be used in the 
calculations instead of the ellipse contained in Figure 1.


<R05>
Sec. 154.408  Cargo tank external pressure load.

    For the calculation required under Sec. 154.406 (a)(2) and (b), the 
external pressure load must be the difference between the minimum 
internal pressure (maximum vacuum), and the maximum external pressure to 
which any portion of the cargo tank may be simultaneously subjected.


<R05>
Sec. 154.409  Dynamic loads from vessel motion.

    (a) For the calculation required under Sec. 154.406 (a)(3) and (b), 
the dynamic loads must be determined from the long term distribution of 
vessel motions, including the effects of surge, sway, heave, roll, 
pitch, and yaw on irregular seas that the vessel may experience during 
10\8\ wave encounters. The speed used for this calculation may be 
reduced from the ship service speed if specially approved by the 
Commandant

[[Page 225]]

(G-MSO) and if that reduced speed is used in the hull strength 
calculation under Sec. 31.10-5(c) of this chapter.
    (b) If the loads determined under paragraphs (c), (d), or (e) of 
this section result in a design stress that is lower than the allowable 
stress of the material under Sec.Sec. 154.610, 154.615, or 154.620, the 
allowable stress must be reduced to that stress determined in paragraphs 
(c), (d), or (e).
    (c) If a tank is designed to avoid plastic deformation and buckling, 
then acceleration components of the dynamic loads must be determined for 
the largest loads the vessel may experience during an operating life 
corresponding to the probability level of 10-8, by using one of the 
following methods:
    (1) Method 1 is a detailed analysis of the vessel's acceleration 
components.
    (2) Method 2 applies to vessels of 50 m (164 ft) or more in length 
and is an analysis by the following formulae that corresponds to a 
10<SUP>-8</SUP> probability level in the North Atlantic:
    (i) Vertical acceleration under paragraph (f)(1) of this section:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02FE91.085
    

[[Page 226]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02FE91.086

    (d) If a cargo tank is designed to avoid fatigue, the dynamic loads 
determined under paragraph (a) of this section must be used to develop 
the dynamic spectrum.

[[Page 227]]

    (e) If a cargo tank is designed to avoid uncontrolled crack 
propagation, the dynamic loads are:
    (1) Determined under paragraph (a) of this section; and
    (2) For a load distribution for a period of 15 days by the method in 
Figure 3.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02FE91.087


[[Page 228]]


    (f) When determining the accelerations for dynamic loads under 
paragraph (a) of this section, the accelerations acting in a cargo tank 
must be estimated for the cargo tank's center of gravity and include the 
following component accelerations:
    (1) Vertical accelerations, meaning the motion acceleration of heave 
and pitch, and of any roll normal to the vessel base that has an effect 
on the component acceleration.
    (2) Transverse acceleration, meaning the motion acceleration of 
sway, yaw and roll, and gravity component of roll.
    (3) Longitudinal acceleration, meaning the motion acceleration of 
surge and pitch and gravity component of pitch.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.410  Cargo tank sloshing loads.

    (a) For the calculation required under Sec. 154.406 (a)(5) and (b), 
the determined sloshing loads resulting from the accelerations under 
Sec. 154.409(f) must be specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).
    (b) If the sloshing loads affect the cargo tank scantlings, an 
analysis of the effects of the sloshing loads in addition to the 
calculation under paragraph (a) of this section must be specially 
approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.411  Cargo tank thermal loads.

    For the calculations required under Sec. 154.406(a)(4), the 
following determined loads must be specially approved by the Commandant 
(G-MSO):
    (a) Transient thermal loads for the cooling down periods of cargo 
tanks for design temperatures lower than -55 <deg>C (-67 <deg>F).
    (b) Stationary thermal loads for cargo tanks for design temperatures 
lower than -55 <deg>C (-67 <deg>F) that cause high thermal stress.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.412  Cargo tank corrosion allowance.

    A cargo tank must be designed with a corrosion allowance if the 
cargo tank:
    (a) is located in a space that does not have inert gas or dry air; 
or
    (b) carries a cargo that corrodes the tank material.

    Note: Corrosion allowance for independent tank type C is contained 
in Sec. 54.01-35 of this chapter.

                             Integral Tanks


<R05>
Sec. 154.418  General.

    An integral tank must not be designed for a temperature colder than 
-10 <deg>C (14 <deg>F), unless the tank is specially approved by the 
Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.419  Design vapor pressure.

    The P<INF>o</INF> of an integral tank must not exceed 24.5 kPa gauge 
(3.55 psig) unless special approval by the Commandant (G-MSO) allows a 
P<INF>o</INF> between 24.5 kPa gauge (3.55 psig) and 69 kPa gauge (10 
psig).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.420  Tank design.

    (a) The structure of an integral tank must meet the deep tank 
scantling standards of the American Bureau of Shipping published in 
``Rules for Building and Classing Steel Vessels'', 1981.
    (b) The structure of an integral tank must be designed and shown by 
calculation to withstand the internal pressure determined under Sec. 
154.407.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 77-069, 52 FR 
31630, Aug. 21, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 154.421  Allowable stress.

    The allowable stress for the integral tank structure must meet the 
American Bureau of Shipping's allowable stress for the vessel's hull 
published in

[[Page 229]]

``Rules for Building and Classing Steel Vessels'', 1981.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 77-069, 52 FR 
31630, Aug. 21, 1987]

                             Membrane Tanks


<R05>
Sec. 154.425  General.

    The design of the hull structure and the design of the membrane tank 
system, that includes the membrane tank, secondary barrier, including 
welds, the supporting insulation, and pressure control equipment, must 
be specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.426  Design vapor pressure.

    The P<INF>o</INF> of a membrane tank must not exceed 24.5 kPa gauge 
(3.55 psig) unless special approval by the Commandant (G-MSO) allows a 
P<INF>o</INF> between 24.5 kPa gauge (3.55 psig) and 69 kPa gauge (10 
psig).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.427  Membrane tank system design.

    A membrane tank system must be designed for:
    (a) Any static and dynamic loads with respect to plastic deformation 
and fatigue;
    (b) Combined strains from static, dynamic, and thermal loads;
    (c) Preventing collapse of the membrane from:
    (1) Over-pressure in the interbarrier space;
    (2) Vacuum in the cargo tank;
    (3) Sloshing in a partially filled cargo tank; and
    (4) Hull vibrations; and
    (d) The deflections of the vessel's hull.


<R05>
Sec. 154.428  Allowable stress.

    The membrane tank and the supporting insulation must have allowable 
stresses that are specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.429  Calculations.

    The tank design load calculations for a membrane tank must include 
the following:
    (a) Plastic deformation and fatigue life resulting from static and 
dynamic loads in the membrane and the supporting insulation.
    (b) The response of the membrane and its supporting insulation to 
vessel motion and acceleration under the worst weather conditions. 
Calculations from a similar vessel may be submitted to meet this 
paragraph.
    (c) The combined strains from static, dynamic, and thermal loads.


<R05>
Sec. 154.430  Material test.

    (a) The membrane and the membrane supporting insulation must be made 
of materials that withstand the combined strains calculated under Sec. 
154.429(c).
    (b) Analyzed data of a material test for the membrane and the 
membrane supporting insulation must be submitted to the Commandant (G-
MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.431  Model test.

    (a) The primary and secondary barrier of a membrane tank, including 
the corners and joints, must withstand the combined strains from static, 
dynamic, and thermal loads calculated under Sec. 154.429(c).
    (b) Analyzed data of a model test for the primary and secondary 
barrier of the membrane tank must be submitted to the Commandant (G-
MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.432  Expansion and contraction.

    The support system of a membrane tank must allow for thermal and 
physical expansion and contraction of the tank.

[[Page 230]]

                           Semi-Membrane Tanks


<R05>
Sec. 154.435  General.

    (a) The design of a semi-membrane tank, the supporting insulation 
for the tank, and the supporting hull structure for the tank must be 
specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).
    (b) A semi-membrane tank must be designed to meet:
    (1) Sec. 154.425 through Sec. 154.432;
    (2) Sec. 154.437 through Sec. 154.440; or
    (3) Sec. 154.444 through Sec. 154.449.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.436  Design vapor pressure.

    The P<INF>o</INF> of a semi-membrane tank must not exceed 24.5 kPa 
gauge (3.55 psig) unless special approval by the Commandant (G-MSO) 
allows a P<INF>o</INF> between 24.5 kPa gauge (3.55 psig) and 69 kPa 
gauge (10 psig).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]

                         Independent Tank Type A


<R05>
Sec. 154.437  General.

    An independent tank type A must meet Sec. 154.438 through Sec. 
154.440.


<R05>
Sec. 154.438  Design vapor pressure.

    (a) If the surface of an independent tank type A are mostly flat 
surfaces,the P<INF>o</INF> must not exceed 69 kPa gauge (10 psig).
    (b) If the surfaces of an independent tank type A are formed by 
bodies of revolution, the design calculation of the P<INF>o</INF> must 
be specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.439  Tank design.

    An independent tank type A must meet the deep tank standard of the 
American Bureau of Shipping published in ``Rules for Building and 
Classing Steel Vessels'', 1981, and must:
    (a) Withstand the internal pressure determined under Sec. 154.407;
    (b) Withstand loads from tank supports calculated under Sec.Sec. 
154.470 and 154.471; and
    (c) Have a corrosion allowance that meets Sec. 154.412.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 77-069, 52 FR 
31630, Aug. 21, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 154.440  Allowable stress.

    (a) The allowable stresses for an independent tank type A must:
    (1) For tank web frames, stringers, or girders of carbon manganese 
steel or aluminum alloys, meet [sigma]B/2.66 or [sigma]Y/1.33, whichever 
is less; and
    (2) For other materials, be specially approved by the Commandant (G-
MSO).
    (b) A greater allowable stress than required in paragraph (a)(1) of 
this section may be specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO) if the 
equivalent stress ([sigma]c) is calculated from the formula in Appendix 
A of this part.
    (c) Tank plating must meet the American Bureau of Shipping's deep 
tank standards, for an internal pressure head that meets Sec. 
154.439(a), published in ``Rules for Building and Classing Steel 
Vessels'', 1981.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983; CGD 77-069, 52 FR 31630, Aug. 21, 1987]

                         Independent Tank Type B


<R05>
Sec. 154.444  General.

    An independent tank type B must be designed to meet Sec.Sec. 154.445 
through 154.449.


<R05>
Sec. 154.445  Design vapor pressure.

    If the surfaces of an independent tank type B are mostly flat 
surfaces, the P<INF>o</INF> must not exceed 69 kPa gauge (10 psig).


<R05>
Sec. 154.446  Tank design.

    An independent tank type B must meet the calculations under Sec. 
154.448.


<R05>
Sec. 154.447  Allowable stress.

    (a) An independent tank type B designed from bodies of revolution 
must

[[Page 231]]

have allowable stresses \3\ determined by the following formulae:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \3\ See Appendix B for stress analyses definitions.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
[sigma]<INF>m</INF>[le] f

[sigma]<INF>L</INF>[le] 1.5 f

[sigma]<INF>b</INF>[le] 1.5 F

[sigma]<INF>L</INF> + [sigma]b[le] 1.5 F

[sigma]<INF>m</INF> + [sigma]b[le] 1.5 F

where:

[sigma]<INF>m</INF>=equivalent primary general membrane stress \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \4\ See Appendix A for equivalent stress.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

[sigma]<INF>L</INF>=equivalent primary local membrane stress 4
[sigma]<INF>b</INF>=equivalent primary bending stress \4\
f=the lesser of ([sigma]<INF>B</INF>/A) or ([sigma]<INF>Y</INF>/B)
F=the lesser of ([sigma]<INF>B</INF>/C) or ([sigma]<INF>Y</INF>/D)
A, B, C, and D=stress factors in Table 2.

                   Table 2--Values for Stress Factors
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                      Nickel
                                    steel and
                                      carbon     Austenitic    Aluminum
                                    manganese      steel        alloy
                                      steel        values       values
                                      values
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Stress factors:
  A..............................          4.0          4.0          4.0
  B..............................          2.0          1.6          1.5
  C..............................          3.0          3.0          3.0
  D..............................          1.5          1.5          1.5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) An independent tank type B designed from plane surfaces must 
have allowable stresses specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.448  Calculations.

    The following calculations for an independent tank type B must be 
specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO):
    (a) Plastic deformation, fatigue life, buckling, and crack 
propagation resulting from static and dynamic loads on the tank and its 
support.
    (b) A three-dimensional analysis of the stress exerted by the hull 
on the tank, its support, and its keys.
    (c) The response of the tank and its support to the vessel's motion 
and acceleration in irregular waves or calculations from a similar 
vessel.
    (d) A tank buckling analysis considering the maximum construction 
tolerance.
    (e) A finite element analysis using the loads determined under Sec. 
154.406.
    (f) A fracture mechanics analysis using the loads determined under 
Sec. 154.406.
    (g) The cumulative effects of the fatigue load from the following 
formula:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02FE91.088

where:

n<INF>i</INF>=the number of stress cycles at each stress level during 
the life of the vessel;
N<INF>i</INF>=the number of cycles to failure for corresponding stress 
levels from the Wohler (S-N) curve;
N<INF>j</INF>=the number of cycles to failure from the fatigue load by 
loading and unloading the tank; and
C<INF>w</INF>=0.5 or less. A C<INF>w</INF> of greater than 0.5 but not 
exceeding 1.0 may be specially approved by the Commandant (G-MTH).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.449  Model test.

    The following analyzed data of a model test of structural elements 
for independent tank type B must be submitted to the Commandant (G-MSO) 
for special approval:
    (a) Stress concentration factors.
    (b) Fatigue life.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]

          Independent Tank Type C and Process Pressure Vessels


<R05>
Sec. 154.450  General.

    Independent tanks type C and process pressure vessels must be 
designed to meet the requirements under Part 54 of this chapter, except 
Sec. 54.01-40(b), and:
    (a) The calculation under Sec. 54.01-18 (b)(1) must also include the 
design loads determined under Sec. 154.406;
    (b) The calculated tank plating thickness, including any corrosion 
allowance, must be the minimum thickness without a negative plate 
tolerance; and
    (c) The minimum tank plating thickness must not be less than:
    (1) 5mm (\3/16\ in.) for carbon-manganese steel and nickel steel;

[[Page 232]]

    (2) 3mm (\1/8\ in.) for austenitic steels; or
    (3) 7mm (\9/32\ in.) for aluminum alloys.


<R05>
Sec. 154.451  Design vapor pressure.

    The P<INF>o</INF> (kPa) of an independent tank type C must be 
calculated by the following formula:

P<INF>o</INF>=196+AC(<INF>[rho]</INF>) <SUP>3/2</SUP>

where:

A=1.813 ([sigma]<INF>m</INF>/[Delta][sigma]<INF>A</INF>) \2\;
[sigma]<INF>m</INF>=design primary membrane stress;
[Delta][sigma]<INF>A</INF>=(allowable dynamic membrane stress for double 
amplitude at probability level Q=10<SUP>-8</SUP>) 53.9 MPa (7821 psi) 
for ferritic and martensitic steels and 24.5 MPa (3555 psi) for 5083-0 
aluminum;
C=a characteristic tank dimension that is the greatest of h, 0.75b, or 
0.45 l;

where:

h=the height of the tank or the dimension in the vessel's vertical 
direction, in meters;
b=the width of the tank or the dimension in the vessel's transverse 
direction; in meters; and
l=the length of the tank or the dimension in the vessel's longitudinal 
direction, in meters; and
<INF>[rho]</INF>=the specific gravity of the cargo.


<R05>
Sec. 154.452  External pressure.

    The design external pressure, P<INF>e,</INF> for an independent tank 
type C must be calculated by the following formula:

P<INF>e</INF>=P<INF>1</INF>+P<INF>2</INF>+P<INF>3</INF>+P<INF>4</INF>

where:

P<INF>1</INF>=the vacuum relief valve setting for tanks with a vacuum 
relief valve, or 24.5 kPa gauge (3.55 psig) for tanks without a vacuum 
relief valve.
P<INF>2</INF>=0, or the pressure relief valve setting for an enclosed 
space containing any portion of a pressure vessel.
P<INF>3</INF>=total compressive load in the tank shell from the weight 
of the tank, including corrosion allowance, weight of insulation, weight 
of dome, weight of pipe tower and piping, the effect of the partially 
filled tank, the effect of acceleration and hull deflection, and the 
local effect of external and internal pressure.
P<INF>4</INF>=0, or the external pressure from the head of water from 
any portion of the pressure vessel on exposed decks.


<R05>
Sec. 154.453  Failure to meet independent tank type C standards.

    If the Commandant (G-MSO) determines during plan review, that a tank 
designed as an independent tank type C fails to meet the standards under 
Sec. 154.450, Sec. 154.451, and 154.452 and can not be redesigned to 
meet those standards, the tank may be redesigned as an independent tank 
type A or B.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]

                            Secondary Barrier


<R05>
Sec. 154.459  General.

    (a) Each cargo tank must have a secondary barrier that meets Table 3 
and except as allowed in Table 3, the hull must not be the secondary 
barrier.
    (b) If the Commandant (G-MSO) specially approves an integral tank 
for a design temperature at atmospheric pressure lower than -10 <deg>C 
(14 <deg>F), the integral tank must have a complete secondary barrier 
that meets Sec. 154.460.
    (c) If the Commandant (G-MSO) specially approves a semi-membrane 
tank under the requirements of an independent tank type B, the semi-
membrane tank may have a partial secondary barrier specially approved by 
the Commandant (G-MSO).
    (d) If Table 3 allows the hull to be a secondary barrier, the 
vessel's hull must:
    (1) Meet Sec.Sec. 154.605 through 154.630; and
    (2) Be designed for the stresses resulting from the design 
temperature.

                                      Table 3--Secondary Barriers for Tanks
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                     Cargo temperature (T) at atmospheric pressure
                                     ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Tank type                                             T<-10 <deg>C (14
                                         T[ge]-10 <deg>C (14    <deg>F)[ge]55 <deg>C (-     T<-55 <deg>C (-67
                                               <deg>F)                 67 <deg>F)                <deg>F)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Integral............................  No secondary barrier      Tank type not usually    Tank type not allowed.
                                       required.                 allowed \1\.
Membrane............................  ......do................  Complete secondary       Complete secondary
                                                                 barrier \1\.             barrier.
Semi-membrane.......................  ......do................  ......do...............   Do.
Independent:
  Type A............................  ......do................  ......do...............   Do.
  Type B............................  ......do................  Partial secondary        Partial secondary
                                                                 barrier \1\.             barrier.

[[Page 233]]

 
  Type C............................  ......do................  No secondary barrier     No secondary barrier
                                                                 required.                required.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The hull may be a secondary barrier.


(14 U.S.C. 632; 46 U.S.C. 369, 375, and 416; 49 U.S.C. 1655(b); 49 CFR 
1.46(b))

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.460  Design criteria.

    At static angles of heel up through 30<deg>, a secondary barrier 
must
    (a) If a complete secondary barrier is required in Sec. 154.459, 
hold all of the liquid cargo in the cargo tank for at least 15 days 
under the dynamic loads in Sec. 154.409(e);
    (b) If a partial secondary barrier is permitted in Sec. 154.459, 
hold any leakage of liquid cargo corresponding to the extent of failure 
under Sec. 154.448(a) after initial detection or primary barrier leak 
for at least 15 days under the dynamic loads in Sec. 154.409(e);
    (c) If the primary barrier fails, prevent the temperature of the 
vessel's structure from falling below the minimum allowable service 
temperature of the steel; and
    (d) Be designed so that a cargo tank failure does not cause a 
failure in the secondary barrier.

                               Insulation


<R05>
Sec. 154.465  General.

    If the design temperature is below -10 <deg>C (14 <deg>F), the cargo 
tank insulation must prevent the temperature of the vessel's hull from 
cooling below the minimum temperature allowed under Sec. 154.172.


<R05>
Sec. 154.466  Design criteria.

    (a) The insulation for a cargo tank without a secondary barrier must 
be designed for the cargo tank at the design temperature, and for a 
vessel operating in:
    (1) Any waters in the world, except Alaskan waters, for the ambient 
cold condition of:
    (i) Five knots air at -18 <deg>C (0 <deg>F); and
    (ii) Still sea water at 0 <deg>C (32 <deg>F); or
    (2) Alaskan waters for the ambient cold condition of:
    (i) Five knots air at -29 <deg>C (20 <deg>F); and
    (ii) Still sea water at -2 <deg>C (28 <deg>F).
    (b) The insulation for a cargo tank with a secondary barrier must be 
designed for the secondary barrier at the design temperature, and the 
ambient cold conditions listed under paragraph (a)(1) or paragraph 
(a)(2) of this section.
    (c) The insulation material must be designed for any loads 
transmitted from adjacent hull structure.
    (d) Insulation for cargo tank and piping must meet Sec. 38.05-20 of 
this chapter.
    (e) Powder or granulated insulation must:
    (1) Not compact from vibrations of the vessel;
    (2) Maintain the thermal conductivity listed under Sec. 154.467; and
    (3) Not exert a static pressure greater than the external design 
pressure of the cargo tank under Sec. 154.408.


<R05>
Sec. 154.467  Submission of insulation information.

    The following insulation information must be submitted for special 
approval by the Commandant (G-MSO):
    (a) Compatibility with the cargo.
    (b) Solubility in the cargo.
    (c) Absorption of the cargo.
    (d) Shrinkage.
    (e) Aging.
    (f) Closed cell content.
    (g) Density.
    (h) Mechanical properties.
    (i) Thermal expansion.
    (j) Abrasion.
    (k) Cohesion.
    (l) Thermal conductivity.
    (m) Resistance to vibrations.
    (n) Resistance to fire and flame spread.

[[Page 234]]

    (o) The manufacturing and installation details of the insulation 
including:
    (1) Fabrication;
    (2) Storage;
    (3) Handling;
    (4) Erection; and
    (5) Quality control.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]

                             Support System


<R05>
Sec. 154.470  General.

    (a) A cargo tank must have a support system that:
    (1) prevents movement of the cargo tank under the static and dynamic 
loads in Sec. 154.406; and
    (2) allows the cargo tank to contract and expand from temperature 
variation and hull deflection without exceeding the design stress of the 
cargo tank and the hull.
    (b) The cargo tank support system must have a key that prevents 
rotation of the cargo tank.
    (c) An independent tank must have supports with an antiflotation 
system that withstands the upward force of the tank without causing 
plastic deformation that endangers the hull structure when the tank is:
    (1) Empty; and
    (2) In a hold space flooded to the summer load draft of the vessel.


<R05>
Sec. 154.471  Design criteria.

    (a) The cargo tank support system must be designed:
    (1) For the loads in Sec. 154.406(a);
    (2) To not exceed the allowable stress under this part at a static 
angle of heel of 30<deg>;
    (3) To withstand a collision force equal to at least one-half the 
weight of the cargo tank and cargo from forward and one-quarter the 
weight of the cargo tank and cargo from aft; and
    (4) For the largest resulting acceleration in Figure 1, including 
rotational and translation effects.
    (b) The cargo tank support design loads in paragraph (a) of this 
section may be analyzed separately.


<R05>
Sec. 154.476  Cargo transfer devices and means.

    (a) If a cargo pump in a cargo tank is not accessible for repair 
when the cargo tank is in use, the cargo tank must have an additional 
means of cargo transfer, such as another pump or gas pressurization.
    (b) If cargo is transferred by gas pressurization, the pressurizing 
line must have a safety relief valve that is set at less than 90 percent 
of the tank relief valve setting.

                    Cargo and Process Piping Systems


<R05>
Sec. 154.500  Cargo and process piping standards.

    The cargo liquid and vapor piping and process piping systems must 
meet the requirements in Sec.Sec. 154.503 through 154.562, Subparts 
56.01 through 56.35, Sec.Sec. 56.50-20 and 56.50-105, and Subparts 56.60 
through 56.97 of this chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 154.503  Piping and piping system components: Protection from movement.

    Where thermal movement and movements of the cargo tank and the hull 
structure may cause stresses that exceed the design stresses, the piping 
and piping system components and cargo tanks must be protected from 
movement by:
    (a) Offsets;
    (b) Loops;
    (c) Bends;
    (d) Mechanical expansion joints including:
    (1) Bellows;
    (2) Slip joints;
    (3) Ball joints; or
    (e) Other means specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.506  Mechanical expansion joint: Limits in a piping system.

    Mechanical expansion joints in a piping system outside of a cargo 
tank:
    (a) May be installed only if offsets, loops or bends cannot be 
installed due to limited space or piping arrangement;
    (b) Must be a bellows type; and

[[Page 235]]

    (c) Must not have insulation or a cover unless necessary to prevent 
damage.


<R05>
Sec. 154.512  Piping: Thermal isolation.

    Low temperature piping must be thermally isolated from any adjacent 
hull structure to prevent the temperature of that structure from 
dropping below the minimum temperature for the hull material under Sec. 
154.170.


<R05>
Sec. 154.514  Piping: Electrical bonding.

    (a) Cargo tanks or piping that are separated from the hull structure 
by thermal isolation must be electrically bonded to the hull structure 
by a method under paragraph (c) of this section.
    (b) A pipe joint or a hose connection fitting that has a gasket must 
be electrically bonded by a method under paragraph (c) of this section 
that bonds:
    (1) Both sides of the connection to the hull structure; or
    (2) Each side of the connection to the other side.
    (c) An electrical bond must be made by at least one of the following 
methods:
    (1) A metal bonding strap attached by welding or bolting.
    (2) Two or more bolts that give metal to metal contact between the 
bolts and the parts to be bonded.
    (3) Metal to metal contact between adjacent parts under designed 
operating conditions.


<R05>
Sec. 154.516  Piping: Hull protection.

    A vessel's hull must be protected from low temperature liquid 
leakage by a drip pan, or other means specially approved by the 
Commandant (G-MSO), at:
    (a) Each piping connection dismantled on a routine basis;
    (b) Cargo discharge and loading manifolds; and
    (c) Pump seals.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.517  Piping: Liquid pressure relief.

    The cargo loading and discharge crossover headers, cargo hoses, and 
cargo loading arms must have means to relieve cargo pressure and to 
remove liquid cargo.


<R05>
Sec. 154.519  Piping relief valves.

    (a) The liquid relief valve that protects the cargo piping system 
from liquid pressure exceeding the design pressure must discharge into:
    (1) A cargo tank; or
    (2) A cargo vent mast if that vent mast has a means for the 
detection and removal of the liquid cargo that is specially approved by 
the Commandant (G-MSO).
    (b) A relief valve on a cargo pump that protects the cargo piping 
system must discharge into the pump suction.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.520  Piping calculations.

    A piping system must be designed to meet the allowable stress values 
under Sec. 56.07-10 of this chapter and, if the design temperature is -
110 <deg>C (-166 <deg>F) or lower, the stress analysis must be specially 
approved by the Commandant (G-MSO) and must include:
    (a) Pipe weight loads;
    (b) Acceleration loads;
    (c) Internal pressure loads;
    (d) Thermal loads; and
    (e) Loads from the hull.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.522  Materials for piping.

    (a) The materials for piping systems must meet Sec. 154.625 for the 
minimum design temperature of the piping, except the material for open 
ended vent piping may be specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO) 
if:
    (1) The temperature of the cargo at the pressure relief valve 
setting is -55 <deg>C (-67 <deg>F) or warmer; and
    (2) Liquid can not discharge to the vent piping.
    (b) Materials for piping outside the cargo tanks must have a melting 
point of at least 925 <deg>C (1697 <deg>F), except for short lengths of 
pipes with fire resisting insulation that are attached to the cargo 
tanks.

[[Page 236]]


<R05>
Sec. 154.524  Piping joints: Welded and screwed couplings.

    Pipe lengths without flanges must be joined by one of the following:
    (a) A butt welded joint with complete penetration at the weld root 
except that for design temperatures colder than -10 <deg>C (14 <deg>F) 
the butt weld must be double welded or must be welded using:
    (1) A backing ring that for design pressures greater than 979 kPa 
gauge (142 psig) must be removed after the weld is completed;
    (2) A consumable insert; or
    (3) An inert gas back-up on the first weld pass.
    (b) A slip-on welded joint with sleeves and attachment welds is 
allowed for an open ended pipe with an external diameter of 50 mm (2 
in.) or less and a design temperature of -55 <deg>C (-67 <deg>F), or 
warmer.
    (c) A socket weld fitting with attachment welds is allowed for pipe 
with an external diameter of 50 mm (2 in.) or less and a design 
temperature of -55 <deg>C (-67 <deg>F) or warmer.
    (d) Screwed couplings are allowed for instrumentation and control 
piping that meets Sec. 56.30-20 and Sec. 56.50-105 (a)(4) and (b)(4) of 
this chapter.
    (e) A method or fitting specially approved by the Commandant (G-
MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.526  Piping joints: Flange connection.

    Flange connections for pipe joints must meet Sec. 56.30-10 and Sec. 
56.50-105 (a)(4) and (b)(4) of this chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 154.528  Piping joints: Flange type.

    (a) A flange must be one of the following types:
    (1) Welding neck.
    (2) Slip-on.
    (3) Socket weld.
    (b) If the piping is designed for a temperature between -10 <deg>C 
(14 <deg>F) and -55 <deg>C (-67 <deg>F), the pipe flange may be a:
    (1) Slip-on type, if the nominal pipe size is 100 mm (4 in.) or 
less;
    (2) Socket weld, if the nominal pipe size is 50 mm (2 in.) or less; 
or
    (3) Welding neck.
    (c) If the piping is designed for a temperature lower than -55 
<deg>C (-67 <deg>F), the pipe flange must be a welding neck type.


<R05>
Sec. 154.530  Valves: Cargo tank MARVS 69 kPa gauge (10 psig) or lower.

    (a) Except those connections for tank safety relief valves and for 
liquid level gauging devices other than those under Sec.Sec. 154.536 and 
154.1310, liquid and vapor connections on a cargo tank with a MARVS of 
69 kPa gauge (10 psig) or lower must have shut-off valves that--
    (1) Are located as close to the tank as practical;
    (2) Are capable of local manual operation; and
    (3) May be remotely controlled.
    (b) The cargo piping system for a cargo tank with a MARVS of 69 kPa 
gauge (10 psig) or lower must have at least one remotely controlled 
quick-closing shut-off valve for closing liquid and vapor piping between 
vessel and shore that meets Sec.Sec. 154.540 and 154.544.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 77-069, 52 FR 
31630, Aug. 21, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 154.532  Valves: Cargo tank MARVS greater than 69 kPa gauge (10 psig).

    (a) Except connections for tank safety relief valves and except for 
liquid level gauging devices other than those under Sec.Sec. 154.536 and 
154.1310, liquid and vapor connections on a cargo tank with a MARVS 
greater than 69 kPa gauge (10 psig) must have, as close to the tank as 
practical, a:
    (1) Stop valve capable of local manual operation; and
    (2) A remotely controlled quick-closing shut-off valve.
    (b) If the nominal pipe size of a liquid or vapor connection is less 
than 50 mm (2 in.), an excess flow valve may be substituted for the 
quick-closing valve under paragraph (a) of this section.
    (c) One valve may be substituted for the manual controlled stop 
valve and the remotely controlled quick-closing shut-off valve required 
under paragraph (a) of this section if that valve:
    (1) Meets Sec.Sec. 154.540 and 154.544; and
    (2) Is capable of local manual operation.

[[Page 237]]


<R05>
Sec. 154.534  Cargo pumps and cargo compressors.

    Cargo pumps and cargo compressors must shut-down automatically when 
the quick-closing shut-off valves under Sec.Sec. 154.530 and 154.532 are 
closed by the emergency shut-down system required under Sec. 154.540.


<R05>
Sec. 154.536  Cargo tank gauging and measuring connections.

    Unless the outward flow from a cargo tank is less than the flow 
through a circular hole of 1.4 mm (0.055 in.) in diameter, cargo tank 
connections for gauging or measuring devices must have the excess flow, 
shut-off, or quick-closing shut-off valves under Sec. 154.530 or Sec. 
154.532.


<R05>
Sec. 154.538  Cargo transfer connection.

    A cargo transfer connection must have a:
    (a) Remotely controlled quick-closing shut-off valve that meets 
Sec.Sec. 154.540 and 154.544; or
    (b) Blank flange.


<R05>
Sec. 154.540  Quick-closing shut-off valves: Emergency shut-down system.

    The quick-closing shut-off valves under Sec.Sec. 154.530, 154.532, 
and 154.538 must have an emergency shut-down system that:
    (a) Closes all the valves;
    (b) Is actuated by a single control in at least two locations remote 
from the quick-closing valves;
    (c) Is actuated by a single control in each cargo control station 
under Sec. 154.320; and
    (d) Has fusible elements at each tank dome and cargo loading and 
discharge manifold that melt between 98 <deg>C (208 <deg>F) and 104 
<deg>C (220 <deg>F) and actuate the emergency shut-down system.


<R05>
Sec. 154.544  Quick-closing shut-off valves.

    The quick-closing shut-off valve under Sec.Sec. 154.530, 154.532 and 
154.538 must:
    (a) Be a shut-off valve;
    (b) Close from the time of actuation in 30 seconds or less;
    (c) Be the fail-closed type; and
    (d) Be capable of local manual closing.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 77-069, 52 FR 
31630, Aug. 21, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 154.546  Excess flow valve: Closing flow.

    (a) The rated closing flow of vapor or liquid cargo for an excess 
flow valve must be specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).
    (b) An excess flow valve allowed under Sec. 154.532(b) must close 
automatically at the rated closing flow.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.548  Cargo piping: Flow capacity.

    Piping with an excess flow valve must have a vapor or liquid flow 
capacity that is greater than the rated closing flow under Sec. 154.546.


<R05>
Sec. 154.550  Excess flow valve: Bypass.

    If the excess flow valve allowed under Sec. 154.532(b) has a bypass, 
the bypass must be of 1.0 mm (0.0394 in.) or less in diameter.

                               Cargo Hose


<R05>
Sec. 154.551  Cargo hose: General.

    Each of the vessel's liquid and vapor cargo hose for loading or 
discharging cargo must meet Sec.Sec. 154.552 through 154.562.


<R05>
Sec. 154.552  Cargo hose: Compatibility.

    Liquid and vapor cargo hoses must:
    (a) Not chemically react with the cargo; and
    (b) Withstand design temperature.


<R05>
Sec. 154.554  Cargo hose: Bursting pressure.

    Cargo hose that may be exposed to the pressure in the cargo tank, 
the cargo pump discharge, or the vapor compressor discharge must have a 
bursting pressure of at least five times the maximum working pressure on 
the hose during cargo transfer.


<R05>
Sec. 154.556  Cargo hose: Maximum working pressure.

    A cargo hose must have a maximum working pressure not less than the 
maximum pressure to which it may be subjected and at least 1034 kPa 
gauge (150 psig).

[[Page 238]]


<R05>
Sec. 154.558  Cargo hose: Marking.

    Each cargo hose must be marked with the:
    (a) Maximum working pressure; and
    (b) Minimum service temperature for service at other than ambient 
temperature.


<R05>
Sec. 154.560  Cargo hose: Prototype test.

    (a) Each cargo hose must be of a type that passes a prototype test 
at a pressure of at least five times its maximum working pressure at or 
below the minimum service temperature.
    (b) Each cargo hose must not be the hose used in the prototype test.


<R05>
Sec. 154.562  Cargo hose: Hydrostatic test.

    Each cargo hose must pass a hydrostatic pressure test at ambient 
temperature of at least one and a half times its specified maximum 
working pressure but not more than two-fifths its bursting pressure.

                                Materials


<R05>
Sec. 154.605  Toughness test.

    (a) Each toughness test under Sec.Sec. 154.610 through 154.625 must 
meet Subpart 54.05 of this chapter.
    (b) If subsize test specimens are used for the Charpy V-notch 
toughness test, the Charpy V-notch energy must meet Table 54.05-20 (a) 
of this chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 154.610  Design temperature not colder than 0 <deg>C (32 <deg>F).

    Materials for cargo tanks for a design temperature not colder than 0 
<deg>C (32 <deg>F) must meet the following:
    (a) The tank materials must meet Sec.Sec. 54.25-1 and 54.25-3 of 
this chapter.
    (b) Plates, forgings, rolled and forged bars and shapes must be 
carbon manganese steel or other material allowed under Sec.Sec. 154.615, 
154.620, and 154.625.
    (c) Plates must be normalized or quenched and tempered and where the 
thickness exceeds 20 mm (0.787 in.), made with fine grain practice, 
austenitic grain size of five or finer. A control rolling procedure may 
be substituted for normalizing if specially approved by the Commandant 
(G-MSO). Plate for an independent tank type C must also meet the 
requirements of ASTM A 20 (incorporated by reference, see Sec. 154.1) 
and Sec. 54.01-18(b)(5) of this chapter.
    (d) For integral and independent type A tanks, the American Bureau 
of Shipping's grade D not exceeding 20 mm (0.787 in.) in thickness, and 
Grade E hull structural steel are allowed if the steel meets Sec. 54.05-
10 of this chapter.
    (e) The tensile properties under paragraph (a) of this section must 
be determined for:
    (1) Each plate as rolled; and
    (2) Each five short ton batch of forgings, forged or rolled 
fittings, and forged or rolled bars and shapes.
    (f) The specified yield strength must not exceed 637 MPa (92.43 Ksi) 
and when it exceeds 490 MPa (71.10 Ksi), the hardness of the weld and 
the heat affected zone must be specially approved by the Commandant (G-
MSO).
    (g) The Charpy V-notch impact energy must be determined for:
    (1) Each plate as rolled; and
    (2) Each five short ton batch of forgings, forged or rolled fittings 
and rolled or forged bars and shapes.
    (h) The orientation and required impact energy of a 10 mm x 10 mm 
(0.394 in. x 0.394 in.) Charpy V-notch specimen must be:
    (1) For plates; transverse specimen and 27.4 J (20 ft-lbs); and
    (2) For forgings, forged and rolled fittings and rolled and forged 
bars: longitudinal specimen and 41.1 J (30 ft-lbs).
    (i) The test temperature of the Charpy V-notch specimens is as 
follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Material Thickness                    Test Temperature
------------------------------------------------------------------------
t[le]20 mm (0.788 in.).........................     0 <deg>C (32 <deg>F)
20< t<30 mm (1.182 in.)........................   -20 <deg>C (-4 <deg>F)
30< t<40 mm (1.576 in.)........................  -40 <deg>C (-40 <deg>F)
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983; USCG-1999-5151, 64 FR 67183, Dec. 1, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 154.615  Design temperature below 0 <deg>C (32 <deg>F) and down 
to -55 <deg>C (-67 <deg>F).

    Plates, forgings, forged or rolled or forged bars and shapes for 
cargo tanks and secondary barriers for a design temperature below 0 
<deg>C (32 <deg>F) and down to -55 <deg>C (-67 <deg>F) must meet Sec. 
54.25-10 of this chapter.

[[Page 239]]


<R05>
Sec. 154.620  Design temperature below -55 <deg>C (-67 <deg>F) and down 
to -165 <deg>C (-265 <deg>F).

    Plates, forgings and forged or rolled fittings, and rolled, forged 
or extruded bars and shapes for cargo tanks, secondary barriers, and 
process pressure vessels for a design temperature below -55 <deg>C (-67 
<deg>F) and down to -165 <deg>C (-265 <deg>F) must:
    (a) Meet Sec. 54.25-10(b)(2), Sec. 54.25-15, or Sec. 54.25-20 of 
this chapter; or
    (b) Be of an aluminum alloy that is specially approved by the 
Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.625  Design temperature below 0 <deg>C (32 <deg>F) and down 
to -165 <deg>C (-265 <deg>F).

    Pipes, tubes, forgings, castings, bolting, and nuts for cargo and 
process piping for a design temperature below 0 <deg>C (32 <deg>F) and 
down to -165 <deg>C (-265 <deg>F) must meet Sec. 56.50-105 of this 
chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 154.630  Cargo tank material.

    (a) If a material of a cargo tank is not listed in Sec.Sec. 154.610, 
154.615 or Sec. 154.620, the allowable stress of that material must be 
specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).
    (b) For cargo tanks of aluminum alloys with welded connections, the 
minimum tensile strength ([sigma]<INF>B</INF>) for the calculations 
under Sec. 154.440, Sec. 154.447 and Sec. 154.450 must be the minimum 
tensile strength of the alloy in the annealed condition.
    (c) Increased yield strength and tensile strength of a material at 
low temperature for independent tanks type A, B, and C must be specially 
approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]

                              Construction


<R05>
Sec. 154.650  Cargo tank and process pressure vessel welding.

    (a) Cargo tank and process pressure vessel welding must meet Subpart 
54.05 and Part 57 of this chapter.
    (b) Welding consumables used in welding cargo tanks must meet Sec. 
57.02-4 of this chapter.
    (c) Independent tanks must meet the following:
    (1) Each welded joint of the shells must be a full penetration butt 
weld, except dome to shell connections may have full penetration tee 
welds.
    (2) Each nozzle weld must be of the full penetration type, except 
for small penetrations on domes.
    (d) Each welded joint in an independent tank type C or in a process 
pressure vessel must meet Part 54 of this chapter, except that any 
backing rings must be removed unless specially approved by the 
Commandant (G-MSO).
    (e) Each welded joint in a membrane tank must meet the quality 
assurance measures, weld procedure qualification, design details, 
materials, construction, inspection, and production testing of 
components developed during the prototype testing program that are 
specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO) under this part.
    (f) Each welded joint in a semi-membrane tank must meet paragraph 
(c) or (e) of this section.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.655  Stress relief for independent tanks type C.

    For a design temperature colder than -10 <deg>C (14 <deg>F), an 
independent tank type C of:
    (a) Carbon and carbon-manganese steel must be stress relieved by 
post-weld heat treatment under Sec. 54.25-7 of this chapter or by 
mechanical stress relief under Subpart 54.30 of this chapter; or
    (b) Materials other than carbon and carbon manganese steel must be 
stress relieved as required under Part 54 of this chapter. The procedure 
for stress relieving must be specially approved by the Commandant (G-
MSO).


<R05>
Sec. 154.660  Pipe welding.

    (a) Pipe welding must meet Part 57 of this chapter.
    (b) Longitudinal butt welds, in piping that does not meet a standard 
or specification under Sec. 56.60-1 of this chapter,

[[Page 240]]

and girth butt welds must meet the following:
    (1) Butt welds of pipes made from carbon, carbon manganese, or low 
alloy steels must meet Sec. 56.50-105 of this chapter, including the 
requirements for post-weld heat treatment.
    (2) Except for piping inside an independent cargo tank type A, B, or 
C, butt welds must be 100% radiographically tested if the design 
temperature is lower than -10 <deg>C (14 <deg>F), and:
    (i) The wall thickness is greater than 10 mm (0.394 in.); or
    (ii) The nominal pipe diameter is greater than 100 mm (nominal 4 
in.).
    (3) If Table 4 references this section, butt welds for deck cargo 
piping exceeding 75 mm (3 in.) in diameter must be 100% radiographically 
tested.
    (4) Butt welds of pipes not meeting paragraph (b)(2) or (b)(3) of 
this section must meet the non-destructive testing requirements under 
Subpart 56.95 of this chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 154.665  Welding procedures.

    Welding procedure tests for cargo tanks for a design temperature 
colder than 0 <deg>C (32 <deg>F), process pressure vessels, and piping 
must meet Sec. 54.05-15 and Subpart 57.03 of this chapter.

                 Cargo Pressure and Temperature Control


<R05>
Sec. 154.701  Cargo pressure and temperature control: General.

    Except as allowed under Sec. 154.703, cargo tanks must:
    (a) Have their safety relief valves set at a pressure equal to or 
greater than the vapor pressure of the cargo at 45 <deg>C (113 <deg>F) 
but not greater than the MARVS under Sec. 154.405; or
    (b) Be refrigerated by a system meeting Sec. 154.702, and each 
refrigerated incompatible cargo refrigerated by a separate system.


<R05>
Sec. 154.702  Refrigerated carriage.

    (a) Each refrigeration system must:
    (1) Have enough capacity to maintain the cargo vapor pressure in 
each cargo tank served by the system below the set pressure of the 
relief valves under ambient temperatures of 45 <deg>C (113 <deg>F) still 
air and 32 <deg>C (89.6 <deg>F) still water with the largest unit in the 
system inoperative; or
    (2) Have a standby unit with a capacity at least equal to the 
capacity of the largest refrigeration unit in the system.
    (b) For the purpose of this section, a ``refrigeration unit'' 
includes a compressor and its motors and controls.
    (c) Each refrigeration system must:
    (1) Have a heat exchanger with an excess capacity of 25 percent of 
the required capacity; or
    (2) A standby heat exchanger.
    (d) Where cooling water is used in a refrigeration system:
    (1) The cooling water pump or pumps must be used exclusively for the 
system;
    (2) Each pump must have suction lines from sea chests on the port 
and starboard sides of the vessel; and
    (3) There must be a standby pump, that may be used for:
    (i) Non-essential purposes on the vessel; or
    (ii) Essential purposes on the vessel, if the pump is sized to 
simultaneously provide for the capacity requirements for the essential 
purposes and the refrigeration cooling water.
    (e) Each refrigeration system must use refrigerants that are 
compatible with the cargo and, for cascade units, with each other.
    (f) The pressure of the heat transfer fluid in each cooling coil in 
a tank must be greater than the pressure of the cargo.


<R05>
Sec. 154.703  Methane (LNG).

    Unless a cargo tank carrying methane (LNG) can withstand the 
pressure build up due to boil-off for 21 days, the pressure in the cargo 
tank must be maintained below the set pressure of the safety relief 
valve for at least 21 days by:
    (a) A refrigeration system that meets Sec. 154.702;
    (b) A waste heat or catalytic furnace that burns boil-off gas, and:
    (1) Maintains the stack exhaust temperature below 535 <deg>C (995 
<deg>F);
    (2) Exhibits no visible flame; and
    (3) Is specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO);

[[Page 241]]

    (c) Boilers, inert gas generators, and combustion engines in the 
main propelling machinery space that use boil-off gas as fuel; or
    (d) Equipment for services, other than those under paragraph (c) of 
this section, that use boil-off gas as fuel and that are located:
    (1) In the main propelling machinery space; or
    (2) a space specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.705  Cargo boil-off as fuel: General.

    (a) Each cargo boil-off fuel system under Sec. 154.703(c) must meet 
Sec.Sec. 154.706 through 154.709.
    (b) The piping in the cargo boil-off fuel system must have a 
connection for introducing inert gas and for gas freeing the piping in 
the machinery space.
    (c) A gas fired main propulsion boiler or combustion engine must 
have a fuel oil fired pilot that maintains fuel flow as required under 
Sec. 154.1854 if the gas fuel supply is cut-off.


<R05>
Sec. 154.706  Cargo boil-off as fuel: Fuel lines.

    (a) Gas fuel lines must not pass through accommodation, service, or 
control spaces. Each gas fuel line passing through other spaces must 
have a master gas fuel valve and meet one of the following:
    (1) The fuel line must be a double-walled piping system with the 
annular space containing an inert gas at a pressure greater than the 
fuel pressure. Visual and audible alarms must be installed at the 
machinery control station to indicate loss of inert gas pressure.
    (2) The fuel line must be installed in a mechanically exhaust-
ventilated pipe or duct, having a rate of air change of at least 30 
changes per hour. The pressure in the space between the inner pipe and 
outer pipe or duct must be maintained at less than atmospheric pressure. 
Continuous gas detection must be installed to detect leaks in the 
ventilated space. The ventilation system must meet Sec. 154.1205.
    (b) Each double wall pipe or vent duct must terminate in the 
ventilation hood or casing under Sec. 154.707(a). Continuous gas 
detection must be installed to indicate leaks in the hood or casing.


<R05>
Sec. 154.707  Cargo boil-off as fuel: Ventilation.

    (a) A ventilation hood or casing must be installed in areas occupied 
by flanges, valves, and piping at the fuel burner to cause air to sweep 
across them and be exhausted at the top of the hood or casing.
    (b) The hood or casing must be mechanically exhaust-ventilated and 
meet Sec. 154.1205.
    (c) The ventilated hood or casing must have an airflow rate 
specially approved by the Commandant.


<R05>
Sec. 154.708  Cargo boil-off as fuel: Valves.

    (a) Gas fuel lines to the gas consuming equipment must have two 
fail-closed automatic valves in series. A third valve, designed to fail-
open, must vent that portion of pipe between the two series valves to 
the open atmosphere.
    (b) The valves under paragraph (a) of this section must be arranged 
so that loss of boiler forced draft, flame failure, or abnormal gas fuel 
supply pressure automatically causes the two series valves to close and 
the vent valve to open. The function of one of the series valves and the 
vent valve may be performed by a single three-way valve.
    (c) A master gas fuel valve must be located outside the machinery 
space, but be operable from inside the machinery space and at the valve. 
The valve must automatically close when there is:
    (1) A gas leak detected under Sec. 154.706(a)(2) or Sec. 154.706(b);
    (2) Loss of the ventilation under Sec. 154.706(a)(2) or Sec. 
154.707(c); or
    (3) Loss of inert gas pressure within the double-walled piping 
system under Sec. 154.706(a)(1).


<R05>
Sec. 154.709  Cargo boil-off as fuel: Gas detection equipment.

    (a) The continuous gas detection system required under Sec. 
154.706(a)(2) and (b) must:
    (1) Meet Sec. 154.1350(c), (d), and (j) through (s); and

[[Page 242]]

    (2) Have a device that:
    (i) Activates an audible and visual alarm at the machinery control 
station and in the wheelhouse if the methane concentration reaches 1.5 
percent by volume; and
    (ii) Closes the master gas fuel valve required under Sec. 154.708(c) 
before the methane concentration reaches 3 percent by volume.
    (b) The number and arrangement of gas sampling points must be 
specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]

                           Cargo Vent Systems


<R05>
Sec. 154.801  Pressure relief systems.

    (a) Each cargo tank that has a volume of 20m\3\ (706 ft.\3\) or less 
must have at least one pressure relief valve.
    (b) Each cargo tank that has a volume of more than 20m\3\ (706 
ft.\3\) must have at least two pressure relief valves of the same 
nominal relieving capacity.
    (c) Each pressure relief valve must:
    (1) Meet Subpart 162.018 of this chapter or, if the valve is also 
capable of vacuum relief and the MARVS is 69 kPa gauge (10 psig) or 
less, Subpart 162.017 of this chapter, and have at least the capacity 
required under Sec. 154.806;
    (2) Not be set for a higher pressure than the MARVS;
    (3) Have a fitting for sealing wire that prevents the set pressure 
from being changed without breaking the sealing wire;
    (4) Be fitted on the cargo tank to remain in the vapor phase under 
conditions of 15<deg> list and of 0.015 L trim by both the bow and 
stern;
    (5) Vent to a vent mast under Sec. 154.805, except a relief valve 
may vent to a common tank relief valve header if the back pressure is 
included in determining the required capacity under Sec. 154.806;
    (6) Not vent to a common header or common vent mast if the relief 
valves are connected to cargo tanks carrying chemically incompatible 
cargoes;
    (7) Not have any stop valves or other means of isolating the cargo 
tank from its relief valve unless:
    (i) The stop valves are interlocked or arranged so that only one 
pressure relief valve is out of service at any one time;
    (ii) The interlock arrangement automatically shows the relief valve 
that is out of service; and
    (iii) The other valves have the relieving capacity required under 
Sec. 154.806, or all relief valves on the cargo tank are the same size 
and there is a spare of the same size, or there is a spare for each 
relief valve on a cargo tank.
    (d) The pressure relief system must:
    (1) If the design temperature is below 0 <deg>C (32 <deg>F), be 
designed to prevent the relief valve from becoming inoperative due to 
ice formation; and
    (2) Be designed to prevent chattering of the relief valve.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979; 44 FR 59234, Oct. 15, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 154.802  Alternate pressure relief settings.

    Cargo tanks with more than one relief valve setting must have one of 
the following arrangements:
    (a) Relief valves that:
    (1) Are set and sealed under Sec. 154.801(c);
    (2) Have the capacity under Sec. 154.806; and
    (3) Are interlocked so that cargo tank venting can occur at any 
time.
    (b) Relief valves that have spacer pieces or springs that:
    (1) Change the set pressure without pressure testing to verify the 
new setting; and
    (2) Can be installed without breaking the sealing wire required 
under Sec. 154.801(c)(3).


<R05>
Sec. 154.804  Vacuum protection.

    (a) Except as allowed under paragraph (b) of this section, each 
cargo tank must have a vacuum protection system meeting paragraph (a)(1) 
of this section and either paragraph (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section.
    (1) There must be a means of testing the operation of the system.
    (2) There must be a pressure switch that operates an audible and 
visual alarm in the cargo control station

[[Page 243]]

identifying the tank and the alarm condition and a remote group audible 
and visual alarm in the wheelhouse. Both alarms must be set at or below 
80% of the maximum external design pressure differential of the cargo 
tanks. There must be a second, independent pressure switch that 
automatically shuts off all suction of cargo liquid or vapor from the 
cargo tank and secures any refrigeration of that tank at or below the 
maximum external design pressure differential.
    (3) There must be a vacuum relief valve that:
    (i) Has a gas flow capacity at least equal to the maximum cargo 
discharge rate per tank;
    (ii) Is set to open at or below the maximum external design pressure 
differential; and
    (iii) Admits inert gas, cargo vapor from a source other than a cargo 
vapor header, or air except as prohibited under Sec. 154.1710.
    (b) A vacuum protection system does not have to be installed if the 
cargo tank is designed to withstand:
    (1) A maximum external pressure differential exceeding 24.5 kPa 
gauge (3.55 psig); and
    (2) The maximum external pressure differential that can be obtained:
    (i) At maximum discharge rates with no vapor return to the cargo 
tanks;
    (ii) By operation of the cargo refrigeration system; or
    (iii) By drawing off vapor for use in accordance with Sec. 
154.703(c)

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979; 44 FR 59234, Oct. 15, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 154.805  Vent masts.

    Relief valves or common vent headers from relief valves must 
discharge to a vent mast that:
    (a) Discharges vertically upward;
    (b) Has a rain cap or other means of preventing the entrance of rain 
or snow;
    (c) Has a screen with 25mm (1 inch) wire mesh or bars not more than 
25mm (1 in.) apart on the discharge port;
    (d) Extends at least to a height of B/3 or 6m (19.7 ft.), whichever 
is greater, above the weather deck and 6m (19.7 ft.) above the working 
level;
    (e) For a cargo tank, does not exhaust cargo vapors within a radius 
of B or 25m (82 ft.), whichever is less, from any forced or natural 
ventilation intake or other opening to an accommodation, service, 
control station, or other gas-safe space, except that for vessels less 
than 90m (295 ft.) in length, shorter distances may be specially 
approved by the Commandant (G-MSO);
    (f) For a containment system, except a cargo tank, does not exhaust 
vapor within a radius of 10m (32.8 ft.) or less from any forced or 
natural ventilation intake or other opening to an accommodation, 
service, control station, or other gas-safe space;
    (g) Has drains to remove any liquid that may accumulate; and
    (h) Prevents accumulations of liquid at the relief valves.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.806  Capacity of pressure relief valves.

    Pressure relief valves for each cargo tank must have a combined 
relief capacity, including the effects of back pressure from vent 
piping, headers, and masts, to discharge the greater of the following 
with not more than a 20% rise in cargo tank pressure above the set 
pressure of the relief valves:
    (a) The maximum capacity of an installed cargo tank inerting system 
if the maximum attainable working pressure of the cargo tank inerting 
system exceeds the set pressure of the relief valves.
    (b) The quantity of vapors generated from fire exposure that is 
calculated under Sec. 54.15-25 of this chapter.

            Atmospheric Control in Cargo Containment Systems


<R05>
Sec. 154.901  Atmospheric control within cargo tanks and cargo piping 
systems.

    (a) Each vessel must have a piping system for purging each cargo 
tank and all cargo piping.
    (b) The piping system must minimize the pocketing of gas or air 
remaining after purging.
    (c) For cargo tanks certificated to carry flammable gases, the 
piping system must allow purging the tank of

[[Page 244]]

flammable vapors before air is introduced and purging the tank of air 
before the tank is filled with cargo.
    (d) Each cargo tank must have:
    (1) Gas sampling points at its top and bottom; and
    (2) Gas sampling line connections that are valved and capped above 
the deck.


<R05>
Sec. 154.902  Atmospheric control within hold and interbarrier spaces.

    (a) Vessels certificated to carry flammable cargo in cargo 
containment systems with full secondary barriers must have an inert gas 
system or onboard storage of inert gas that provides enough inert gas to 
meet the requirements of Sec. 154.1848 for 30 days consumption.
    (b) Vessels certificated to carry flammable cargo in cargo 
containment systems with partial secondary barriers must:
    (1) Have an inert gas system or onboard inert gas storage that can 
inert the largest hold and interbarrier space so that the oxygen 
concentration is 8 percent or less by volume; and
    (2) Meet paragraph (a) or (c)(2) of this section.
    (c) Vessels certificated to carry only nonflammable cargo in cargo 
containment systems with secondary barriers must:
    (1) Meet paragraph (a) of this section; or
    (2) Have air drying systems that reduce the dewpoint of air admitted 
to hold or interbarrier spaces below the temperature of any surface in 
those spaces or -45 <deg>C (-49 <deg>F), whichever is warmer.
    (d) Vessels with refrigerated independent tanks type C must have 
inert gas or air drying systems that reduce the dewpoint of any inert 
gas or air admitted to the hold spaces below the temperature of any 
surface in those spaces or -45 <deg>C (-49 <deg>F), whichever is warmer.


<R05>
Sec. 154.903  Inert gas systems: General.

    (a) Inert gas carried or generated to meet Sec.Sec. 154.901, 
154.902, and 154.1848 must be non-flammable and non-reactive with the 
cargoes that the vessel is certificated to carry and the materials of 
construction of the cargo tanks, hold and interbarrier spaces, and 
insulation.
    (b) The boiling point and dewpoint at atmospheric pressure of the 
inert gas must be below the temperature of any surface in those spaces 
or -45 <deg>C (-49 <deg>F), whichever is warmer.
    (c) For the temperatures and pressures at which the gas is stored 
and used, storage vessels and inert gas piping must meet Sec.Sec. 
154.450 and 154.500 respectively.


<R05>
Sec. 154.904  Inert gas system: Controls.

    The inert gas system must have:
    (a) At least one check valve in the cargo area to prevent the back 
flow of cargo vapor into the inert gas system, or another means 
specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO);
    (b) If the inert gas system is in the machinery space or another 
space outside the cargo area, a second check valve in the cargo area 
meeting paragraph (a) of this section;
    (c) Automatic and manual inert gas pressure controls; and
    (d) Valves to isolate each inerted space.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.906  Inert gas generators.

    The inert gas generator must:
    (a) Produce an inert gas containing less than 5% oxygen by volume;
    (b) Have a device to continuously sample the discharge of the 
generator for oxygen content; and
    (c) Have an audible and visual alarm in the cargo control station 
that alarms when the inert gas contains 5% or more oxygen by volume.


<R05>
Sec. 154.908  Inert gas generator: Location.

    (a) Except as allowed in paragraph (b) of this section, an inert gas 
generator must be located in the main machinery space or a space that is 
not in the cargo area and does not have direct access to any 
accommodation, service, or control space.
    (b) An inert gas generator that does not use flame burning equipment 
may be located in the cargo area if specially

[[Page 245]]

approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.910  Inert gas piping: Location.

    Inert gas piping must not pass through or terminate in an 
accommodation, service, or control space.


<R05>
Sec. 154.912  Inerted spaces: Relief devices.

    Inerted spaces must be fitted with relief valves, rupture discs, or 
other devices specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979; CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 39629, Sept. 
1, 1983]

                               Electrical


<R05>
Sec. 154.1000  Applicability.

    Sections 154.1005 through 154.1020 apply to flammable cargo and 
ammonia carriers.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1002  Definition.

    For the purposes of Sec.Sec. 154.1005 through 154.1020, ``gas-
dangerous'' does not include the weather deck of an ammonia carrier.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1005  Equipment approval.

    (a) Electrical equipment that is required to be intrinsically safe 
or explosion proof under Sec. 154.1010 must be specially approved by the 
Commandant or listed as intrinsically safe or explosion proof by an 
independent laboratory that is specially approved by the Commandant (G-
MSO), for Class I Division I locations and the Group that is specified 
in Table 4 for the cargo carried.
    (b) Each submerged cargo pump motor installation must be specially 
approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).
    (c) Electrical equipment that must be intrinsically safe to meet 
Sec. 154.1010 must meet the definition in Sec. 110.15-100(i) of this 
chapter.
    (d) Electrical equipment that must be explosion proof to meet Sec. 
154.1010 must meet Sec. 110.15-65(e) of this chapter.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.1010  Electrical equipment in gas-dangerous space or zone.

    (a) Except as allowed in this section, electrical equipment must not 
be installed in a gas-dangerous space or zone.
    (b) Intrinsically safe electrical equipment and wiring may be in a 
gas-dangerous space or zone.
    (c) A submerged cargo pump motor may be in a cargo tank if:
    (1) Low liquid level, motor current, or pump discharge pressure 
automatically shuts down power to the pump motor if the pump loses 
suction;
    (2) There is an audible and visual alarm at the cargo control 
station that actuates if the motor shuts down under the requirements of 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section; and
    (3) There is a lockable circuit breaker or lockable switch that 
disconnects the power to the motor.
    (d) A supply cable for a submerged cargo pump motor may be in a hold 
space.
    (e) A hold space that has a tank that is not required to have a 
secondary barrier under Sec. 154.459 may only have:
    (1) Through runs of cable;
    (2) Explosion-proof lighting fixtures;
    (3) Depth sounding devices in gas-tight enclosures;
    (4) Log devices in gas-tight enclosures; and
    (5) Impressed current cathodic protection system electrodes in gas-
tight enclosures.
    (f) A space that is separated by a gastight steel boundary from a 
hold space that has a cargo tank that must have a secondary barrier, 
under the requirements of Sec. 154.459, may only have:
    (1) Through runs of cable;
    (2) Explosion-proof lighting fixtures;
    (3) Depth sounding devices in gastight enclosures;
    (4) Log devices in gastight enclosures;
    (5) Impressed current cathodic protection system electrodes in 
gastight enclosures;
    (6) Explosion-proof motors that operate cargo system valves or 
ballast system valves; and
    (7) Explosion-proof bells for general alarm systems.
    (g) A cargo handling room may only have:

[[Page 246]]

    (1) Explosion-proof lighting fixtures; and
    (2) Explosion-proof bells for general alarm systems.
    (h) A space for cargo hose storage may only have:
    (1) Explosion-proof lighting fixtures; and
    (2) Through runs of cable.
    (i) A space that has cargo piping may only have:
    (1) Explosion-proof lighting fixtures; and
    (2) Through runs of cable.
    (j) A gas-dangerous zone on the weather deck may only have:
    (1) Explosion-proof equipment that is for the operation of the 
vessel; and
    (2) Through runs of cable.
    (k) A space, except those under paragraphs (e) through (j) of this 
section, that has a direct opening to a gas-dangerous space or zone may 
only have the electrical equipment allowed in the gas-dangerous space or 
zone.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1015  Lighting in gas-dangerous space.

    (a) Each gas-dangerous space that has lighting fixtures must have at 
least two branch circuits for lighting.
    (b) Each switch and each overcurrent protective device for any 
lighting circuit that is in a gas-dangerous space must open each 
conductor of the circuit simultaneously.
    (c) Each switch and each overcurrent protective device for lighting 
in a gas-dangerous space must be in a gas-safe space.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1020  Emergency power.

    The emergency generator must be designed to allow operation at the 
final angle of heel under Sec. 154.230(a).

                              Firefighting

                Firefighting System: Exterior Water Spray


<R05>
Sec. 154.1105  Exterior water spray system: General.

    Each liquefied flammable gas vessel and each liquefied toxic gas 
vessel must have an exterior water spray system that meets Sec.Sec. 
154.1110 through 154.1135.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1110  Areas protected by system.

    Each water spray system must protect:
    (a) All cargo tank surfaces that are not covered by the vessel's 
hull structure or a steel cover;
    (b) Each cargo tank dome;
    (c) Each on-deck storage vessel for flammable or toxic liquefied 
gases;
    (d) Each cargo discharge and loading manifold;
    (e) Each quick-closing valve under Sec.Sec. 154.530, 154.532, and 
154.538, and other control valves essential to cargo flow;
    (f) Each boundary facing the cargo area of each superstructure that 
contains accommodation, service, or control spaces;
    (g) Each boundary facing the cargo area of each deckhouse that 
contains accommodation, service, or control spaces; and
    (h) Each boundary of each deckhouse that is within the cargo area 
and that is manned during navigation of the vessel or during cargo 
transfer operations, except the deckhouse roof if it is 2.4 m (8 ft.) or 
higher above the cargo containing structure.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979; 44 FR 59234, Oct. 15, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 154.1115  Discharge.

    (a) The discharge density of each water spray system must be at 
least:
    (1) 10000 cm\3\/m\2\/min. (0.25 gpm/ft.\2\) over each horizontal 
surface; and
    (2) 4000 cm\3\/m\2\/min. (0.10 gpm/ft.\2\) against vertical surface, 
including the water rundown.
    (b) The water spray protection under Sec. 154.1110 (d) and (e) must 
cover an area in a horizontal plane extending at least 0.5 m (19 in.) in 
each direction from the pipes, fittings, and valves, or the area of the 
drip tray, whichever is greater.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1120  Nozzles.

    (a) Nozzles for the water spray system must be spaced to provide the 
minimum discharge density under Sec. 154.1115 in each part of the 
protected area.
    (b) The vertical distance between water spray nozzles for the 
protection of vertical surfaces must be 3.7 m (12 ft.) or less.

[[Page 247]]


<R05>
Sec. 154.1125  Pipes, fittings, and valves.

    (a) Each pipe, fitting, and valve for each water spray system must 
meet Part 56 of this chapter.
    (b) Each water spray main that protects more than one area listed in 
Sec. 154.1110 must have at least one isolation valve at each branch 
connection and at least one isolation valve downstream of each branch 
connection to isolate damaged sections.
    (c) Each valved cross-connection from the water spray system to the 
fire main must be outside of the cargo area.
    (d) Each pipe, fitting, and valve for the water spray system must be 
made of fire resistant and corrosion resistant materials, such as 
galvanized steel or galvanized iron pipe.
    (e) Each water spray system must have a means of drainage to prevent 
corrosion of the system and freezing of accumulated water in subfreezing 
temperatures.
    (f) Each water spray system must have a dirt strainer that is 
located at the water spray system manifold or pump.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1130  Sections.

    (a) If a water spray system is divided into sections, each section 
must at least include the entire deck area bounded by the length of a 
cargo tank and the full beam of the vessel.
    (b) If a water spray system is divided into sections, the control 
valves must be at a single manifold that is aft of the cargo area.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1135  Pumps.

    (a) Water to the water spray system must be supplied by:
    (1) A pump that is only for the use of the system;
    (2) A fire pump; or
    (3) A pump specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).
    (b) Operation of a water spray system must not interfere with 
simultaneous operation of the fire main system at its required capacity. 
There must be a valved cross-connection between the two systems.
    (c) Except as allowed under para graph (d) of this section, each 
pump for each water spray system must have the capacity to 
simultaneously supply all areas named in Sec. 154.1110.
    (d) If the water spray system is divided into sections, the pump 
under paragraph (a) of this section must have the capacity to 
simultaneously supply the required discharge density under Sec. 
154.1115(a) for:
    (1) The areas in Sec.Sec. 154.1110(f) through (h) and 154.1115(b); 
and
    (2) The largest section that includes the required protection under 
Sec. 154.1110 (a), (b), and (c).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]

                    Firefighting System: Dry Chemical


<R05>
Sec. 154.1140  Dry chemical system: General.

    Each liquefied flammable gas carrier must have a dry chemical 
firefighting system that meets Sec.Sec. 154.1145 through 154.1170, Part 
56 and Subpart 162.039 of this chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1145  Dry chemical supply.

    (a) A vessel with a cargo carrying capacity less that 1000 m\3\ 
(35,300 ft.\3\) must have at least one self-contained dry chemical 
storage unit for the cargo area with an independent inert gas 
pressurizing source adjacent to each unit.
    (b) A vessel with a cargo carrying capacity of 1000 m\3\ (35,300 
ft.\3\) or more must have at least two self-contained dry chemical 
storage units for the cargo area with an independent inert gas 
pressurizing source adjacent to each unit.
    (c) A vessel with bow and stern loading and discharge areas must 
have at least one self-contained dry chemical storage unit with an 
independent inert gas pressurizing source adjacent to the unit for each 
area.
    (d) Each dry chemical storage unit and associated piping must be 
designed for:
    (1) Sequential discharge of each hose line and each monitor for 45 
seconds; and
    (2) Simultaneous discharge of all hose lines and monitors for 45 
seconds.
    (e) Each fully charged dry chemical storage unit must have the 
greater of the following:

[[Page 248]]

    (1) Enough dry chemical to provide for sequential discharge of each 
attached hose and monitor for 45 seconds.
    (2) Enough dry chemical to provide for simultaneous discharge of all 
attached hoses and monitors for 45 seconds.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1150  Distribution of dry chemical.

    (a) All locations on the above deck cargo area and the cargo piping 
outside that cargo area must be protected by:
    (1) At least two dry chemical hand hose lines; or
    (2) At least one dry chemical hand hose line and one dry chemical 
monitor.
    (b) At least one dry chemical storage unit and hand hose line or 
monitor must be at the after end of the cargo areas.
    (c) Each cargo loading and discharge manifold must be protected by 
at least one dry chemical monitor.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1155  Hand hose line: Coverage.

    The coverage for the area for a hand hose line under Sec. 154.1150 
must not exceed the length of the hand hose line except the coverage for 
the protection of areas that are inaccessible to personnel must not 
exceed one-half the projection of the hose at its rated discharge, or 10 
m (32.8 ft.), whichever is less.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1160  Monitor coverage of system.

    The coverage of each dry chemical system monitor under Sec. 154.1150 
must not exceed:
    (a) 10 m (32.8 ft.) at 10 kg/sec (22 lb/sec);
    (b) 30 m (98.4 ft.) at 25 kg/sec (55 lb/sec);
    (c) 40 m (131.2 ft.) at 45 kg/sec (99 lb/sec);
    (d) An interpolation between 10 m (32.8 ft.) at 10 kg/sec (22 lb/
sec) and 30 m (98.4 ft.) at 25 kg/sec (55 lb/sec); or
    (e) An interpolation between 30 m (98.4 ft.) at 25 kg/sec (55 lb/
sec) and 40 m (131.2 ft.) at 45 kg/sec (99 lb/sec).


<R05>
Sec. 154.1165  Controls.

    (a) Each dry chemical hand hose line must be one that can be 
actuated at its hose reel or hose storage cabinet.
    (b) Each dry chemical monitor must be one that can be actuated and 
controlled at the monitor.
    (c) A dry chemical monitor for the cargo loading and discharging 
manifold areas must be one that can be:
    (1) Actuated from a location other than the monitor and manifold 
area; and
    (2) Except for pre-aimed monitors, controlled from a location other 
than the monitor and manifold area.
    (d) Each dry chemical storage unit must have independent piping with 
a stop valve in the piping for each remote hand hose line and remote 
monitor where the piping connects to the storage container, if the unit 
has:
    (1) More than one hand hose line;
    (2) More than one monitor; or
    (3) A combination of hand hose lines and monitors.
    (e) Each stop valve under paragraph (d) of the section must be 
capable of:
    (1) Manual operation; and
    (2) Being opened from the hose reel or monitor to which it is 
connected.
    (f) Damage to any dry chemical system hose, monitor, pipe or control 
circuits must not prevent the operation of other hoses, monitors, or 
control circuit that are connected to the same storage unit.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1170  Hand hose line: General.

    Each dry chemical hand hose line must:
    (a) Not be longer than 33m (108 ft.);
    (b) Be stored on a hose reel or in a hose cabinet and be one that is 
operable whether or not it is unwound from a hose reel or removed from a 
hose cabinet;
    (c) Be non-kinkable;
    (d) Have a nozzle with a valve to start and stop the flow of 
chemical;
    (e) Have a capacity of at least 3.5 kg/sec (7.7 lb./sec); and
    (f) Be one that can be operated by one person.

                Cargo Area: Mechanical Ventilation System


<R05>
Sec. 154.1200  Mechanical ventilation system: General.

    (a) Each cargo compressor room, pump room, gas-dangerous cargo 
control station, and space that contains

[[Page 249]]

cargo handling equipment must have a fixed, exhaust-type mechanical 
ventilation system.
    (b) The following must have a supply-type mechanical ventilation 
system:
    (1) Each space that contains electric motors for cargo handling 
equipment.
    (2) Each gas-safe cargo control station in the cargo area.
    (3) Each gas-safe space in the cargo area.
    (4) Each space that contains inert gas generators, except main 
machinery spaces.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1205  Mechanical ventilation system: Standards.

    (a) Each exhaust type mechanical ventilation system required under 
Sec. 154.1200 (a) must have ducts for vapors from the following:
    (1) The deck level.
    (2) Bilges.
    (3) If the vapors are lighter than air, the top of each space that 
personnel enter during cargo handling operations.
    (b) The discharge end of each duct under paragraph (a) of this 
section must be at least 10 m (32.8 ft.) from ventilation intakes and 
openings to accommodations, service, control station, and other gas-safe 
spaces.
    (c) Each ventilation system under Sec. 154.1200 (a) and (b)(1) must 
change the air in that space and its adjoining trunks at least 30 times 
each hour.
    (d) Each ventilation system for a gas-safe cargo control station in 
the cargo area must change the air in that space at least eight times 
each hour.
    (e) A ventilation system must not recycle vapor from ventilation 
discharges.
    (f) Each mechanical ventilation system must have its operational 
controls outside the ventilated space.
    (g) No ventilation duct for a gas-dangerous space may pass through 
any machinery, accommodation, service, or control space, except as 
allowed under Sec. 154.703.
    (h) Each electric motor that drives a ventilation fan must not be 
within the ducts for any space that may contain flammable cargo vapors.
    (i) Ventilation impellers and the housing in way of those impellers 
on a flammable cargo carrier must meet one of the following:
    (1) The impeller, housing, or both made of non-metallic material 
that does not generate static electricity.
    (2) The impeller and housing made of non-ferrous material.
    (3) The impeller and housing made of austenitic stainless steel.
    (4) The impeller and housing made of ferrous material with at least 
13mm (0.512 in.) tip clearance.
    (j) No ventilation fan may have any combination of fixed or rotating 
components made of an aluminum or magnesium alloy and ferrous fixed or 
rotating components.
    (k) Each ventilation intake and exhaust must have a protective metal 
screen of not more than 13mm (0.512 in.) square mesh.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1210  Hold space, void space, cofferdam, and spaces containing cargo 
piping.

    (a) Each hold space, void space, cofferdam, and spaces containing 
cargo piping must have:
    (1) A fixed mechanical ventilation system; or
    (2) A fixed ducting system that has a portable blower that meets 
Sec. 154.1205(i) and (j).
    (b) A portable blower in any personnel access opening must not 
reduce the area of that opening so that the opening does not meet Sec. 
154.340.

                             Instrumentation


<R05>
Sec. 154.1300  Liquid level gauging system: General.

    (a) If Table 4 lists a closed gauge for a cargo, the liquid level 
gauging system under Sec. 154.1305 must be closed gauges that do not 
have any opening through which cargo liquid or vapor could escape, such 
as an ultrasonic device, float type device, electronic or magnetic 
probe, or bubble tube indicator.
    (b) If Table 4 lists a restricted gauge for a cargo, the liquid 
level gauging system under Sec. 154.1305 must be closed gauges that meet 
paragraph (a) of this section or restricted gauges that do not vent the 
cargo tank's vapor space, such as a fixed tube, slip tube, or rotary 
tube.

[[Page 250]]


<R05>
Sec. 154.1305  Liquid level gauging system: Standards.

    (a) Each cargo tank must have at least one liquid level gauging 
system that is operable:
    (1) At pressures up to, and including, the MARVS of the tank; and
    (2) At temperatures that are within the cargo handling temperature 
range for all cargoes carried.
    (b) Unless the cargo tank has one liquid gauging system that can be 
repaired and maintained when the tank contains cargo, each cargo tank 
must have at least two liquid level gauging systems that meet paragraph 
(a) of this section.
    (c) Each liquid level gauging system must measure liquid levels from 
400 mm (16 in.) or less from the lowest point in the cargo tank, except 
collection wells, to 100 percent full.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1310  Closed gauge shut-off valve.

    Each closed gauge that is not mounted directly on the cargo tank 
must have a shut-off valve that is as close to the tank as practical.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1315  Restricted gauge excess flow valve.

    Each restricted gauge that penetrates a cargo tank must have an 
excess flow valve unless the gauge meets Sec. 154.536.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1320  Sighting ports, tubular gauge glasses, and flat plate type 
gauge glasses.

    (a) Cargo tanks may have sighting ports as a secondary means of 
liquid level gauging in addition to the gauges under Sec. 154.1305, if:
    (1) The tank has a MARVS that is less than 69 kPa gauge (10 psig);
    (2) The port has a protective cover and an internal scale; and
    (3) The port is above the liquid level.
    (b) Tubular gauge glasses must not be liquid level gauges for cargo 
tanks.
    (c) Plate type gauge glasses must not be liquid level gauges for 
cargo tanks, except deck tanks if the gauge connections have excess flow 
valves.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1325  Liquid level alarm system: All cargo tanks.

    Except as allowed under Sec. 154.1330, each cargo tank must have a 
high liquid level alarm system that:
    (a) Is independent of the liquid level gauging system under Sec. 
154.1305;
    (b) Actuates quick-closing valves under Sec.Sec. 154.530, 154.532, 
and 154,538 or a stop valve in the cargo tank loading line to prevent 
the tank from becoming 100 percent liquid full and without causing the 
pressure in the loading lines to exceed the design pressure; and
    (c) Actuates an audible and visual alarm at the cargo control 
station at the liquid level at which the valves under paragraph (b) of 
this section are actuated or at some lower liquid level.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1330  Liquid level alarm system: Independent tank type C.

    Independent tanks type C need not have the high liquid level alarm 
system under Sec. 154.1325 if:
    (a) The tank volume is less than 200 m\3\ (7,060 ft.\3\); or
    (b) The tank can withstand the maximum possible pressure during 
loading, that pressure is below the relief valve setting, and overflow 
of the tank cannot occur.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1335  Pressure and vacuum protection.

    (a) Each cargo tank must have the following:
    (1) A pressure gauge that:
    (i) Monitors the vapor space;
    (ii) Is readable at the tank; and
    (iii) Has remote readouts at the cargo control station.
    (2) If vacuum protection is required under Sec. 154.804, a vacuum 
gauge meeting paragraphs (a)(1)(i), (a)(1)(ii), and (a)(1)(iii) of this 
section.
    (b) The vessel must have at least one high pressure alarm that:
    (1) Actuates before the pressure in any cargo tank exceeds the 
maximum pressure specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO); and
    (2) Actuates an audible and visual alarm at the cargo control 
station, and a remote group alarm in the wheelhouse.
    (c) If vacuum protection is required under Sec. 154.804, the vessel 
must have at least one low pressure alarm that:

[[Page 251]]

    (1) Actuates before the pressure in any cargo tank falls below the 
minimum pressure specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO); and
    (2) Actuates an audible and visual alarm at the cargo control 
station, and a remote group alarm in the wheelhouse.
    (d) At least one pressure gauge must be fitted on each:
    (1) Enclosed hold;
    (2) Enclosed interbarrier space;
    (3) Cargo pump discharge line;
    (4) Liquid cargo manifold; and
    (5) Vapor cargo manifold.
    (e) There must be a local manifold pressure gauge between each 
manifold stop valve and each hose connection to the shore.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.1340  Temperature measuring devices.

    (a) Each cargo tank must have devices that measure the temperature:
    (1) At the bottom of the tank; and
    (2) Near the top of the tank and below the maximum liquid level 
allowed under Sec. 154.1844.
    (b) Each device required by paragraph (a) must have a readout at the 
cargo control station.
    (c) Except for independent tanks type C, each cargo containment 
system for a design temperature colder than -55 <deg>C (-67 <deg>F) must 
have temperature measuring devices that meet the following:
    (1) The number and location of the devices must be specially 
approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).
    (2) The devices must be within the cargo tank's insulation or on the 
adjacent hull structure.
    (3) Each device must show the temperature continuously or at regular 
intervals of one hour or less.
    (4) Each device must actuate an audible and visual alarm at the 
cargo control station and a remote group alarm in the wheelhouse before 
the temperature of the steel of the adjacent hull structure is cooled 
below the lowest temperature allowed for the steel under Sec. 154.172.
    (d) For each cargo tank with a design temperature colder than -55 
<deg>C (-67 <deg>F), the number and arrangement of the devices that show 
the temperature of the tank during cool down procedures must be 
specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.1345  Gas detection.

    (a) Each vessel carrying a cargo that is designated with an ``I'' or 
``I and T'' in Table 4 must have:
    (1) A fixed flammable gas detection system that meets Sec. 154.1350; 
and
    (2) Two portable gas detectors that can each measure 0 to 100% of 
the lower flammable limit of the cargo carried.
    (b) Each vessel carrying a cargo that is designated with a ``T'' or 
``I and T'' in Table 4 must have:
    (1) Two portable gas detectors that show if the concentration of 
cargo is above or below the threshold limit value listed in 29 CFR 
1910.1000 for that cargo; and
    (2) Fixed gas sampling tubes in each hold space and interbarrier 
space with:
    (i) The number of tubes specially approved by the Commandant (G-
MSO);
    (ii) Each tube valved and capped above the main deck unless it is 
connected to a fixed toxic gas detector;
    (iii) If the vessel carries cargo that is heavier than the 
atmosphere of the space, each tube's open end in the lower part of the 
space;
    (iv) If the vessel carries cargo that is lighter than the atmosphere 
of the space, each tube's open end in the upper part of the space;
    (v) If the vessel carries cargo that is heavier than the atmosphere 
of the space and another cargo that is lighter than the atmosphere of 
the space, tubes with their open ends in the lower part of the space and 
tubes with their open ends in the upper part of the space; and
    (vi) If the vessel carries cargo that can be both heavier and 
lighter than the atmosphere of the space, tubes with their open ends in 
the lower part of the space and tubes with their open ends in the upper 
part of the space.
    (c) A vessel that carries methyl bromide or sulfur dioxide must have 
a fixed gas detection system that is not located in a gas-safe space.

[[Page 252]]

    (d) A vessel that carries sulfur dioxide must have a fixed gas 
detection system that meets Sec. 154.1350 except paragraph (j).
    (e) Each alarm under Sec. 154.1350(e) on a vessel that carries 
methyl bromide or sulfur dioxide must be set at or below the threshold 
limit value listed in 29 CFR 1910.1000 for the cargo carried.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.1350  Flammable gas detection system.

    (a) The vessel must have a fixed flammable gas detection system that 
has sampling points in:
    (1) Each cargo pump room;
    (2) Each cargo compressor room;
    (3) Each motor room for cargo handling machinery;
    (4) Each cargo control station that is not gas-safe;
    (5) Each hold space, interbarrier space, and other enclosed spaces, 
except fuel oil or ballast tanks, in the cargo area, unless the vessel 
has independent tanks type C; and
    (6) Each space between the doors of an air lock under Sec. 154.345.
    (b) The sampling points under paragraph (a) of this section must 
meet Sec. 154.1345(b)(2) (iii) through (vi).
    (c) Gas sampling lines for the flammable gas detection system must 
not pass through any gas-safe space, except the gas-safe space in which 
the gas detection equipment is located.
    (d) Gas detection systems must have a readout with meters that show 
flammable gas concentration over the concentration or volume ranges 
under paragraph (t) or (u) of this section.
    (e) Each flammable gas detection system must have audible and visual 
alarms that are actuated at a cargo concentration that is 30% or less of 
the lower flammable limit in air of the cargo carried.
    (f) Each flammable gas detection system must have an audible and 
visual alarm for power failure and loss of gas sampling flow.
    (g) The alarms under paragraphs (e) and (f) of this section must 
signal in the space where the gas detection system's readout is located 
and must meet Sec. 154.1365.
    (h) Remote group alarms, that indicate that one of the alarm 
conditions under paragraphs (e) and (f) of this section exists, must 
meet Sec. 154.1365 and must be in each wheelhouse and in each cargo 
control station if the gas detection system's readout is not located in 
those spaces.
    (i) Each flammable gas detection system must monitor each sampling 
point at 30 minute or shorter intervals.
    (j) Electrical equipment for each flammable gas detection system 
that is in a gas-dangerous space or area must meet Sec.Sec. 154.1000 
through 154.1015.
    (k) Each flammable gas detection system must have enough flame 
arrestors for all gas sampling lines to prevent flame propagation to the 
spaces served by the system through the sampling lines.
    (l) Each flammable gas detection system must have a filter that 
removes particulate matter in each gas sampling line.
    (m) Each filter under paragraph (l) of this section must be located 
where it can be removed during vessel operation, unless it can be freed 
by back pressure.
    (n) Each flammable gas detection system in a gas-safe space must:
    (1) Have a shut-off valve in each sampling line from an enclosed 
space, such as a hold or interbarrier space; and
    (2) Exhaust gas to a safe location in the open atmosphere and away 
from all ignition sources.
    (o) Each flammable gas detection system must not have common 
sampling lines, except sampling lines may be manifolded at the gas 
detector location if each line has an automatic valve that prevents 
cross-communication between sampling points.
    (p) Each flammable gas detection system must have at least one 
connection for injecting zero gas and span gas into the system for 
testing and calibration.
    (q) Each flammable gas detection system must have span gas for 
testing and calibration that is of known concentration.
    (r) The calibration test procedure and type and concentration of 
span gas under paragraph (q) of this section must be on or in each gas 
analyzer cabinet.

[[Page 253]]

    (s) Each flammable gas detection system must have at least one flow 
meter capable of measuring the flow to the gas analyzer, and must 
provide a means for ensuring that there is a positive flow in the right 
direction in each sampling line at all times.
    (t) Each flammable gas detection system must measure gas 
concentrations that:
    (1) Are at least 0% through 200% of the alarm concentration; and
    (2) Allow calibration of the equipment with span gas.
    (u) In each hold and each interbarrier space that contains tanks 
other than independent tanks type A, B, or C, the flammable gas 
detection system must measure cargo concentrations of 0 to 100% by 
volume with:
    (1) An analyzer other than the one under paragraph (t) of this 
section; or
    (2) The analyzer under paragraph (t) of this section with a scale 
switch that automatically returns the analyzer to the concentration 
range under paragraph (t) of this section when released.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1360  Oxygen analyzer.

    The vessel must have a portable analyzer that measures oxygen levels 
in an inert atmosphere.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1365  Audible and visual alarms.

    (a) Each audible alarm must have an arrangement that allows it to be 
turned off after sounding. For remote group alarms this arrangement must 
not interrupt the alarm's actuation by other faults.
    (b) Each visual alarm must be one that can be turned off only after 
the fault that actuated it is corrected.
    (c) Each visual alarm must be marked to show the type and, except 
for remote group alarms, the location of each fault that actuates it.
    (d) Each vessel must have means for testing each alarm.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1370  Pressure gauge and vacuum gauge marking.

    Each pressure gauge and vacuum gauge under Sec. 154.1335(a) must be 
marked with the maximum and minimum pressures that are specified on the 
vessel's certificate for the cargo carried.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1375  Readout for temperature measuring device: Marking.

    Each readout under Sec. 154.1340 for a device that measures 
temperature in a cargo tank must be marked with the design temperature 
specified for the cargo tank on the vessel's certificate.

                            Safety Equipment


<R05>
Sec. 154.1400  Safety equipment: All vessels.

    (a) Instead of the equipment under Sec. 35.30-20 of this chapter, a 
vessel of less than 25,000 m\3\ cargo capacity must have the following 
personnel safety equipment:
    (1) Six self-contained, pressure-demand-type, air-breathing 
apparatus approved by the Mining Enforcement and Safety Administration 
(MESA) or the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH), each having at least a 30 minute capacity.
    (2) Nine spare bottles of air for the self-contained air-breathing 
apparatus, each having at least a 30 minute capacity.
    (3) Six steel-cored lifelines.
    (4) Six Type II or Type III flashlights constructed and marked in 
accordance with ASTM F 1014 (incorporated by reference, see Sec. 154.1).
    (5) Three fire axes.
    (6) Six helmets that meet ANSI Safety Requirements for Industrial 
Head Protection, Z-89.1 (1969).
    (7) Six sets of boots and gloves that are made of rubber or other 
electrically non-conductive material.
    (8) Six sets of goggles that meet the specifications of ANSI 
Practice for Occupational and Educational Eye and Face Protection, Z-
87.1 (1979).
    (9) Three outfits that protect the skin from scalding steam and the 
heat of a fire, and that have a water resistant outer surface.
    (10) Three chemical protective outfits that protect the wearers from 
the particular personnel hazards presented by the cargo vapor.
    (b) Instead of the equipment under Sec. 35.30-20 of this chapter, a 
vessel of 25,000 m\3\ cargo capacity or more must have the following 
personnel safety equipment:

[[Page 254]]

    (1) Eight self-contained, pressure-demand-type, air-breathing 
apparatus approved by the Mining Enforcement and Safety Administration 
(MESA) or the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH), each having at least a 30 minute capacity.
    (2) Nine spare bottles of air for the self-contained air-breathing 
apparatus, each having at least a 30 minute capacity.
    (3) Eight steel-cored lifelines.
    (4) Eight Type II or Type III flashlights constructed and marked in 
accordance with ASTM F 1014 (incorporated by reference, see Sec. 154.1).
    (5) Three fire axes.
    (6) Eight helmets that meet ANSI Safety Requirements for Industrial 
Head Protection, Z-89.1 (1969).
    (7) Eight sets of boots and gloves that are made of rubber or other 
electrically non-conductive material.
    (8) Eight sets of goggles that meet the specifications of ANSI 
Practice for Occupational and Educational Eye and Face Protection, Z-
87.1 (1979).
    (9) Five outfits that protect the skin from scalding steam and the 
heat of a fire, and that have a water resistant outer surface.
    (10) Three chemical protective outfits that protect the wearers from 
the particular personnel hazards presented by the cargo vapor.
    (c) When Table 4 references this section, a vessel carrying the 
listed cargo must have the following additional personnel protection 
equipment:
    (1) Three self-contained, pressure-demand-type, air-breathing 
apparatus approved by the Mining Enforcement and Safety Administration 
(MESA) or the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH), each having at least a 30 minute capacity.
    (2) Nine spare bottles of air for the self-contained air-breathing 
apparatus, each having at least a 30 minute capacity.
    (3) Three steel-cored lifelines.
    (4) Three Type II or Type III flashlights constructed and marked in 
accordance with ASTM F 1014 (incorporated by reference, see Sec. 154.1).
    (5) Three helmets that meet ANSI Safety Requirements for Industrial 
Head Protection, Z-89.1 (1969).
    (6) Three sets of boots and gloves that are made of rubber or other 
electrically non-conductive material.
    (7) Three sets of goggles that meet the specifications of ANSI 
Practice for Occupational and Educational Eye and Face Protection, Z-
87.1 (1979).
    (8) Three chemical protective outfits that protect the wearers from 
the particular personnel hazards presented by the cargo vapor.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 77-069, 52 FR 
31630, Aug. 21, 1987; CGD 82-042, 17705, May 18, 1988; USCG-1999-5151, 
64 FR 67183, Dec. 1, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 154.1405  Respiratory protection.

    When Table 4 references this section, a vessel carrying the listed 
cargo must have:
    (a) Respiratory protection equipment for each person on board that 
protects the person from the cargo vapor for at least 5 minutes; and
    (b) Two additional sets of respiratory protection equipment that:
    (1) Are stowed in the wheelhouse; and
    (2) Protects the wearer from the cargo vapor for at least 5 minutes.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1410  Decontamination shower.

    When Table 4 references this section, a vessel carrying the listed 
cargo must have a decontamination shower and an eye wash that:
    (a) Are on the weatherdeck; and
    (b) Have their location marked EMERGENCY SHOWER in letters:
    (1) 7.6 cm (3 in.) high; and
    (2) 5.1 cm (2 in.) wide.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1415  Air compressor.

    Each vessel must have an air compressor to recharge the bottles for 
the air-breathing apparatus.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1420  Stretchers and equipment.

    Each vessel must have:
    (a) Two stretchers or wire baskets; and
    (b) Equipment for lifting an injured person from a cargo tank, hold, 
or void space.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1430  Equipment locker.

    One of each item of equipment under Sec.Sec. 154.1400 and 154.1420 
must be stowed in a marked locker:

[[Page 255]]

    (a) On the open deck in or adjacent to the cargo area; or
    (b) In the accommodation house, near to a door that opens onto the 
main deck.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1435  Medical first aid guide.

    Each vessel must have a copy of the IMO Medical First Aid Guide for 
Use in Accidents Involving Dangerous Goods, printed by IMO, London, U.K.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1440  Antidotes.

    Each vessel must have the antidotes prescribed in the IMO Medical 
First Aid Guide for Use in Accidents Involving Dangerous Goods, printed 
by IMO, London, U.K. for the cargoes being carried.


<R04>
          Subpart D--Special Design and Operating Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 154.1700  Purpose.

    This subpart prescribes design and operating requirements that are 
unique for certain cargoes regulated by this part.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1702  Materials of construction.

    When Table 4 references one of the following paragraphs in this 
section, the materials in the referenced paragraph must not be in 
components that contact the cargo liquid or vapor:
    (a) Aluminum and aluminum bearing alloys.
    (b) Copper and copper bearing alloys.
    (c) Zinc or galvanized steel.
    (d) Magnesium.
    (e) Mercury.
    (f) Acetylide forming materials, such as copper, silver, and 
mercury.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1705  Independent tank type C.

    The following cargoes must be carried in an independent tank type C 
that meets Sec. 154.701(a):
    (a) Ethylene oxide.
    (b) Methyl bromide.
    (c) Sulfur dioxide.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1710  Exclusion of air from cargo tank vapor spaces.

    When a vessel is carrying acetaldehyde, butadiene, ethylene oxide, 
or vinyl chloride, the master shall ensure that air is:
    (a) Purged from the cargo tanks and associated piping before the 
cargo is loaded; and
    (b) Excluded after the cargo is loaded by maintaining a positive 
pressure of at least 13.8 kPa gauge (2 psig) by:
    (1) Introducing a gas that:
    (i) Is not reactive;
    (ii) Is not flammable; and
    (iii) Does not contain more than 0.2% oxygen by volume; or
    (2) Controlling the cargo temperature.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1715  Moisture control.

    When a vessel is carrying sulfur dioxide, the master shall ensure 
that:
    (a) A cargo tank is dry before it is loaded with sulfur dioxide; and
    (b) Air or inert gas admitted into a cargo tank carrying sulfur 
dioxide during discharging or tank breathing has a moisture content 
equal to or less than the moisture content of air with a dewpoint of -45 
<deg>C (-49 <deg>F) at atmospheric pressure.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1720  Indirect refrigeration.

    A refrigeration system that is used to cool acetaldehyde, ethylene 
oxide, or methyl bromide, must be an indirect refrigeration system that 
does not use vapor compression.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1725  Ethylene oxide.

    (a) A vessel carrying ethylene oxide must:
    (1) Have cargo piping, vent piping, and refrigeration equipment that 
have no connections to other systems;
    (2) Have valves, flanges, fittings, and accessory equipment made of 
steel, stainless steel, except types 416 and 442, or other material 
specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO);
    (3) Have valve disk faces, and other wearing parts of valves made of 
stainless steel containing not less than 11% chromium;
    (4) Have gaskets constructed of spirally wound stainless steel with 
teflon or other material specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO);
    (5) Not have asbestos, rubber, or cast iron components in the cargo 
containment system and piping;
    (6) Not have threaded joints in cargo piping;

[[Page 256]]

    (7) Have a water spray system under Sec. 154.1105 that protects the 
above deck cargo piping; and
    (8) Have a nitrogen inerting system or on board nitrogen gas storage 
that can inert the vapor space of an ethylene oxide cargo tank for a 
period of 30 days under the condition of paragraph (e) of this section.
    (b) Cargo hose used for ethylene oxide must:
    (1) Be specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO); and
    (2) Be marked ``For (Alkylene or Ethylene) Oxide Transfer Only.''
    (c) Ethylene oxide must be maintained at less than 30 <deg>C (86 
<deg>F).
    (d) Cargo tank relief valves for tanks containing ethylene oxide 
must be set at 539 kPa gauge (78.2 psig) or higher.
    (e) The vapor space of a cargo tank carrying ethylene oxide must be 
maintained at a nitrogen concentration of 45% by volume.
    (f) A vessel must have a method for jettisoning ethylene oxide that 
meets Sec.Sec. 154.356 and 154.1872.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.1730  Ethylene oxide: Loading and off loading.

    (a) The master shall ensure that before ethylene oxide is loaded 
into a cargo tank:
    (1) The tank is thoroughly clean, dry, and free of rust;
    (2) The hold spaces are inerted with an inert gas that meets Sec. 
154.1710(b)(1); and
    (3) The cargo tank vapor space is inerted with nitrogen.
    (b) Ethylene oxide must be off loaded by a deepwell pump or inert 
gas displacement.
    (c) Ethylene oxide must not be carried in deck tanks.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1735  Methyl acetylene-propadiene mixture.

    (a) The composition of the methyl acetylene-propadiene mixture at 
loading must be within the following limits or specially approved by the 
Commandant (G-MSO):
    (1) One composition is:
    (i) Maximum methyl acetylene and propadiene molar ratio of 3 to 1;
    (ii) Maximum combined concentration of methyl acetylene and 
propadiene of 65 mole percent;
    (iii) Minimum combined concentration of propane, butane, and 
isobutane of 24 mole percent, of which at least one-third (on a molar 
basis) must be butanes and one-third propane; and
    (iv) Maximum combined concentration of propylene and butadiene of 10 
mole percent.
    (2) A second composition is:
    (i) Maximum methyl acetylene and propadiene combined concentration 
of 30 mole percent;
    (ii) Maximum methyl acetylene concentration of 20 mole percent;
    (iii) Maximum propadiene concentration of 20 mole percent;
    (iv) Maximum propylene concentration of 45 mole percent;
    (v) Maximum butadiene and butylenes combined concentration of 2 mole 
percent;
    (vi) A minimum saturated C <INF>4</INF> hydrocarbon concentration of 
4 mole percent; and
    (vii) A minimum propane concentration of 25 mole percent.
    (b) A vessel carrying a methyl acetylene-propadiene mixture must 
have a refrigeration system without vapor compression or have a 
refrigeration system with the following features:
    (1) A vapor compressor that does not raise the temperature and 
pressure of the vapor above 60 <deg>C (140 <deg>F) and 1.72 MPa gauge 
(250 psig) during its operation and that does not allow vapor to 
stagnate in the compressor while it continues to run.
    (2) Discharge piping from each compressor stage or each cylinder in 
the same stage of a reciprocating compressor that has:
    (i) Two temperature actuated shutdown switches set to operate at 60 
<deg>C (140 <deg>F) or less;
    (ii) A pressure actuated shutdown switch set to operate at 1.72 MPa 
gauge (250 psig) or less; and
    (iii) A safety relief valve set to relieve at 1.77 MPa gauge (256 
psig) or less.
    (3) A relief valve that vents to a mast meeting Sec. 154.805 and 
that does not relieve into the compressor suction line.

[[Page 257]]

    (4) An alarm that sounds in the cargo control station and in the 
wheelhouse when any of the high pressure or high temperature switches 
under paragraphs (b)(2)(i) and (b)(2)(ii) of this section operate.
    (c) A vessel carrying a methyl acetylene-propadiene mixture must 
have separate cargo piping, vent piping, and refrigeration equipment for 
methyl acetylene-propadiene that are segregated from other cargo piping, 
vent piping and refrigeration equipment on the vessel.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979; 44 FR 59234, Oct. 15, 1979; CGD 
82-063b, 48 FR 4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.1740  Vinyl chloride: Inhibiting and inerting.

    When a vessel is carrying vinyl chloride, the master shall ensure 
that:
    (a) Section 154.1818 is met; or
    (b) Section 154.1710 is met, and the oxygen content of inert gas is 
less than 0.1% by volume.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1745  Vinyl chloride: Transferring operations.

    A vessel carrying vinyl chloride must meet the requirements of Sec. 
151.50-34(g) through (k) of this chapter.

[CGD 95-012, 60 FR 48051, Sept. 18, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 154.1750  Butadiene or vinyl chloride: Refrigeration system.

    A refrigeration system for butadiene or vinyl chloride must not use 
vapor compression unless it:
    (a) Avoids any stagnation points where uninhibited liquid can 
accumulate; or
    (b) Has inhibited liquid from the cargo tank added to the vapor 
upstream of the condenser.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1755  Nitrogen.

    Except for deck tanks and their piping systems, cargo containment 
systems and piping systems carrying nitrogen must be specially approved 
by the Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.1760  Liquid ammonia.

    The master shall ensure that no person sprays liquid ammonia into a 
cargo tank containing more than 8% oxygen by volume.


<R04>
                          Subpart E--Operations


<R05>
Sec. 154.1800  Special operating requirements under Part 35 of this chapter.

    Each vessel must meet the requirements of Part 35 of this chapter 
except Sec. 35.30-20.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1801  Certificates, letters, and endorsements: U.S. flag vessels.

    No person may operate a U.S. flag vessel unless the vessel has a 
Certificate of Inspection, issued under Subchapter D of this chapter, 
which is endorsed with the name of the cargo that it is allowed to 
carry.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1802  Certificates, letters and endorsements: Foreign flag vessels.

    (a) No person may operate on the navigable waters of the United 
States a foreign flag vessel, whose flag administration issues IMO 
Certificates, unless the vessel has:
    (1) An IMO Certificate issued by the flag administration that is 
endorsed with the name of the cargo that it is allowed to carry, and, 
except when entering United States waters to be examined as required by 
Sec. 154.150, a Certificate of Compliance <SUP>1</SUP> issued by the 
Coast Guard endorsed under this part with the name of the cargo that it 
is allowed to carry; or
    (2) Special approval under Sec. 154.30.
    (b) No person may operate on the navigable waters of the United 
States a foreign flag vessel, whose flag administration does not issue 
IMO Certificates, unless the vessel has:
    (1) Except when entering United States waters to be examined as 
required by Sec. 154.150, a Certificate of Compliance <SUP>1</SUP> 
issued by the Coast Guard endorsed under this part with the name of the 
cargo it is allowed to carry; or
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Until the Certificate of Compliance form is developed, the 
Letter of Compliance with a Subchapter O endorsement for the carriage of 
liquefied gases will serve the purpose of the endorsed Certificate of 
Compliance.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 258]]

    (2) Special approval under Sec. 154.30.
    (c) No person may operate on the navigable waters of the United 
States a foreign flag vessel unless the vessel has onboard the following 
plans and information which except for the certificates under paragraph 
(c)(1) of this section, are in English:
    (1) The vessel's Cargo Ship Safety Construction Certificate and 
Cargo Ship Safety Equipment Certificate issued under the International 
Convention for Safety of Life at Sea, 1974.
    (2) A description and schematic plan of the arrangement for inerting 
cargo tanks, hold spaces, and interbarrier spaces.
    (3) A description of the cargo tank gauging equipment.
    (4) A description and instruction manual for the calibration of the 
cargo leak detector equipment.
    (5) A schematic plan that shows the locations of leak detectors and 
sampling points.
    (6) If the vessel carries methane, a description of the systems for 
cargo temperature and pressure control. (See Sec.Sec. 154.703 through 
154.709).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 81-052, 50 FR 
8735, Mar. 5, 1985; CGD 77-069, 52 FR 31631, Aug. 21, 1987; CGD 90-008, 
55 FR 30663, July 26, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 154.1803  Expiration of Certificates of Compliance.

    (a) A Certificate of Compliance expires after a period not to exceed 
twenty-four months from the date of the examination under Sec. 154.150.
    (b) If a vessel's IMO Certificate of Fitness expires or otherwise 
becomes invalid, its Certificate of Compliance becomes invalid for the 
carriage of cargoes listed in Table 4 of this part or authorized by 
special approval under Sec. 154.12. To maintain the validity of the 
Certificate of Compliance, the vessel's owner must submit a copy of any 
revised or reissued IMO Certificate to Commanding Officer, Marine Safety 
Center.

[CGD 81-052, 50 FR 8735, Mar. 5, 1985; CGD 95-072, 60 FR 50466, Sept. 
29, 1995; 60 FR 54106, Oct. 19, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 154.1804  Document posted in wheelhouse.

    No person may operate a U.S. flag vessel unless the documents under 
Sec. 154.1801 are under glass in a conspicuous place in the wheelhouse.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1806  Regulations on board.

    No person may operate a U.S. flag vessel unless a copy of this part 
and a copy of Part 35 of this chapter are on board.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1808  Limitations in the endorsement.

    No person may operate a vessel unless that person complies with all 
limitations in the endorsement on the vessel's Certificate of Inspection 
or Certificate of Compliance.

[CGD 81-052, 50 FR 8735, Mar. 5, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 154.1809  Loading and stability manual.

    (a) No person may operate a vessel unless that vessel has on board a 
loading and stability manual.
    (b) The loading and stability manual must contain:
    (1) Information that enables the master to load and ballast the 
vessel while keeping structural stresses within design limits; and
    (2) The information required by Sec. 170.110 of this chapter.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 79-023, 49 FR 
51010, Nov. 4, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.1810  Cargo manual.

    (a) No person may operate a foreign flag vessel, whose flag 
administration does not issue IMO Certificates, on the navigable waters 
of the United States, or a U.S. flag vessel, unless the vessel has on 
board a cargo manual containing the following information:
    (1) A description of each cargo carried, its handling hazards as a 
liquid or as a gas including frostbite or asphyxiation, its safety 
equipment and necessary first aid measures required by this part.
    (2) A description of the dangers of asphyxiation from the inerting 
gases used on the vessel.

[[Page 259]]

    (3) The measures that mitigate embrittlement of steel structure in 
way of cargo leakage.
    (4) The use of the firefighting systems on the vessel.
    (5) The features of the cargo containment system that affect its 
operation and maintenance, including pressure and temperature ranges and 
relief valve settings.
    (6) Pressures, temperatures, and liquid levels for all operations.
    (7) General information derived from the first loading of the 
vessel.
    (8) Alarm settings.
    (9) Descriptions of the components of the cargo system, including 
the following:
    (i) Liquid cargo system.
    (ii) Liquid recirculating or condensate return system.
    (iii) Cargo tank cool-down system.
    (iv) Cargo tank warm-up or vaporization system.
    (v) Gas main system.
    (vi) Cargo tank or compressor relief system and blocked liquid or 
gas relief system.
    (vii) Inerting system.
    (viii) Boil-off gas compressor or reliquefaction system.
    (ix) Gas detection systems.
    (x) Alarm or safety indication systems.
    (xi) Cargo jettisoning system.
    (xii) The system for using boil-off gas as fuel.
    (10) A description of cargo loading and discharge operations, 
including simultaneous handling of multigrades of cargo and ballast.
    (11) A description of cargo operations during the voyage.
    (12) A description of cargo tank cool-down and warm-up operations 
including purging with inert gas and air.
    (13) A description of hull and cargo tank temperature monitoring 
systems.
    (14) A description of gas detection systems and alarm or safety 
systems.
    (15) A description of the following conditions and their symptoms, 
including emergency measures and corrective actions:
    (i) Cargo or ballast valve malfunction.
    (ii) Low cargo tank gas pressure.
    (iii) High fill level shutdown.
    (iv) Gas compressor shutdown.
    (v) Hull cold spots.
    (vi) Cargo piping leaks.
    (vii) Primary or secondary barrier failure.
    (viii) Hold boundary structural failure.
    (ix) Fire in vent mast head.
    (x) Reliquefaction plant failure.
    (xi) Vaporizer malfunction or failure.
    (xii) Piping or cargo valve freeze-up.
    (16) Any other matters relating to operation of the cargo systems.
    (17) The operational means to maintain the vessel in a condition of 
positive stability in accordance with the loading and stability manual 
under Sec. 154.1809 through all conditions of:
    (i) Loading and deballasting; and
    (ii) Unloading and ballasting.
    (b) The master shall ensure that the cargo manual is kept up-to-
date.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1812  Operational information for terminal personnel.

    The master shall ensure that terminal personnel are told the 
operational information required by Sec. 154.1810(a)(17).


<R05>
Sec. 154.1814  Cargo information cards.

    (a) No person may operate a vessel unless a cargo information card 
for each cargo being transported is carried either in the wheelhouse, in 
the ship's office, or in another location easily accessible to the 
person in charge of the watch.
    (b) When a vessel is moored at a terminal, the master shall ensure 
that a set of information cards is in the possession of the terminal's 
person in charge of cargo transfer operations.
    (c) Each card must be at least 17 cm x 24 cm (6\3/4\ in. x 9\1/2\ 
in.), have printing on one side only, and must contain the following 
information about the cargo:
    (1) Name as listed in Table 4.
    (2) Appearance.
    (3) Odor.
    (4) Safe handling procedures, including special handling 
instructions, and handling hazards.
    (5) Procedures to follow in the event of spills, leaks, or 
uncontrolled cargo release.
    (6) Procedures to be followed if a person is exposed to the cargo.
    (7) Firefighting procedures and materials.

[[Page 260]]


<R05>
Sec. 154.1816  Cargo location plan.

    The master shall ensure that:
    (a) A cargo location plan is prepared that gives:
    (1) The location and number of each cargo tank; and
    (2) The name of the cargo in each tank;
    (b) One cargo location plan is kept with the sets of cargo 
information cards required under Sec. 154.1814; and
    (c) The cargo names in the cargo location plan do not differ from 
the names of the cargoes listed in Table 4.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1818  Certification of inhibition.

    (a) Except as provided in Sec. 154.1740(b), no person may operate a 
vessel carrying butadiene or vinyl chloride without carrying in the 
wheelhouse written certification from the shipper that the product is 
inhibited.
    (b) The certification required by this section must contain the 
following information:
    (1) The name and concentration of the inhibitor.
    (2) The date the inhibitor was added.
    (3) The expected duration of the inhibitor's effectiveness.
    (4) Any temperature limitations qualifying the inhibitor's effective 
lifetime.
    (5) The action to be taken if the time of the voyage exceeds the 
inhibitor's lifetime.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1820  Shipping document.

    No person may operate a vessel without carrying a shipping document 
in the wheelhouse that lists for each cargo on board:
    (a) The cargo tank in which the cargo is stowed;
    (b) The name of the shipper;
    (c) The location of the loading terminal;
    (d) The cargo name as listed in Table 4; and
    (e) The approximate quantity of the cargo.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1822  Shipping document: Copy for transfer terminal.

    While a vessel is moored at a transfer terminal, the master shall 
ensure that at least one copy of the shipping document is given to the 
terminal's person in charge of cargo transfer.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1824  Obstruction of pumproom ladderways.

    The master shall ensure that each cargo pumproom access is 
unobstructed.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1826  Opening of cargo tanks and cargo sampling.

    (a) The master shall ensure that each cargo tank opening is fully 
closed at all times.
    (b) The master may authorize the opening of a cargo tank:
    (1) During tank cleaning; and
    (2) To sample a cargo that Table 4 allows to be carried in a 
containment system having a restricted gauging system if:
    (i) The cargo tank is not being filled during sampling;
    (ii) The vent system has relieved any pressure in the tank; and
    (iii) The person sampling the cargo wears protective clothing.
    (c) The master shall ensure that cargoes requiring closed gauging as 
listed in Table 4 are sampled only through the controlled sampling 
arrangement of the cargo tank.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1828  Spaces containing cargo vapor: Entry.

    (a) No person may enter a cargo handling space without the 
permission of the master or without following a safety procedure 
established by the master.
    (b) Before allowing anyone to enter a cargo handling space, the 
master shall ensure that:
    (1) The space is free of toxic vapors and has an oxygen 
concentration of at least 19.5 percent oxygen by volume; or
    (2) Those entering the space wear protective equipment with 
breathing apparatus and an officer closely supervises the entire 
operation in the space.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1830  Warning sign.

    (a) The master shall ensure that a vessel transferring cargo, while 
fast to a dock or while at anchor in port, displays a warning sign:
    (1) At the gangway facing the shore so that the sign may be seen 
from the shore; and
    (2) Facing outboard towards the water so that the sign may be seen 
from the water.

[[Page 261]]

    (b) Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, each 
warning sign must have the following words:
    (1) Warning.
    (2) Dangerous Cargo.
    (3) No Visitors.
    (4) No Smoking.
    (5) No Open Lights.
    (c) Each letter in the words on the sign must:
    (1) Be block style;
    (2) Be black on a white background;
    (3) Be 7.6 cm (3 in.) high;
    (4) Be 5.1 cm (2 in.) wide, except for ``M'' and ``W'' which must be 
7.6 cm (3 in.) wide, and the letter ``I'' which may be 1.3 cm (\1/2\ 
in.) wide; and
    (5) Have 1.3 cm (\1/2\ in.) stroke width.
    (d) The spacing between letters must be:
    (1) 1.3 cm (\1/2\ in.) between letters of the same word on the sign;
    (2) 5.1 cm (2 in.) between words;
    (3) 5.1 cm (2 in.) between lines; and
    (4) 5.1 cm (2 in.) at the borders of the sign.
    (e) The words ``No Smoking'' and ``No Open Lights'' may be omitted 
when the cargoes on board a vessel are not flammable.
    (f) When a vessel carries or transfers vinyl chloride, the warning 
sign under paragraph (b) of this section must also have the words 
``Cancer Suspect Agent.''


<R05>
Sec. 154.1831  Persons in charge of transferring liquid cargo in bulk or preparing cargo tanks.

    (a) The owner and operator of the vessel, and his or her agent, and 
each of them, shall ensure that--
    (1) Enough ``Tankerman-PICs'' or restricted ``Tankerman-PICs'', and 
``Tankerman-Assistants'', authorized for the classification of cargo 
carried, are on duty to safely conduct a transfer of liquid cargo in 
bulk or a cool-down, warm-up, gas-free, or air-out of each cargo tank;
    (2) Each transfer of liquid cargo in bulk, and each cool-down, warm-
up, gas-free, or air-out of a cargo tank, is supervised by a person 
designated as a person in charge of the transfer that possesses the 
qualifications required by 33 CFR 155.710;
    (3) On each foreign tankship, the person in charge of either a 
transfer of liquid cargo in bulk or a cool-down, warm-up, gas-free, or 
air-out of a cargo tank possesses the qualifications required by 33 CFR 
155.710;
    (4) When cargo regulated under this part is being transferred, the 
person in charge of the transfer has received special training in the 
particular hazards associated with the cargo and in all special 
procedures for its handling; and
    (5) On each foreign vessel, the person in charge understands his or 
her responsibilities as described in this subchapter.
    (b) Upon request by the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, in 
whose zone the transfer will take place, the owner and operator of the 
vessel, and his or her agent, and each of them, shall provide 
documentary evidence that the person in charge has received the training 
specified by paragraph (a)(4) of this section and is capable of 
competently performing the procedures necessary for the cargo.

[CGD 79-116, 60 FR 17158, Apr. 4, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 154.1834  Cargo transfer piping.

    The person in charge of cargo transfer shall ensure that cargo is 
transferred to or from a cargo tank only through the cargo piping 
system.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1836  Vapor venting as a means of cargo tank pressure and 
temperature control.

    When the vessel is on the navigable waters of the United States, the 
master shall ensure that the cargo pressure and temperature control 
system under Sec.Sec. 154.701 through 154.709 is operating and that 
venting of cargo is unnecessary to maintain cargo temperature and 
pressure control, except under emergency conditions.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1838  Discharge by gas pressurization.

    The person in charge of cargo transfer may not authorize cargo 
discharge by gas pressurization unless:
    (a) The tank to be offloaded is an independent tank type B or C;
    (b) The pressurizing medium is the cargo vapor or a nonflammable, 
nontoxic gas that is inert with the cargo; and
    (c) The pressurizing line has:

[[Page 262]]

    (1) A pressure reducing valve that has a setting that is 90 percent 
or less of the tank's relief valve setting; and
    (2) A manual control valve between the pressure reducing valve and 
the tank.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1840  Protective clothing.

    The person in charge of cargo transfer shall ensure that each person 
involved in a cargo transfer operation, except those assigned to gas-
safe cargo control rooms, wears protective clothing.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1842  Cargo system: Controls and alarms.

    The master shall ensure that the cargo emergency shut-down system 
and the alarms under Sec. 154.1325 are tested and working before cargo 
is transferred.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1844  Cargo tanks: Filling limits.

    (a) Unless a higher limit is specified on the certificate the master 
shall ensure that a cargo tank is not loaded:
    (1) More than 98 percent liquid full; or
    (2) In excess of the volume determined under the following formula:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02FE91.089
    
where:

V<INF>L</INF>=maximum volume to which the tank may be loaded;
V=volume of the tank;
d<INF>r</INF>=density at the reference temperature specified in 
paragraph (b) of this section; and
d<INF>L</INF>=density of the cargo at the loading temperature and 
pressure.

    (b) The reference temperature to be used in paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section is the temperature corresponding to the vapor pressure of the 
cargo at the set pressure of the pressure relief valves.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1846  Relief valves: Changing set pressure.

    The master shall:
    (a) Supervise the changing of the set pressure of relief valves 
under Sec. 154.802(b);
    (b) Enter the change of set pressure in the vessel's log; and
    (c) Ensure that a sign showing the set pressure is posted:
    (1) In the cargo control room or station; and
    (2) At each relief valve.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1848  Inerting.

    (a) The master shall ensure that:
    (1) Hold and interbarrier spaces on a vessel with full secondary 
barriers are inerted so that the oxygen concentration is 8 percent or 
less by volume when flammable cargoes are carried;
    (2) Hold and interbarrier spaces contain only dry air or inert gas 
on:
    (i) A vessel with partial secondary barriers;
    (ii) A vessel with full secondary barriers when non-flammable 
cargoes are carried; and
    (iii) A vessel with refrigerated independent tanks type C;
    (3) When cargo tanks containing flammable vapor are to be gas freed, 
the flammable vapors are purged from the tank by inert gas before air is 
admitted; and
    (4) When gas free cargo tanks are to be filled with a flammable 
cargo, air is purged from the tank by inert gas until the oxygen 
concentration in the tank is 8 percent or less by volume before cargo 
liquid or vapor is introduced.
    (b) Inert gas must be supplied from the shore or from the vessel's 
inert gas system.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1850  Entering cargo handling spaces.

    (a) The master shall ensure that the ventilation system under Sec. 
154.1200 is in operation for 30 minutes before a person enters one of 
the following:
    (1) Spaces containing cargo pumps, compressors, and compressor 
motors.
    (2) Gas-dangerous cargo control spaces.
    (3) Other spaces containing cargo handling equipment.
    (b) The master shall ensure that a warning sign listing the 
requirement for use of the ventilation system, is posted outside of each 
space under paragraph (a) of this section.
    (c) The master shall ensure that no sources of ignition are put in a 
cargo handling space on a vessel carrying flammable cargo unless the 
space is gas free.

[[Page 263]]


<R05>
Sec. 154.1852  Air breathing equipment.

    (a) The master shall ensure that a licensed officer inspects the 
compressed air breathing equipment at least once each month.
    (b) The master shall enter in the vessel's log a record of the 
inspection required under paragraph (a) of this section that includes:
    (1) The date of the inspection; and
    (2) The condition of the equipment at the time of the inspection.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1854  Methane (LNG) as fuel.

    (a) If methane (LNG) vapors are used as fuel in the main propulsion 
system of a vessel, the master shall ensure that the fuel oil fired 
pilot under Sec. 154.705(c) is used when the vessel is on the navigable 
waters of the United States.
    (b) When the methane (LNG) fuel supply is shut down due to loss of 
ventilation or detection of gas, the master shall ensure that the 
methane (LNG) fuel supply is not used until the leak or other cause of 
the shutdown is found and corrected.
    (c) The master shall ensure that the required procedure under 
paragraph (b) of this section is posted in the main machinery space.
    (d) The master shall ensure that the oxygen concentration in the 
annular space of the fuel line under Sec. 154.706(a)(1) is 8% or less by 
volume before methane (LNG) vapors are admitted to the fuel line.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1858  Cargo hose.

    The person in charge of cargo transfer shall ensure that cargo hose 
used for cargo transfer service meets Sec.Sec. 154.552 through 154.562.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1860  Integral tanks: Cargo colder than -10 <deg>C (14 <deg>F).

    The master shall ensure that an integral tank does not carry a cargo 
colder than -10 <deg>C (14 <deg>F) unless that carriage is specially 
approved by the Commandant (G-MSO).

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 154.1862  Posting of speed reduction.

    If a speed reduction is specially approved by the Commandant under 
Sec. 154.409, the master shall ensure that the speed reduction is posted 
in the wheelhouse.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1864  Vessel speed within speed reduction.

    The master shall ensure that the speed of the vessel is not greater 
than the posted speed reduction.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1866  Cargo hose connection: Transferring cargo.

    No person may transfer cargo through a cargo hose connection unless 
the connection has the remotely controlled quick closing shut off valve 
required under Sec. 154.538.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1868  Portable blowers in personnel access openings.

    The master shall ensure that a portable blower in a personnel access 
opening does not reduce the area of the opening so that it does not meet 
Sec. 154.340.


<R05>
Sec. 154.1870  Bow and stern loading.

    (a) When the bow or stern loading piping is not in use, the master 
shall lock closed the shut-off valves under Sec. 154.355(a)(4) or remove 
the spool piece under Sec. 154.355(a)(4).
    (b) The person in charge of cargo transfer shall ensure that after 
the bow or stern loading piping is used it is purged of cargo vapors 
with inert gas.
    (c) The person in charge of cargo transfer shall ensure that 
entrances, forced or natural ventilation intakes, exhausts, and other 
openings to any deck house alongside the bow or stern loading piping are 
closed when this piping is in use.
    (d) The person in charge of cargo transfer shall ensure that bow or 
stern loading piping installed in the area of the accommodation, 
service, or control space is not used for transfer of the following:
    (1) Acetaldehyde.
    (2) Ammonia, anhydrous.
    (3) Dimethylamine.
    (4) Ethylamine.
    (5) Ethyl Chloride.
    (6) Methyl Chloride.
    (7) Vinyl Chloride.

[[Page 264]]


<R05>
Sec. 154.1872  Cargo emergency jettisoning.

    (a) The master shall ensure that emergency jettisoning piping under 
Sec. 154.356, except bow and stern loading and discharging piping, is 
only used when an emergency exists.
    (b) Emergency jettisoning piping when being used may be outside of 
the transverse tank location under Sec. 154.310.
    (c) The master shall ensure that cargo is not jettisoned in a U.S. 
port.
    (d) When ethylene oxide is carried, the master shall ensure that the 
emergency jettisoning piping with associated pumps and fittings is on-
line and ready for use for an emergency.
    (e) The master shall lock closed the shut-off valves under Sec. 
154.356 when the emergency jettisoning piping is not in use.
    (f) The person in charge of cargo transfer shall ensure that after 
the emergency jettisoning piping is used it is purged of cargo vapors 
with inert gas.
    (g) The person in charge of cargo transfer shall ensure that 
entrances, forced or natural ventilation intakes, exhausts, and other 
openings to accommodation, service, or control spaces facing the 
emergency jettisoning piping area and alongside the emergency 
jettisoning piping are closed when this piping is in use.

                                                        Table 4--Summary of Minimum Requirements
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                       Electrical
         Cargo name \1\             Ship type    Independent tank  Control of cargo       Vapor        Gauging \3\    hazard class         Special
                                                  type C required  tank vapor space   detection \2\                   and group \4\      requirements
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Acetaldehyde....................  IIG/IIPG.....  ................  Inert...........  I & T.........  C.............  I-C...........  154.1410 (c),
                                                                                                                                      154.1410,
                                                                                                                                      154.1710,
                                                                                                                                      154.1720,
                                                                                                                                      154.1870.
Ammonia, anhydrous..............  IIG/IIPG.....  ................  ................  T.............  C.............  I-D...........  154.1000, 154.1400
                                                                                                                                      (c), 154.1405,
                                                                                                                                      154.1410, 154.1702
                                                                                                                                      (b), (c), (e),
                                                                                                                                      154.1760,
                                                                                                                                      154.1870.
Butadiene.......................  IIG/IIPG.....  ................  Inert...........  I.............  R.............  I-B...........  154.1702 (b), (d),
                                                                                                                                      (f), 154.1710,
                                                                                                                                      154.1750,
                                                                                                                                      154.1818.
Butane..........................  IIG/IIPG.....  ................  ................  I.............  R.............  I-D...........  None.
Butylene........................  IIG/IIPG.....  ................  ................  I.............  R.............  I-D...........  None.
Dimethylamine...................  IIG/IIPG.....  ................  ................  I & T.........  C.............  I-C...........  154.1400 (c),
                                                                                                                                      154.1405,
                                                                                                                                      154.1410, 154.1702
                                                                                                                                      (b), (c), (e),
                                                                                                                                      154.1870.
Ethane..........................  IIG..........  ................  ................  I.............  R.............  I-D...........  None.
Ethylamine......................  IIG/IIPG.....  ................  ................  I & T.........  C.............  I-C...........  154.1400 (c),
                                                                                                                                      154.1405,
                                                                                                                                      154.1410, 154.1702
                                                                                                                                      (b), (c), (e),
                                                                                                                                      154.1870.
Ethyl Chloride..................  IIG/IIPG.....  ................  ................  I & T.........  R.............  I-D...........  154.1870.
Ethylene........................  IIG..........  ................  ................  I.............  R.............  I-C...........  None.
Ethylene oxide..................  IG...........  Yes.............  Inert...........  I & T.........  C.............  I-B...........  154.660 (b) (3),
                                                                                                                                      154.1400 (c),
                                                                                                                                      154.1405,
                                                                                                                                      154.1410, 154.1702
                                                                                                                                      (b), (d), (f),
                                                                                                                                      154.1705,
                                                                                                                                      154.1710,
                                                                                                                                      154.1720,
                                                                                                                                      154.1725,
                                                                                                                                      154.1730, 154.1870
                                                                                                                                      (a), (b).
Methane (LNG)...................  IIG..........  ................  ................  I.............  C.............  I-D...........  154.703 through
                                                                                                                                      154.709, 154.1854.
Methyl acetylene-propadiene       IIG/IIPG.....  ................  ................  I.............  R.............  I.............  154.1735.
 mixture.
Methyl bromide..................  IG...........  Yes.............  ................  I & T.........  C.............  I-D...........  154.660 (b) (3),
                                                                                                                                      154.1345 (c) (d),
                                                                                                                                      154.1400 (c),
                                                                                                                                      154.1405,
                                                                                                                                      154.1410, 154.1702
                                                                                                                                      (a), (d),
                                                                                                                                      154.1705,
                                                                                                                                      154.1720, 154.1870
                                                                                                                                      (a), (b).
Methyl chloride.................  IIG/IIPG.....  ................  ................  I & T.........  C.............  I-D...........  154.1702 (a),
                                                                                                                                      154.1870.
Nitrogen........................  IIIG.........  ................  ................  O.............  C.............  ..............  154.1755.

[[Page 265]]

 
Propane.........................  IIG/IIPG.....  ................  ................  I.............  R.............  I-D...........  None.
Propylene.......................  IIG/IIPG.....  ................  ................  I.............  R.............  I-D...........  None.
Refrigerant.....................  IIIG.........  ................  ................  ..............  R.............  ..............  None.
Sulfur dioxide..................  IG...........  Yes.............  Dry.............  T.............  C.............  ..............  154.660 (b) (3),
                                                                                                                                      154.1345 (c), (d),
                                                                                                                                      154.1400 (c),
                                                                                                                                      154.1405,
                                                                                                                                      154.1410,
                                                                                                                                      154.1705,
                                                                                                                                      154.1715,
                                                                                                                                      154.1720, 154.1870
                                                                                                                                      (a), (b).
Vinyl chloride..................  IIG/IIPG.....  ................  ................  I & T.........  C.............  I-D...........  154.1405, 154.1410,
                                                                                                                                      154.1702 (a) (b)
                                                                                                                                      (d) (f), 154.1710,
                                                                                                                                      154.1740,
                                                                                                                                      154.1745,
                                                                                                                                      154.1750,
                                                                                                                                      154.1818, 154.1830
                                                                                                                                      (f), 154.1870.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Refrigerant gases include non-toxic, non-flammable gases such as: dichlorodifluoromethane, dichloromonofluoromethane, dichlorotetrafluoroethane,
  monochlorodifluoromethane, monochlorotetrafluoroethane, and monochlorotrifluoromethane.
\2\ As used in this column: ``I'' stands for flammable vapor detection; ``T'' stands for toxic vapor detection; ``O'' stands for oxygen detection; and
  see Sec.Sec. 154.1345 thru 154.1360.
\3\ As used in this column: ``C'' stands for closed gauging; ``R'' stands for restricted gauging; and see Sec. 154.1300.
\4\ The designations used in this column are from the National Electrical Code.


[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979; 44 FR 59234, Oct. 15, 1979]

                Appendix A to Part 154--Equivalent Stress

    I. Equivalent stress ([sigma] c) is calculated by the following 
formula or another formula specially approved by the Commandant (G-MSO) 
as equivalent to the following:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02FE91.090

where:

[sigma]<INF>x</INF>=total normal stress in ``x'' direction.
[sigma]<INF>y</INF>=total normal stress in ``y'' direction.
[tau]xy=total shear stress in ``xy'' plane.

    II. When the static and dynamic stresses are calculated separately, 
the total stresses in paragraph I are calculated from the following 
formulae or another formulae specially approved by the Commandant (G-
MSO) as equivalent to the following:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02FE91.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02FE91.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02FE91.093

    III. Each dynamic and static stress is determined from its 
acceleration component and its hull strain component from hull 
deflection and torsion.

[CGD 74-289, 44 FR 26009, May 3, 1979, as amended by CGD 82-063b, 48 FR 
4782, Feb. 3, 1983]

           Appendix B to Part 154--Stress Analyses Definitions

    The following are the standard definitions of stresses for the 
analysis of an independent tank type B:
    Normal stress means the component of stress normal to the plane of 
reference.
    Membrane stress means the component of normal stress that is 
uniformly distributed and equal to the average value of the stress 
across the thickness of the section under consideration.
    Bending stress means the variable stress across the thickness of the 
section under consideration, after the subtraction of the membrane 
stress.

[[Page 266]]

    Shear stress means the component of the stress acting in the plane 
of reference.
    Primary stress means the stress produced by the imposed loading that 
is necessary to balance the external forces and moments. (The basic 
characteristic of a primary stress is that it is not self-limiting. 
Primary stresses that considerably exceed the yield strength result in 
failure or at least in gross deformations.)
    Primary general membrane stress means the primary membrane stress 
that is so distributed in the structure that no redistribution of load 
occurs as a result of yielding.
    Primary local membrane stress means the resulting stress from both a 
membrane stress, caused by pressure or other mechanical loading, and a 
primary or a discontinuity effect that produces excessive distortion in 
the transfer of loads to other portions of the structure. (The resulting 
stress is a primary local membrane stress although it has some 
characteristics of a secondary stress.) A stress region is local if:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02FE91.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC02FE91.095

where:

S<INF>1</INF>=distance in the meridional direction over which the 
equivalent stress exceeds 1.1 f.
S<INF>2</INF>=distance in the meridional direction to another region 
where the limits for primary general membrane stress are exceeded.
R=mean radius of the vessel.
t=wall thickness of the vessel at the location where the primary general 
membrane stress limit is exceeded.
f=allowable primary general membrane stress.

    Secondary stress means a normal stress or shear stress caused by 
constraints of adjacent parts or by self-constraint of a structure. The 
basic characteristic of a secondary stress is that it is self-limiting. 
Local yielding and minor distortions can satisfy the conditions that 
cause the stress to occur.

                           PART 155 [RESERVED]

[[Page 267]]


<R02>
                              FINDING AIDS


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts and 
an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in 
the CFR Index and Finding Aids volume to the Code of Federal Regulations 
which is published separately and revised annually.

  Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference
  Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
  Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
  List of CFR Sections Affected

[[Page 269]]

            Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference

                     (Revised as of October 1, 2003)

  The Director of the Federal Register has approved under 5 U.S.C. 
552(a) and 1 CFR part 51 the incorporation by reference of the following 
publications. This list contains only those incorporations by reference 
effective as of the revision date of this volume. Incorporations by 
reference found within a regulation are effective upon the effective 
date of that regulation. For more information on incorporation by 
reference, see the preliminary pages of this volume.


46 CFR (PARTS 140-155)

COAST GUARD, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
                                                                  46 CFR


American Boat and Yacht Council, Inc.

  3069 Solomon's Island Road, Edgewater, MD 21037
ABYC H-25-81--Portable Fuel Systems and Portable                   147.7
  Containers for Flammable Liquids, May 12, 1981.


American Bureau of Shipping

  Publications Department, ABS Plaza, 16855 
  Northchase Drive, Houston, Texas 77060
Rules for Building and Classing Steel Vessels,                     154.1
  1981.


American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists

  1330 Kemper Meadow Drive, Cincinatti, OH 45240-
  1634
Guidelines for the Selection of Chemical              151.50-73; 153.993
  Protective Clothing (3rd Edition, 1987).


American National Standards Institute (ANSI)

  25 West 43rd Street, Fourth floor, New York, NY 
  10036 Telephone: (212) 642-4900
ANSI B16.5-77 Steel Pipe Flanges and Pipe Fittings    151.50-35; 153.940
ANSI B16.5-88, Steel Pipe Flanges and Flanged           150.480; 153.940
  Fittings.
ANSI B16.11-73 Forged Steel Fittings, Socket-                  151.50-10
  Welding and Threaded.
ANSI B16.24-79 Bronze Pipe Flanges and Flanged          150.480; 153.940
  Fittings.
ANSI B16.25-79 Butt-welded Ends--Pipe, Valves,                 151.50-10
  Flanges, and Fittings.
ANSI B16.31-71 Non-Ferrous Pipe Flanges...........   150.480(a); 153.940
ANSI B31.1-80 Power Piping........................   151.20-1; 151.50-10
ANSI Z87.1-79 Practice for Occupational and              150.395(g)(2); 
  Educational Eye and Face Protection.                   150.457(b)(2); 
                                                      154.1(b); 154.1400
ANSI Z88.2-80 Practice for Respiratory Protection.          150.395(h); 
                                                         150.457(b)(3); 
                                                           150.460(b)(1)
ANSI Z89.1-69 Safety Requirements for Industrial                154.1400
  Head Protection.


American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-Conditioning 
Engineers, Inc.

  Publication Sales Department, 1791 Tullie 
  Circle, NE., Atlanta, GA 30329
ANSI/ASHRAE 34-78--Number Designation of                           147.7
Refrigerants, approved 1978.
[[Page 270]]

American Society of Mechanical Engineers

  Three Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016-5990; 
  Telephone: (800) THE-ASME
Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code:
  Section VIII, Pressure Vessels, 1980                         151.03-37
  Section V, Nondestructive Examination (1986)                  151.01-2


American Society for Nondestructive Testing (ASNT)

  P.O. Box 21142, Columbus, OH 43221
Recommended Practice No. SNT-TC-1A (1988),                      151.01-2
  Personnel Qualification and Certification in 
  Nondestructive Testing.


American Society for Testing and Materials

  100 Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, PA, 
  19428-2959, Telephone (610) 832-9585, FAX (610) 
  832-9555
ASTM A 20-78 General Requirements for Steel Plates        154.1; 154.610
  for Pressure Vessels.
ASTM A 20/A 20 M-97a, Standard Specification for          154.1; 154.610
  General Requirements for Steel Plates for 
  Pressure Vessels.
ASTM D 4986-98, Standard Test Method for              151.01-2; 151.15-3
  Horizontal Burning Characteristicsof Cellular 
  Polymeric Materials.
ASTM E 84-98, Standard Test Method for Surface        151.01-2; 151.15-3
  Burning Characteristicsof Building Materials.
ASTM F 1014-86 Standard Specification for               154.1400(a)(4), 
  Flashlights on Vessels.                                 (b)(4), (c)(4)
ASTM F 1014-92, Standard Specification for               154.1; 154.1400
  Flashlights on Vessels.
ASTM F 1122-87 Quick Disconnect Couplings.........      150.480; 153.940
ASTM F 1122-87 (1992), Standard Specification for         153.4; 153.940
  Quick Disconnect Couplings.
ASTM F 1271-89 Spill Valves for use in Marine Tank               153.365
  Liquid Overpressure Protection Applications.
ASTM F 1271-90 (1995), Standard Specification for         153.4; 153.365
  Spill Valves for Use in Marine TankLiquid 
  Overpressure Protections Applications.


Department of Defense

  DODSSP Standardization Document Order Desk, 700 
  Robbins Ave., Bldg. 4D, Philadelphia, PA 19111-
  5098
Military Specifications:
  MIL-B-11886 Box, Metal, Shipping: Reusable,       146.29-11; 146.29-90
  Transporter, Steel, Maximum Load 9,000 Lbs, K
  MIL-B-21560 Box, Metal, Shipping: Reusable,       146.29-11; 146.29-90
  Transporter, Steel, Type 1, Capacity 135 Cubic 
  Feet, Maximum Load 9000 Lbs, B, Notice 1


International Maritime Organization (formerly Inter-Governmental 
Maritime Organization)

  4 Albert Embankment, London SE1 7SR, England 
  Telephone: 0171-587 3210; FAX: 0171-587 3210; 
  Telex: 23588. Purchase from: IMO Sales, New York 
  Nautical Instrument and Service Corp., 140 W. 
  Broadway, New York, NY 10013. Telephone: (212) 
  962-4522; FAX: (212) 406-8420
Resolution A212 (VII) Code for the Construction                    153.2
  and Equipment of Ships Carrying Dangerous 
  Chemicals in Bulk, 1977, with 8 amdts.
Resolution A328 (IX) Code for the Construction and          154.1; 154.3
  Equipment of Ships Carrying Liquefied Gases in 
  Bulk, 1976.
Resolution MSC.35 (63) Adoption of Guidelines for       155.140; 155.235
Emergency Towing Arrangements on Tankers, May 
[[Page 271]]

Code for Existing Ships Carrying Liquefied Gases                   154.1
  in Bulk, 1976.
International Convention on Safety of Life at Sea,        154.3; 154.5; 
  1974.                                                         154.1802
Medical First Aid Guide for Use in Accidents            153.930; 154.1; 
  Involving Dangerous Goods (no date).                154.1435; 154.1440


National Fire Protection Association

  1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269-9101, 
  Telephone: (800) 344-3555
57--Standard for Fumigation, 1973.................               147A.11
70--National Electrical Code, 1981................             146.29-35
NFPA 306--1984 Control of Gas Hazards on Vessels..         150.460(b)(1)


Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human Services

  Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government 
  Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402, Telephone 
  202-512-1800
DHHS Publication No. (PHS) 84-2024--The Ship's                     147.7
  Medicine Chest and Medical Aid at Sea, revised 
  1984.


Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.

  Available from: Global Engineering Documents, 15 
  Inverness Way East, Englewood, CO 80112, 
  Telephone (800) 854-7179 or
  Global Engineering Documents, 7730 Carondelet 
  Ave., Suite 470, Clayton, MO 63105, Telephone 
  (800) 854-7179
UL 30--Metal Safety Cans, 7th Ed., March 11, 1985,                 147.7
  revised March 12, 1985 and March 3, 1987.
UL 1185--Portable Marine Fuel Tanks, Second                        147.7
  Edition, March 13, 1978, revised July 6, 1984.
UL 1313--Nonmetallic Safety Cans for Petroleum                     147.7
  Products, 1st Ed., March 15, 1982, revised 
  January 3, 1984 and March 22, 1985.
UL 1314--Special Purpose Containers, 1st Ed., July                 147.7
  1983, revised February 7, 1984 and September 23, 
  1986.
UL 783-79 Standard for Safety, Electric                            154.1
  Flashlights for Use in Hazardous Locations, 
  Class 1, Groups C and D, 1979.

[[Page 273]]


<R03>
                    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters


<R04>

                     (Revised as of October 1, 2003)

                      Title 1--General Provisions

         I  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register 
                (Parts 1--49)
        II  Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50--299)
        IV  Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400--500)

                          Title 2 [Reserved]

                        Title 3--The President

         I  Executive Office of the President (Parts 100--199)

                           Title 4--Accounts

         I  General Accounting Office (Parts 1--99)

                   Title 5--Administrative Personnel

         I  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1--1199)
        II  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300--1399)
         V  The International Organizations Employees Loyalty 
                Board (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      VIII  Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800--1899)
        IX  Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900--1999)
        XI  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Part 2100)
       XIV  Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of 
                the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal 
                Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400--2499)
        XV  Office of Administration, Executive Office of the 
                President (Parts 2500--2599)
       XVI  Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600--2699)
       XXI  Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100--3199)
      XXII  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Part 3201)
     XXIII  Department of Energy (Part 3301)
      XXIV  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Part 3401)
       XXV  Department of the Interior (Part 3501)
      XXVI  Department of Defense (Part 3601)

[[Page 274]]

    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Part 3801)
      XXIX  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900--3999)
       XXX  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4099)
      XXXI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100--4199)
    XXXIII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Part 4301)
      XXXV  Office of Personnel Management (Part 4501)
        XL  Interstate Commerce Commission (Part 5001)
       XLI  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Part 5101)
      XLII  Department of Labor (Part 5201)
     XLIII  National Science Foundation (Part 5301)
       XLV  Department of Health and Human Services (Part 5501)
      XLVI  Postal Rate Commission (Part 5601)
     XLVII  Federal Trade Commission (Part 5701)
    XLVIII  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Part 5801)
         L  Department of Transportation (Part 6001)
       LII  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Part 6201)
      LIII  Department of Education (Parts 6300--6399)
       LIV  Environmental Protection Agency (Part 6401)
        LV  National Endowment for the Arts (Part 6501)
       LVI  National Endowment for the Humanitiess (Part 6601)
      LVII  General Services Administration (Part 6701)
     LVIII  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Part 
                6801)
       LIX  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Part 
                6901)
        LX  United States Postal Service (Part 7001)
       LXI  National Labor Relations Board (Part 7101)
      LXII  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Part 7201)
     LXIII  Inter-American Foundation (Part 7301)
       LXV  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Part 
                7501)
      LXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Part 
                7601)
     LXVII  Institute of Museum and Library Services (Part 7701)
      LXIX  Tennessee Valley Authority (Part 7901)
      LXXI  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Part 8101)
    LXXIII  Department of Agriculture (Part 8301)
     LXXIV  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission (Part 
                8401)
     LXXVI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Part 8601)
    LXXVII  Office of Management and Budget (Part 8701)

                      Title 6--Homeland Security

         I  Department of Homeland Security, Office of the 
                Secretary (Parts 0--99)

[[Page 275]]

                         Title 7--Agriculture

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Agriculture 
                (Parts 0--26)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of 
                Agriculture
         I  Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, 
                Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 27--209)
        II  Food and Nutrition Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 210--299)
       III  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         V  Agricultural Research Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                700--799)
      VIII  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Federal Grain Inspection Service), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 900--999)
         X  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1000--1199)
        XI  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1200--1299)
       XIV  Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative 
                Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service 
                Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800--
                2099)
        XX  Local Television Loan Guarantee Board (Parts 2200--
                2299)
      XXVI  Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 2600--2699)
     XXVII  Office of Information Resources Management, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2800--2899)
      XXIX  Office of Energy, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2900--2999)
       XXX  Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3000--3099)

[[Page 276]]

      XXXI  Office of Environmental Quality, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3100--3199)
     XXXII  Office of Procurement and Property Management, 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 3200--3299)
    XXXIII  Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3300--3399)
     XXXIV  Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3400--
                3499)
      XXXV  Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3500--3599)
     XXXVI  National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 3600--3699)
    XXXVII  Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3700--3799)
   XXXVIII  World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3800--3899)
       XLI  [Reserved]
      XLII  Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200--
                4299)

                    Title 8--Aliens and Nationality

         I  Department of Homeland Security (Immigration and 
                Naturalization) (Parts 1--599)
         V  Executive Office for Immigration Review, Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1000--1400)

                 Title 9--Animals and Animal Products

         I  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1--199)
        II  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Packers and Stockyards Programs), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--299)
       III  Food Safety and Inspection Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 300--599)

                           Title 10--Energy

         I  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Department of Energy (Parts 200--699)
       III  Department of Energy (Parts 700--999)
         X  Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 1000-
                -1099)
      XVII  Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700--
                1799)
     XVIII  Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste 
                Commission (Part 1800)

[[Page 277]]

                      Title 11--Federal Elections

         I  Federal Election Commission (Parts 1--9099)

                      Title 12--Banks and Banking

         I  Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  Federal Reserve System (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  Office of Thrift Supervision, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XIV  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400--
                1499)
        XV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1500--1599)
      XVII  Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                1700--1799)
     XVIII  Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, 
                Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800--1899)

               Title 13--Business Credit and Assistance

         I  Small Business Administration (Parts 1--199)
       III  Economic Development Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board (Parts 400--499)
         V  Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board (Parts 
                500--599)

                    Title 14--Aeronautics and Space

         I  Federal Aviation Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--199)
        II  Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation 
                (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200--399)
       III  Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 400--499)
         V  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
        VI  Air Transportation System Stabilization (Parts 1300--
                1399)

                 Title 15--Commerce and Foreign Trade

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 
                0--29)

[[Page 278]]

            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Commerce and 
                Foreign Trade
         I  Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                30--199)
        II  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 400--499)
       VII  Bureau of Industry and Security, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Technology Administration, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
      XIII  East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400--
                1499)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade 
                Agreements
        XX  Office of the United States Trade Representative 
                (Parts 2000--2099)
            Subtitle D--Regulations Relating to Telecommunications 
                and Information
     XXIII  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                2300--2399)

                    Title 16--Commercial Practices

         I  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0--999)
        II  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000--1799)

             Title 17--Commodity and Securities Exchanges

         I  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1--199)
        II  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 400--499)

          Title 18--Conservation of Power and Water Resources

         I  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of 
                Energy (Parts 1--399)
       III  Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Water Resources Council (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800--899)
      XIII  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300--1399)

[[Page 279]]

                       Title 19--Customs Duties

         I  Bureau of Customs and Border Protection, Department of 
                Homeland Security; Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--199)
        II  United States International Trade Commission (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, 
                Department of Homeland Security (Parts 400--599)

                     Title 20--Employees' Benefits

         I  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200--399)
       III  Social Security Administration (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 500--599)
         V  Employment and Training Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 600--699)
        VI  Employment Standards Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 800-
                -899)
      VIII  Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 
                900--999)
        IX  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 1000--1099)

                       Title 21--Food and Drugs

         I  Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1--1299)
        II  Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 1300--1399)
       III  Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400--
                1499)

                      Title 22--Foreign Relations

         I  Department of State (Parts 1--199)
        II  Agency for International Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Peace Corps (Parts 300--399)
        IV  International Joint Commission, United States and 
                Canada (Parts 400--499)
         V  Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Parts 700--
                799)
        IX  Foreign Service Grievance Board (Parts 900--999)
         X  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  International Boundary and Water Commission, United 
                States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 
                1100--1199)
       XII  United States International Development Cooperation 
                Agency (Parts 1200--1299)

[[Page 280]]

       XIV  Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor 
                Relations Authority; General Counsel of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign 
                Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  African Development Foundation (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 1600-
                -1699)
      XVII  United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700--1799)

                          Title 23--Highways

         I  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--999)
        II  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and 
                Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 1300--1399)

                Title 24--Housing and Urban Development

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban 
                Development
         I  Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                100--199)
        II  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Government National Mortgage Association, Department 
                of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Housing and Office of Multifamily Housing 
                Assistance Restructuring, Department of Housing 
                and Urban Development (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 600--699) [Reserved]
       VII  Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and 
                Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700--
                799)
      VIII  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance 
                Programs, Section 202 Direct Loan Program, Section 
                202 Supportive Housing for the Elderly Program and 
                Section 811 Supportive Housing for Persons With 
                Disabilities Program) (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian 
                Housing, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 900--1699)

[[Page 281]]

         X  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Interstate Land Sales 
                Registration Program) (Parts 1700--1799)
       XII  Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 2000--2099)
        XX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 3200--3899)
       XXV  Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100--
                4199)

                           Title 25--Indians

         I  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--299)
        II  Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 300--399)
       III  National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500--599)
        IV  Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 
                700--799)
         V  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, 
                and Indian Health Service, Department of Health 
                and Human Services (Part 900)
        VI  Office of the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 1000--1199)
       VII  Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians, 
                Department of the Interior (Part 1200)

                      Title 26--Internal Revenue

         I  Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 1--899)

           Title 27--Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms

         I  Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau, Department 
                of the Treasury (Parts 1--299)
        II  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, 
                Department of Justice (Parts 400--699)

                   Title 28--Judicial Administration

         I  Department of Justice (Parts 0--299)
       III  Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice 
                (Parts 300--399)
         V  Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500--
                599)
        VI  Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700--799)

[[Page 282]]

      VIII  Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the 
                District of Columbia (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact Council 
                (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Department of Justice and Department of State (Parts 
                1100--1199)

                            Title 29--Labor

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 0-
                -99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor
         I  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 400--499)
         V  Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 
                500--899)
        IX  Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission 
                (Parts 900--999)
         X  National Mediation Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       XII  Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 
                1400--1499)
       XIV  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600--
                1699)
      XVII  Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2499)
       XXV  Employee Benefits Security Administration, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 2500--2599)
     XXVII  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2700--2799)
        XL  Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4999)

                      Title 30--Mineral Resources

         I  Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Minerals Management Service, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 200--299)
       III  Board of Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                400--499)
       VII  Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 700--999)

                 Title 31--Money and Finance: Treasury

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--50)

[[Page 283]]

            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
         I  Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                51--199)
        II  Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 200-
                -399)
        IV  Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 400-
                -499)
         V  Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of International Investment, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Claims Collection Standards (Department of the 
                Treasury--Department of Justice) (Parts 900--999)

                      Title 32--National Defense

            Subtitle A--Department of Defense
         I  Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1--399)
         V  Department of the Army (Parts 400--699)
        VI  Department of the Navy (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Department of the Air Force (Parts 800--1099)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to National 
                Defense
       XII  Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XVI  Selective Service System (Parts 1600--1699)
     XVIII  National Counterintelligence Center (Parts 1800--1899)
       XIX  Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Information Security Oversight Office, National 
                Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000--
                2099)
       XXI  National Security Council (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXIV  Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400--
                2499)
     XXVII  Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 
                2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of the Vice President of the United States 
                (Parts 2800--2899)

               Title 33--Navigation and Navigable Waters

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 1-
                -199)
        II  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 200-
                -399)
        IV  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                          Title 34--Education

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Education (Parts 1--99)

[[Page 284]]

            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Offices of the 
                Department of Education
         I  Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, 
                Department of Education (Parts 200--299)
       III  Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
                Services, Department of Education (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Vocational and Adult Education, Department 
                of Education (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages 
                Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of 
                Education (Parts 600--699)
        XI  National Institute for Literacy (Parts 1100--1199)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Education
       XII  National Council on Disability (Parts 1200--1299)

                        Title 35--Panama Canal

         I  Panama Canal Regulations (Parts 1--299)

             Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property

         I  National Park Service, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--
                299)
       III  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 300-
                -399)
        IV  American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400--499)
         V  Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Library of Congress (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800--
                899)
        IX  Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Presidio Trust (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance 
                Board (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
        XV  Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust (Part 1501)
       XVI  Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National 
                Environmental Policy Foundation (Parts 1600--1699)

             Title 37--Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights

         I  United States Patent and Trademark Office, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 1--199)
        II  Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200--299)
        IV  Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Under Secretary for Technology, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 500--599)

[[Page 285]]

           Title 38--Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief

         I  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0--99)

                       Title 39--Postal Service

         I  United States Postal Service (Parts 1--999)
       III  Postal Rate Commission (Parts 3000--3099)

                  Title 40--Protection of Environment

         I  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1--799)
        IV  Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1400--1499)
         V  Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
       VII  Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
                Defense; Uniform National Discharge Standards for 
                Vessels of the Armed Forces (Parts 1700--1799)

          Title 41--Public Contracts and Property Management

            Subtitle B--Other Provisions Relating to Public 
                Contracts
        50  Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1--50-
                999)
        51  Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or 
                Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1--51-99)
        60  Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal 
                Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 
                60-1--60-999)
        61  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training Service, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 61-1--61-999)
            Subtitle C--Federal Property Management Regulations 
                System
       101  Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1--
                101-99)
       102  Federal Management Regulation (Parts 102-1--102-299)
       105  General Services Administration (Parts 105-1--105-999)
       109  Department of Energy Property Management Regulations 
                (Parts 109-1--109-99)
       114  Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1--114-99)
       115  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1--115-99)
       128  Department of Justice (Parts 128-1--128-99)
            Subtitle D--Other Provisions Relating to Property 
                Management [Reserved]
            Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management 
                Regulations System
       201  Federal Information Resources Management Regulation 
                (Parts 201-1--201-99) [Reserved]
            Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System
       300  General (Parts 300-1--300-99)
       301  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1--
                301-99)

[[Page 286]]

       302  Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1--302-99)
       303  Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of 
                Certain Employees (Part 303-70)
       304  Payment of Travel Expenses from a Non-Federal Source 
                (Parts 304-1--304-99)

                        Title 42--Public Health

         I  Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 1--199)
        IV  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Department 
                of Health and Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1000--1999)

                   Title 43--Public Lands: Interior

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Lands
         I  Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 200--499)
        II  Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1000--9999)
       III  Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation 
                Commission (Parts 10000--10005)

             Title 44--Emergency Management and Assistance

         I  Federal Emergency Management Agency, Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 0--399)
        IV  Department of Commerce and Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                       Title 45--Public Welfare

            Subtitle A--Department of Health and Human Services 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Welfare
        II  Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), 
                Administration for Children and Families, 
                Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support 
                Enforcement Program), Administration for Children 
                and Families, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for 
                Children and Families Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United 
                States, Department of Justice (Parts 500--599)

[[Page 287]]

        VI  National Science Foundation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800--899)
         X  Office of Community Services, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                1200--1299)
      XIII  Office of Human Development Services, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1300--1399)
       XVI  Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  National Commission on Libraries and Information 
                Science (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800--
                1899)
       XXI  Commission on Fine Arts (Parts 2100--2199)
     XXIII  Arctic Research Commission (Part 2301)
      XXIV  James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 
                2400--2499)
       XXV  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2500--2599)

                          Title 46--Shipping

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 1-
                -199)
        II  Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 200--399)
       III  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage), Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500--599)

                      Title 47--Telecommunication

         I  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Office of Science and Technology Policy and National 
                Security Council (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 300-
                -399)

           Title 48--Federal Acquisition Regulations System

         1  Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1--99)
         2  Department of Defense (Parts 200--299)
         3  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300--
                399)
         4  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         5  General Services Administration (Parts 500--599)
         6  Department of State (Parts 600--699)

[[Page 288]]

         7  United States Agency for International Development 
                (Parts 700--799)
         8  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
         9  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        10  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)
        12  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
        13  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
        14  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        15  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
        16  Office of Personnel Management Federal Employees 
                Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                1600--1699)
        17  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700--1799)
        18  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1800--1899)
        19  Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 1900--1999)
        20  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000--2099)
        21  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation (Parts 2100--2199)
        23  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
        24  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2400--2499)
        25  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
        28  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
        29  Department of Labor (Parts 2900--2999)
        34  Department of Education Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                3400--3499)
        35  Panama Canal Commission (Parts 3500--3599)
        44  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 4400--4499)
        51  Department of the Army Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5100--5199)
        52  Department of the Navy Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5200--5299)
        53  Department of the Air Force Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation Supplement (Parts 5300--5399)
        54  Defense Logistics Agency, Department of Defense (Parts 
                5400--5499)
        57  African Development Foundation (Parts 5700--5799)
        61  General Services Administration Board of Contract 
                Appeals (Parts 6100--6199)
        63  Department of Transportation Board of Contract Appeals 
                (Parts 6300--6399)
        99  Cost Accounting Standards Board, Office of Federal 
                Procurement Policy, Office of Management and 
                Budget (Parts 9900--9999)

[[Page 289]]

                       Title 49--Transportation

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Transportation 
                (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to 
                Transportation
         I  Research and Special Programs Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 100--199)
        II  Federal Railroad Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Federal Transit Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) 
                (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  National Transportation Safety Board (Parts 800--999)
         X  Surface Transportation Board, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1000--1399)
        XI  Bureau of Transportation Statistics, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1400--1499)
       XII  Transportation Security Administration, Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 1500--1599)

                   Title 50--Wildlife and Fisheries

         I  United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of 
                the Interior (Parts 1--199)
        II  National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Fishing and Related Activities (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife 
                Service, Department of the Interior and National 
                Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and 
                Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce); Endangered Species Committee 
                Regulations (Parts 400--499)
         V  Marine Mammal Commission (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 600--699)

                      CFR Index and Finding Aids

            Subject/Agency Index
            List of Agency Prepared Indexes
            Parallel Tables of Statutory Authorities and Rules
            List of CFR Titles, Chapters, Subchapters, and Parts
            Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR

[[Page 291]]




<R03>
           Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR


<R04>

                     (Revised as of October 1, 2003)

                                                  CFR Title, Subtitle or 
                     Agency                               Chapter

Administrative Committee of the Federal Register  1, I
Advanced Research Projects Agency                 32, I
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation         36, VIII
African Development Foundation                    22, XV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 57
Agency for International Development, United      22, II
     States
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
Agricultural Marketing Service                    7, I, IX, X, XI
Agricultural Research Service                     7, V
Agriculture Department                            5, LXXIII
  Agricultural Marketing Service                  7, I, IX, X, XI
  Agricultural Research Service                   7, V
  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service      7, III; 9, I
  Chief Financial Officer, Office of              7, XXX
  Commodity Credit Corporation                    7, XIV
  Cooperative State Research, Education, and      7, XXXIV
       Extension Service
  Economic Research Service                       7, XXXVII
  Energy, Office of                               7, XXIX
  Environmental Quality, Office of                7, XXXI
  Farm Service Agency                             7, VII, XVIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 4
  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation              7, IV
  Food and Nutrition Service                      7, II
  Food Safety and Inspection Service              9, III
  Foreign Agricultural Service                    7, XV
  Forest Service                                  36, II
  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards        7, VIII; 9, II
       Administration
  Information Resources Management, Office of     7, XXVII
  Inspector General, Office of                    7, XXVI
  National Agricultural Library                   7, XLI
  National Agricultural Statistics Service        7, XXXVI
  Natural Resources Conservation Service          7, VI
  Operations, Office of                           7, XXVIII
  Procurement and Property Management, Office of  7, XXXII
  Rural Business-Cooperative Service              7, XVIII, XLII
  Rural Development Administration                7, XLII
  Rural Housing Service                           7, XVIII, XXXV
  Rural Telephone Bank                            7, XVI
  Rural Utilities Service                         7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
  Secretary of Agriculture, Office of             7, Subtitle A
  Transportation, Office of                       7, XXXIII
  World Agricultural Outlook Board                7, XXXVIII
Air Force Department                              32, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement       48, 53
Air Transportation Stabilization Board            14, VI
Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau          27, I
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives,       27, II
     Bureau of
AMTRAK                                            49, VII
American Battle Monuments Commission              36, IV
American Indians, Office of the Special Trustee   25, VII
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service        7, III; 9, I
Appalachian Regional Commission                   5, IX

[[Page 292]]

Architectural and Transportation Barriers         36, XI
     Compliance Board
Arctic Research Commission                        45, XXIII
Armed Forces Retirement Home                      5, XI
Army Department                                   32, V
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 51
Benefits Review Board                             20, VII
Bilingual Education and Minority Languages        34, V
     Affairs, Office of
Blind or Severely Disabled, Committee for         41, 51
     Purchase From People Who Are
Broadcasting Board of Governors                   22, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 19
Census Bureau                                     15, I
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services          42, IV
Central Intelligence Agency                       32, XIX
Chief Financial Officer, Office of                7, XXX
Child Support Enforcement, Office of              45, III
Children and Families, Administration for         45, II, III, IV, X
Civil Rights, Commission on                       45, VII
Civil Rights, Office for                          34, I
Coast Guard                                       33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)                46, III
Commerce Department                               44, IV
  Census Bureau                                   15, I
  Economic Affairs, Under Secretary               37, V
  Economic Analysis, Bureau of                    15, VIII
  Economic Development Administration             13, III
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 13
  Fishery Conservation and Management             50, VI
  Foreign-Trade Zones Board                       15, IV
  Industry and Security, Bureau of                15, VII
  International Trade Administration              15, III; 19, III
  National Institute of Standards and Technology  15, II
  National Marine Fisheries Service               50, II, IV, VI
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric                15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
       Administration                             VI
  National Telecommunications and Information     15, XXIII; 47, III
       Administration
  National Weather Service                        15, IX
  Patent and Trademark Office, United States      37, I
  Productivity, Technology and Innovation,        37, IV
       Assistant Secretary for
  Secretary of Commerce, Office of                15, Subtitle A
  Technology, Under Secretary for                 37, V
  Technology Administration                       15, XI
  Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for      37, IV
Commercial Space Transportation                   14, III
Commodity Credit Corporation                      7, XIV
Commodity Futures Trading Commission              5, XLI; 17, I
Community Planning and Development, Office of     24, V, VI
     Assistant Secretary for
Community Services, Office of                     45, X
Comptroller of the Currency                       12, I
Construction Industry Collective Bargaining       29, IX
     Commission
Consumer Product Safety Commission                5, LXXI; 16, II
Cooperative State Research, Education, and        7, XXXIV
     Extension Service
Copyright Office                                  37, II
Corporation for National and Community Service    45, XII, XXV
Cost Accounting Standards Board                   48, 99
Council on Environmental Quality                  40, V
Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency    28, VIII
     for the District of Columbia
Customs and Border Protection Bureau              19, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Department                                5, XXVI; 32, Subtitle A; 
                                                  40, VII

[[Page 293]]

  Advanced Research Projects Agency               32, I
  Air Force Department                            32, VII
  Army Department                                 32, V; 33, II; 36, III, 
                                                  48, 51
  Defense Intelligence Agency                     32, I
  Defense Logistics Agency                        32, I, XII; 48, 54
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 2
  National Imagery and Mapping Agency             32, I
  Navy Department                                 32, VI; 48, 52
  Secretary of Defense, Office of                 32, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Intelligence Agency                       32, I
Defense Logistics Agency                          32, XII; 48, 54
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board           10, XVII
Delaware River Basin Commission                   18, III
District of Columbia, Court Services and          28, VIII
     Offender Supervision Agency for the
Drug Enforcement Administration                   21, II
East-West Foreign Trade Board                     15, XIII
Economic Affairs, Under Secretary                 37, V
Economic Analysis, Bureau of                      15, VIII
Economic Development Administration               13, III
Economic Research Service                         7, XXXVII
Education, Department of                          5, LIII
  Bilingual Education and Minority Languages      34, V
       Affairs, Office of
  Civil Rights, Office for                        34, I
  Educational Research and Improvement, Office    34, VII
       of
  Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of   34, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 34
  Postsecondary Education, Office of              34, VI
  Secretary of Education, Office of               34, Subtitle A
  Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,  34, III
       Office of
  Vocational and Adult Education, Office of       34, IV
Educational Research and Improvement, Office of   34, VII
Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of     34, II
Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board       13, V
Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board              13, IV
Employee Benefits Security Administration         29, XXV
Employees' Compensation Appeals Board             20, IV
Employees Loyalty Board                           5, V
Employment and Training Administration            20, V
Employment Standards Administration               20, VI
Endangered Species Committee                      50, IV
Energy, Department of                             5, XXIII; 10, II, III, X
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 9
  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission            5, XXIV; 18, I
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 109
Energy, Office of                                 7, XXIX
Engineers, Corps of                               33, II; 36, III
Engraving and Printing, Bureau of                 31, VI
Environmental Protection Agency                   5, LIV; 40, I, IV, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 15
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 115
Environmental Quality, Office of                  7, XXXI
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission           5, LXII; 29, XIV
Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary  24, I
     for
Executive Office of the President                 3, I
  Administration, Office of                       5, XV
  Environmental Quality, Council on               40, V
  Management and Budget, Office of                5, III, LXXVII; 14, VI; 
                                                  48, 99
  National Drug Control Policy, Office of         21, III
  National Security Council                       32, XXI; 47, 2
  Presidential Documents                          3
  Science and Technology Policy, Office of        32, XXIV; 47, II

[[Page 294]]

  Trade Representative, Office of the United      15, XX
       States
Export-Import Bank of the United States           5, LII; 12, IV
Family Assistance, Office of                      45, II
Farm Credit Administration                        5, XXXI; 12, VI
Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation          5, XXX; 12, XIV
Farm Service Agency                               7, VII, XVIII
Federal Acquisition Regulation                    48, 1
Federal Aviation Administration                   14, I
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
Federal Claims Collection Standards               31, IX
Federal Communications Commission                 5, XXIX; 47, I
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of   41, 60
Federal Crop Insurance Corporation                7, IV
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation             5, XXII; 12, III
Federal Election Commission                       11, I
Federal Emergency Management Agency               44, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 44
Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal    48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition     48, 16
     Regulation
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission              5, XXIV; 18, I
Federal Financial Institutions Examination        12, XI
     Council
Federal Financing Bank                            12, VIII
Federal Highway Administration                    23, I, II
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation            1, IV
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office       12, XVII
Federal Housing Finance Board                     12, IX
Federal Labor Relations Authority, and General    5, XIV; 22, XIV
     Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations 
     Authority
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center           31, VII
Federal Management Regulation                     41, 102
Federal Maritime Commission                       46, IV
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service        29, XII
Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission  5, LXXIV; 29, XXVII
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration       49, III
Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                   28, III
Federal Procurement Policy Office                 48, 99
Federal Property Management Regulations           41, 101
Federal Railroad Administration                   49, II
Federal Register, Administrative Committee of     1, I
Federal Register, Office of                       1, II
Federal Reserve System                            12, II
  Board of Governors                              5, LVIII
Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board        5, VI, LXXVI
Federal Service Impasses Panel                    5, XIV
Federal Trade Commission                          5, XLVII; 16, I
Federal Transit Administration                    49, VI
Federal Travel Regulation System                  41, Subtitle F
Fine Arts, Commission on                          45, XXI
Fiscal Service                                    31, II
Fish and Wildlife Service, United States          50, I, IV
Fishery Conservation and Management               50, VI
Food and Drug Administration                      21, I
Food and Nutrition Service                        7, II
Food Safety and Inspection Service                9, III
Foreign Agricultural Service                      7, XV
Foreign Assets Control, Office of                 31, V
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the       45, V
     United States
Foreign Service Grievance Board                   22, IX
Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel            22, XIV
Foreign Service Labor Relations Board             22, XIV
Foreign-Trade Zones Board                         15, IV
Forest Service                                    36, II
General Accounting Office                         4, I
General Services Administration                   5, LVII; 41, 105
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 61
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 5

[[Page 295]]

  Federal Management Regulation                   41, 102
  Federal Property Management Regulations         41, 101
  Federal Travel Regulation System                41, Subtitle F
  General                                         41, 300
  Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel    41, 304
       Expenses
  Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death    41, 303
       of Certain Employees
  Relocation Allowances                           41, 302
  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances          41, 301
Geological Survey                                 30, IV
Government Ethics, Office of                      5, XVI
Government National Mortgage Association          24, III
Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards          7, VIII; 9, II
     Administration
Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation            45, XVIII
Health and Human Services, Department of          5, XLV; 45, Subtitle A
  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services        42, IV
  Child Support Enforcement, Office of            45, III
  Children and Families, Administration for       45, II, III, IV, X
  Community Services, Office of                   45, X
  Family Assistance, Office of                    45, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 3
  Food and Drug Administration                    21, I
  Human Development Services, Office of           45, XIII
  Indian Health Service                           25, V; 42, I
  Inspector General (Health Care), Office of      42, V
  Public Health Service                           42, I
  Refugee Resettlement, Office of                 45, IV
Homeland Security, Department of                  6, I
  Coast Guard                                     33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)              46, III
  Customs and Border Protection Bureau            19, I
  Federal Emergency Management Agency             44, I
  Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau      19, IV
  Immigration and Naturalization                  8, I
  Transportation Security Administration          49, XII
Housing and Urban Development, Department of      5, LXV; 24, Subtitle B
  Community Planning and Development, Office of   24, V, VI
       Assistant Secretary for
  Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant          24, I
       Secretary for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 24
  Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office    12, XVII
       of
  Government National Mortgage Association        24, III
  Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office   24, II, VIII, X, XX
       of Assistant Secretary for
  Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing     24, IV
       Assistance Restructuring, Office of
  Inspector General, Office of                    24, XII
  Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant  24, IX
       Secretary for
  Secretary, Office of                            24, Subtitle A, VII
Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of  24, II, VIII, X, XX
     Assistant Secretary for
Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing       24, IV
     Assistance Restructuring, Office of
Human Development Services, Office of             45, XIII
Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau        19, IV
Immigration and Naturalization                    8, I
Immigration Review, Executive Office for          8, V
Independent Counsel, Office of                    28, VII
Indian Affairs, Bureau of                         25, I, V
Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant           25, VI
     Secretary
Indian Arts and Crafts Board                      25, II
Indian Health Service                             25, V; 42, I
Industry and Security, Bureau of                  15, VII
Information Resources Management, Office of       7, XXVII
Information Security Oversight Office, National   32, XX
     Archives and Records Administration
Inspector General

[[Page 296]]

  Agriculture Department                          7, XXVI
  Health and Human Services Department            42, V
  Housing and Urban Development Department        24, XII
Institute of Peace, United States                 22, XVII
Inter-American Foundation                         5, LXIII; 22, X
Interior Department
  American Indians, Office of the Special         25, VII
       Trustee
  Endangered Species Committee                    50, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 14
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 114
  Fish and Wildlife Service, United States        50, I, IV
  Geological Survey                               30, IV
  Indian Affairs, Bureau of                       25, I, V
  Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant         25, VI
       Secretary
  Indian Arts and Crafts Board                    25, II
  Land Management, Bureau of                      43, II
  Minerals Management Service                     30, II
  National Indian Gaming Commission               25, III
  National Park Service                           36, I
  Reclamation, Bureau of                          43, I
  Secretary of the Interior, Office of            43, Subtitle A
  Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board   30, III
       of
  Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,     30, VII
       Office of
Internal Revenue Service                          26, I
International Boundary and Water Commission,      22, XI
     United States and Mexico, United States 
     Section
International Development, United States Agency   22, II
     for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
International Development Cooperation Agency,     22, XII
     United States
International Fishing and Related Activities      50, III
International Investment, Office of               31, VIII
International Joint Commission, United States     22, IV
     and Canada
International Organizations Employees Loyalty     5, V
     Board
International Trade Administration                15, III; 19, III
International Trade Commission, United States     19, II
Interstate Commerce Commission                    5, XL
James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation      45, XXIV
Japan-United States Friendship Commission         22, XVI
Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries       20, VIII
Justice Department                                5, XXVIII; 28, I, XI; 40, 
                                                  IV
  Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives,     27, II
       Bureau of
  Drug Enforcement Administration                 21, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 28
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             31, IX
  Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                 28, III
  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the     45, V
       United States
  Immigration Review, Executive Office for        8, V
  Offices of Independent Counsel                  28, VI
  Prisons, Bureau of                              28, V
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 128
Labor Department                                  5, XLII
  Benefits Review Board                           20, VII
  Employee Benefits Security Administration       29, XXV
  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board           20, IV
  Employment and Training Administration          20, V
  Employment Standards Administration             20, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 29
  Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office    41, 60
       of
  Federal Procurement Regulations System          41, 50
  Labor-Management Standards, Office of           29, II, IV
  Mine Safety and Health Administration           30, I
  Occupational Safety and Health Administration   29, XVII
  Public Contracts                                41, 50
  Secretary of Labor, Office of                   29, Subtitle A

[[Page 297]]

  Veterans' Employment and Training Service,      41, 61; 20, IX
       Office of the Assistant Secretary for
  Wage and Hour Division                          29, V
  Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of       20, I
Labor-Management Standards, Office of             29, II, IV
Land Management, Bureau of                        43, II
Legal Services Corporation                        45, XVI
Library of Congress                               36, VII
  Copyright Office                                37, II
Local Television Loan Guarantee Board             7, XX
Management and Budget, Office of                  5, III, LXXVII; 14, VI; 
                                                  48, 99
Marine Mammal Commission                          50, V
Maritime Administration                           46, II
Merit Systems Protection Board                    5, II
Micronesian Status Negotiations, Office for       32, XXVII
Mine Safety and Health Administration             30, I
Minerals Management Service                       30, II
Minority Business Development Agency              15, XIV
Miscellaneous Agencies                            1, IV
Monetary Offices                                  31, I
Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in     36, XVI
     National Environmental Policy Foundation
National Aeronautics and Space Administration     5, LIX; 14, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 18
National Agricultural Library                     7, XLI
National Agricultural Statistics Service          7, XXXVI
National and Community Service, Corporation for   45, XII, XXV
National Archives and Records Administration      5, LXVI; 36, XII
  Information Security Oversight Office           32, XX
National Bureau of Standards                      15, II
National Capital Planning Commission              1, IV
National Commission for Employment Policy         1, IV
National Commission on Libraries and Information  45, XVII
     Science
National Council on Disability                    34, XII
National Counterintelligence Center               32, XVIII
National Credit Union Administration              12, VII
National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact     28, IX
     Council
National Drug Control Policy, Office of           21, III
National Foundation on the Arts and the           45, XI
     Humanities
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration    23, II, III; 49, V
National Imagery and Mapping Agency               32, I
National Indian Gaming Commission                 25, III
National Institute for Literacy                   34, XI
National Institute of Standards and Technology    15, II
National Labor Relations Board                    5, LXI; 29, I
National Marine Fisheries Service                 50, II, IV, VI
National Mediation Board                          29, X
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration   15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
                                                  VI
National Park Service                             36, I
National Railroad Adjustment Board                29, III
National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)  49, VII
National Science Foundation                       5, XLIII; 45, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 25
National Security Council                         32, XXI
National Security Council and Office of Science   47, II
     and Technology Policy
National Telecommunications and Information       15, XXIII; 47, III
     Administration
National Transportation Safety Board              49, VIII
National Weather Service                          15, IX
Natural Resources Conservation Service            7, VI
Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, Office of      25, IV
Navy Department                                   32, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 52
Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation             24, XXV
Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste  10, XVIII
   Commission
[[Page 298]]

Nuclear Regulatory Commission                     5, XLVIII; 10, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 20
Occupational Safety and Health Administration     29, XVII
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission  29, XX
Offices of Independent Counsel                    28, VI
Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust             36, XV
Operations Office                                 7, XXVIII
Overseas Private Investment Corporation           5, XXXIII; 22, VII
Panama Canal Commission                           48, 35
Panama Canal Regulations                          35, I
Patent and Trademark Office, United States        37, I
Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel      41, 304
     Expenses
Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of   41, 303
     Certain Employees
Peace Corps                                       22, III
Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation       36, IX
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation              29, XL
Personnel Management, Office of                   5, I, XXXV; 45, VIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 17
  Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal  48, 21
       Acquisition Regulation
  Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition   48, 16
       Regulation
Postal Rate Commission                            5, XLVI; 39, III
Postal Service, United States                     5, LX; 39, I
Postsecondary Education, Office of                34, VI
President's Commission on White House             1, IV
     Fellowships
Presidential Documents                            3
Presidio Trust                                    36, X
Prisons, Bureau of                                28, V
Procurement and Property Management, Office of    7, XXXII
Productivity, Technology and Innovation,          37, IV
     Assistant Secretary
Public Contracts, Department of Labor             41, 50
Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant    24, IX
     Secretary for
Public Health Service                             42, 
</pre></body></html>
